SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Our purpose and strategy SCISYS began in 1980 believing in the opportunities for software.
The SCISYS Group is a leading developer of IT solutions and services.
We are dedicated to our mission of empowering leading organisations and agencies to achieve their goals by creating and delivering quality software solutions.
We develop robust realworld application solutions and products and provide supporting services that create real business benefit to a wide range of customers in diverse markets.
The SCISYS strategy has always been to invest in innovation and acquisition for longterm growth.
INNOVATIVE.
GROWING.
SCISYS
30 YEARS OF LONGTERM GROWTH Strategic Report 02 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2016 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report STRATEGIC REPORT
Chairmans Statement
Looking back operational and financial highlights Finance Directors Report A closer look at 2017 revenues profit and financial performance Our Business Strategy and Model A look at our strategic objectives business model and KPIs STRATEGIC REPORT HIGHLIGHTS
Financial Highlights
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Review
Finance Directors Report Business Strategy and Model Strategic Priorities
A closer look at our divisions Space division Enterprise Solutions and Defence division Media and Broadcast division ANNOVA Systems The key risks we manage Corporate Social Responsibility Our People and Workplace Corporate Governance Report
Leadership and Governance Structure Board of Directors Board Attendance Board Committees Oversight Audit Committee Report
Remuneration Report
Directors Report Statement of Directors Responsibilities
Independent Auditors Report to
Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Principal Accounting Policies Notes for the year ended 31 December 2017 Company Balance Sheet Company statement of Changes in Equity Notes forming part of the Company financial statements Shareholder Information and Financial Calendar Advisers 102 pg. pg. pg.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial Highlights SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 04
Financial Highlights
Fullyear Dividend Per Share 2016 1.96p SPACE DIVISION
2016 19.9m ESD DIVISION
2016 16.7m MandB DIVISION
2016 8.0m ANNOVA SYSTEMS
2016 na Group Revenue 2016 45.7m Adjusted Basic Earnings Per Share 2016 9.2p Adjusted Operating
2016 3.2m Revenues up 25% to 57.2m 2016 45.7m including professional fees 28% higher at 48.0m 2016 37.6m Adjusted operating profit up 44% at 4.6m 2016 3.2m Adjusted operating margin increased to 8% 2016 7% Adjusted basic EPS up 9% at 10.0p 2016 9.2p Statutory operating profit increased to 4.7m 2016 2.8m and basic EPS increased to 11.5p 2016 7.6p Net debt reduced to 5.9m 2016 10.2m Yearend order book 41% higher at 91.3m 2016 64.6m Significant contract wins achieved in all divisions including 18m ground station infrastructure award for the German Heinrich Hertz satellitecommunications mission Firsttime contributor to results Annova achieves a critical milestone on its flagship BBC newsroom computer system contract and extends its customer base with North American win Fullyear dividend per share up 10% to 2.16p 2016 1.96p Year High Year Low Closing midmarket price of Company shares for years ending 31 December
MEDIA and NEWSROOMS ENTERPRISE and DEFENCE Sources of revenues Dividend figure subject to shareholder approval at the AGM.
Xibis is represented by the dark grey slice of the pie chart.
Xibis revenues for 2017 were 0.9m 2016 0.9m.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report  Chairmans Statement
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 05 EARLIER OPTIMISM JUSTIFIED In my report for 2016 I advised that given the strength of our then current order book and shortterm pipeline we anticipated that the growth we were seeing would continue into at least the first half of 2017.
We also noted that in keeping with the pattern over previous years we anticipated that our second half year financial performance in 2017 would be substantially stronger than the first half.
This was indeed the case and I am pleased to report that our optimism and guidance was well placed.
The Group delivered a strong overall performance in 2017 with results for fullyear revenues and adjusted profits being comfortably in line with guidance.
It is also pleasing to report a positive advance on net margins which is in line with our strategic objectives.
Going into 2018 the outlook continues to be very encouraging.
The positive news flow across the year on new business wins was crowned by the announcement in late October of the award of a 18m contract with OHB System AG to deliver the ground station control and communications infrastructure for Heinrich Hertz the German national satellite communications mission.
Further contract wins across the Group in the last quarter of 2017 also meant that we entered 2018 with a record order book of 91.3m.
Operational cash flows were very healthy across the year resulting in further reductions in net debt and underpinning a healthy 10% uplift in the recommended final dividend payment.
With the acquisition of the ANNOVA Systems GmbH Annova business our income streams which are predominantly in sterling and  are well balanced providing an internal hedge against exchangerate movements.
We do not anticipate any major impact on profitability in 2018 from currency fluctuations or hedging adjustments.
Further detail on the performance of each division is given below.
However it is worth noting the overall healthy organic growth and impressive contract wins that contributed to our strong operating cash flows.
Our Space division in particular deserves a specific mention for its extraordinary achievement with 18% yearonyear growth in revenues and a 17% growth in contribution.
Of strategic note is the performance of our Annova division.
A primary focus going into 2017 was the integration of Annova into the
We have started a programme to align Annovas internal processes with SCISYS high standards.
Solid ongoing progress can be reported here.
Its performance is closely aligned with the Groups expectations at the time of acquisition.
Delivery of a key milestone on Annovas BBC newsroom contract was achieved in late summer with the system now on air in the West Midlands and in Salford.
Significant contract wins with MDR ARDs national news programme in Germany and Corus in Canada have strengthened its geographic footprint.
Synergies with our Media and Broadcast MandB division resulted in a major new win for MandB with RTL in France where our dira system is already on air.
In addition to winning the Heinrich Hertz project our Space division has extended its footprint in the Galileo project while our Enterprise Solutions and Defence ESD division has seen key wins late in the year with Public Health England and the Forestry Commission as well as new work with a major defence prime contractor.
The strength of the order book within both our Space and ESD divisions is resulting in a significant expansion of their teams  with an associated recruitment drive.
Similar growth has resulted in the Group opening a new office in Dortmund to house our MandB division.
Strategically we are well positioned and confident in our ability to deliver further progress in 2018.
Contingency planning is in hand to protect the Group from any potential adverse operational consequences resulting from the negotiations between the UK and the EU in respect of the UKs withdrawal from the EU.
Chairmans
Statement
In Summary Record order book Promising outlook Positive momentum continuing Solid growth
Dividend figure subject to shareholder approval at the AGM.
Strategic Report  Chairmans Statement
OUR PURPOSE AND STRATEGY SCISYS began in 1980 believing in the opportunities for software.
The SCISYS Group is a leading developer of IT solutions and services.
We are dedicated to our mission of empowering leading organisations and agencies to achieve their goals by creating and delivering quality software solutions and services.
We develop robust realworld application solutions and products and provide supporting services that create real business benefit to a wide range of customers in diverse markets.
The SCISYS strategy has always been to invest in innovation and acquisition for longterm growth.
OUR
PURPOSE
OUR
VISION
OUR VALUES OUR PRINCIPLES
MISSION
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 06 We believe that SCISYS is well positioned in the short to medium term and that our ESD division might even gain from the situation.
Any impact is likely to be felt by our Space division albeit that the division has continued to win contracts in this current period of pre Brexit uncertainty which extend beyond the proposed Brexit date which is encouraging.
The Board continues to explore a wide range of Brexit options.
While we very much welcome the UK governments strong support for the UKs continued participation in EU funded space programmes EGNOS Galileo and Copernicus and hope to see further clarity on this position during the negotiations for the transitionstage arrangements we are nevertheless preparing a range of tactical options including the option of redomiciling while retaining our AIM listing and associated UK tax benefits to mitigate the possible effects of Brexit on our Space business post March 2019 should negotiations not prove favourable.
Key financials reflect the success In the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS posted overall revenues of 57.2m which were up 25% on last year 2016 Within this figure professional fees were 28% higher at 48.0m 2016 37.6m.
The Group delivered an adjusted operating profit of 4.6m 2016 3.2m a 44% uplift on 2016.
The operating profit was 4.7m 2016 A reconciliation between the adjusted and statutory operating profit measures appears in the Finance Directors Report.
Adjusted basic earnings per share were 10.0p 2016 9.2p basic earnings per share were 11.5p 2016 7.6p.
Cash generation remained healthy and this resulted in a net inflow of 4.5m 2016 2.1m.
The Groups netdebt position was 5.9m at years end 2016 At 8% 2016 7% our adjusted operating margin has improved.
The yearend order book was at a record level at 91.3m 2016 64.6m.
Our people are the key to our success As always our thanks rightly go to all of our staff within the divisions who actively implement our corporate core values of trust respect and openness combined with prudence and balanced growth.
Their hard work and ability to deliver the business solutions that our customers need within tight budgets and timescales is the key factor to the ongoing relationships that SCISYS enjoys with its many and varied longstanding customers.
Our thanks also go to all of our staff within the Groups central functions who provide essential services and valued support to the Group and who have made an important contribution to these results.
Dividend
An interim dividend of 0.59p per share was paid on 9 November 2017.
The Directors are now proposing a final dividend of 1.57p per share subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting on 28 June 2018.
The proposed final dividend will be paid on 27 July 2018 to shareholders on the register at 6 July 2018.
The shares will go exdividend on 5 July 2018.
This would make the dividend for the full year to 31 December 2017 2.16p per share 2016 1.96p and maintains our stated strategy of progressive dividend growth.
Governance matching our needs We are committed to high standards of corporate governance.
We have strong governance frameworks in place throughout the Group in balance with our risks.
SCISYS is currently compliant to the extent appropriate for a company of its size with the UK Corporate Governance Code and is looking to adopt the QCA Corporate Governance Code during the course of 2018.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE The key elements of the Groups strategy remain unchanged.
We continue to focus on balanced revenue growth and margin improvement as well as managementcontrol of risk and succession planning.
Outlook
We are pleased with the healthy organic growth in revenues achieved in 2017.
Our
Based on current performance on projects and our order pipeline across the entire Group the Directors remain fully confident in the prospects of the Groups future organic growth.
We will also continue to look for opportunity where there is a good market product and cultural fit to grow through acquisition.
Dr.
Mike Love Chairman Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Executives
Review
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 07 2017 A STEP CHANGE FOR SCISYS TOWARDS ITS MEDIUMTERM STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES In last years report I expressed my confidence based on the progress achieved in 2016 that we would be able to continue our sustainable resilient and balanced growth in 2017.
I am delighted to confirm that we have ended the period with record revenues of 57.2m up 25% an adjusted operating profit of 4.6m up 44% and adjusted operating margin of 8%.
This is a step change in our performance and it brings us closer to our mediumterm objectives of 60m in revenues and a double digit margin.
Two major elements have contributed to this improved performance Annova the Munichbased newsroom solutions specialist has contributed its first full year to the Groups results.
The other divisions have contributed a very healthy 9% organic revenue growth during 2017 based on a strong second half year which is in line with our expectations expressed in September 2017.
Across all of our divisions we have seen major new contract wins which in aggregate have lifted our order book to more than 91.3m another record achieved in 2017.
The sales success story was epitomised late in 2017 by the notable win by our Space division which secured a contract worth 18m to deliver the complete groundcontrol infrastructure for the German Heinrich Hertz mission.
Of this total order book value 36.5m is for delivery in 2018.
This underpins our optimistic outlook for the year ahead and strongly reinforces the confidence that our medium term objectives are within reach.
Enterprise Solutions and Defence ESD The ESD division delivered a strong second half with its contribution up by 35% and revenues up by 9% on the first six months and thus making up for a slower first half.
The division achieved robust overall results that were just short of its excellent accomplishment in 2016.
It delivered fullyear revenues of 16.5m and a contribution of 4.2m equating to a margin of 25% for the division.
ESD has spent significant effort during the year preparing for further growth including recruiting additional sales effort and new staff.
These initiatives have begun bearing fruit with the order intake exceeding 8m during the fourth quarter of 2017.
To maximise its potential for future growth the division has started to reorganise its internal structure to serve three focal units targeting specific sectors Defence Security and Maritime Government and Emergency Services and Commercial.
All three business units have benefited from their respective healthy mix of recurring revenues and repeat business based on longstanding customer relationships as well as new business wins in established or adjacent application domains.
Contract types across ESD range from fixedprice contracts managed budget contracts and time and materialsbased contracts.
During 2017 the division experienced a move towards a larger proportion of time and materialsbased contracts 60% compared with 47% in 2016 frequently delivering services at customer sites.
This trend is expected to continue as clients increasingly move towards an agile project methodology.
Activities in the Defence Security and Maritime unit were dominated by ongoing projects for electronic architectures for vehicles and vessels bespoke development of business systems and longterm on site time and materials contracts in the intelligence sector.
In all of these realms new opportunities evolved during the year through both new and established customer relationships.
Some of these occurred in late 2017 including an extension of a research programme for the Royal Navys Maritime Air Defence Command a new strategic project in the maritime defence area and a newly established engagement with another major prime contractor for a large defence software and electronics programme.
The Government and Emergency Services business unit continued its frequently recurring longterm business with SCISYS Group 2017 2016 m m Revenue 57.2 45.7 Professional fee revenues 48.0 37.6 Operating margin 8% 7% In Summary Step change in performance Record revenues Order book at record high Synergies achieved with Annova Adjusted operating profit m Operating profit Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 08 SCISYS Chippenham headquarters Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 09 customers such as Londons Metropolitan Police the Met The Coal Authority and the Environment Agency.
Testament to these proven relationships the Met awarded one of seven places on its Solution Provider Framework to our ESD division.
In addition the unit extended its reach by winning initial contracts with Defra Public Health England and both parts of the newly reorganised Forestry Commission.
The Commercial business unit is well established and maintains a core of blue chip clients including Vodafone UK Power Networks Siemens Arqiva and Transport for London.
During 2017 the unit renewed its focus on the transport and logistics sector.
This saw a significant increase in its business with Siemens and the team secured initial contracts with Angel Trains and Govia Thameslink Railway.
For some of these activities ESD has benefited from joining forces with Xibis a separate SCISYS PLC subsidiary based in Leicester as illustrated by the joint delivery of an awardwinning charting app to Imray.
On the technology and innovation front significant effort has gone into reusable software platforms including MACSYS for maritime applications and Cartosys for OpenGISbased solutions.
The sales team has positioned ESD on major framework contracts which boosts the divisions opportunities going forward.
Divisional management and their growing teams are settling into the new structure providing well grounded optimism for 2018 and beyond.
Media and Broadcast MandB In 2017 our MandB division once again delivered a strong performance with revenues of 8.7m up 9% and a contribution of 2.6m up 4%.
With a margin of 30% its more productbiased business model delivers a level of profitability ahead of the Group average.
Much of the success was secured during an impressive upturn in the second half year which was predicted and in line with the outlook given in our interim results revenues and contribution up 46% and 162% respectively on the first half year with margin up to 37% from 21%.
During 2017 the MandB division relied on its strong recurring revenues from maintenance contracts and repeat business from its long established customer base in Germany and the UK.
This provided a sound foundation for its strong performance.
In line with its growth objectives the division also focused on opportunities in new territories.
This led to an initial win for a radio pilot project with the Malaysian public broadcaster RTM.
The ongoing project with the South African Broadcasting Corporation SABC successfully concluded the proofof concept phase and moved into deployment despite experiencing some delays to rollout due to organisational changes at SABC later in the year.
The MandB division won its first client in France with commercial broadcaster
This contract was signed in April and the first programme RTL Fun Radio successfully went live in November followed swiftly by
DIGITAL MAPPING EXCELLENCE An app by Xibis and SCISYS has won a Commended Award from the British Cartographic Society for excellence in digital mapping.
The project involved an international marine chart plotter for smartphones and iPads for our client Imray Laurie Norie and Wilson Ltd.
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
IMAGE CHRISTIAN DAHLMANNSCISYS DE SCISYS new Dortmund location SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 10 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 11 The MandB team has worked to position the division for the mediumterm future by further advancing its product innovation.
The recent cloudbased products dira More and dira Scotty both went live in customer environments in 2017. asset management solution.
It was first presented to the public at the IBC convention in Amsterdam in September 2017 as the first member of the next major product generation called dira Dimension with positive feedback.
The joining of forces with Annova has started to bear fruit.
At the BBC the software integration of Annovas OpenMedia installation and dira is underway.
The
German broadcaster MDR which chose OpenMedia in August 2017 and has been a MandB customer since 1995 bought additional dira licences late in the year ahead of the planned tight integration of both systems.
Annovas relationship with the RTL group goes back over 10 years  as an OpenMedia customer  and RTL is now operating both SCISYS products after an order for dira.
The MandB division is settling in at its new premises in Dortmund and has built a strong starting position for 2018.
It is preparing for future success by making the investments needed to maintain its leading product offering and to prepare and exploit further synergies with Annova.
Annova
2017 is the first year of Annovas contribution to the Groups results.
Its
As a result the deferred consideration expected to be paid for Annova has reduced from 3.9m to 2.0m.
In June Annova secured its first contract in North America with Corus Entertainment which is Canadas largest mediacontent company.
Corus is using Annovas OpenMedia newsroom product for its extensive Global News operation.
The initial project phase successfully concluded in November and subsequent deliveries of this multiyear multiphase programme are already being discussed with the customer.
In August Annova met an important commercial milestone in its flagship project with the BBC by concluding the implementation phase of the project and starting the subsequent transition phase.
By the end of the year OpenMedia was deployed in the BBCs major news operations centres in Salford and the West Midlands.
Also in August German public broadcaster MDR joined Annovas customer portfolio as a new OpenMedia client when it signed a multi million contract to over time replace the existing newsroom system across its entire operation.
It is worth reiterating that MDR has been a key dira customer of our MandB division since 1995.
Annovas innovative new NewsBoard product for editorial crossmedia planning complementing OpenMedia  was successfully sold to ARDAktuell the national news programme of the influential German public broadcaster ARD.
This project win was particularly important because it positions NewsBoard as a bellwether system for other public broadcasters.
The German public broadcaster Radio Bremen became a new customer for Annova and its OpenMedia product in late 2017 adding to the impressive list of important new contracts that it managed to secure during the year.
Measures have been taken to continuously improve Annovas internal disciplines and governance regime in accordance with the demanding internal standards at SCISYS.
This process will continue in 2018 and beyond.
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
WHAT OUR CUSTOMERS SAY SABC did a thorough evaluation of the existing systems on the market and SCISYS delivered the most convincing offer.
Beside the technical requirements SCISYS experience with large systems was of great importance to us in choosing them.
Dennis Herold SABC General Manager Radio Broadcast Facilities OpenMedia clearly is leading in this space and were delighted to be their first major North American partner.
Gerry Belec Dir.
We are very excited about the partnership with SCISYS Space UK as this is an important step bringing us closer to building the operations of a full constellation of nanosatellites.
This partnership will further boost our technological capabilities and help us build a satellite communications network infrastructure which is considered stateoftheart in the industry.
Meir Moalem Managing Director and CEO of Sky and Space Global UK Undertaking the virtualisation of the CRC registry was undoubtedly a significant task.
That it was carried out so smoothly with minimal business disruption is testament to the close working relationship between SCISYS and the Environment
The new cloudbased platform is more performant more resilient and significantly cheaper to operate.
Thank you for all your efforts in securing the future of this key UK Government service.
Andrew Matterson Senior Advisor Emissions Trading Environment Agency Govia Thameslink Railway has been pleased to partner with SCISYS to help develop a solution to assist our customers that have additional accessibility requirements.
Working to a short timescale SCISYS has delivered a Proof of Concept solution that works exactly as designed.
This is a very exciting project and could provide a stepchange in the way our customers are able to travel more freely around the rail network.
Jason Durk Innovation Manager Govia Thameslink Railway GM6 Group has chosen dira to unify its playout solutions for its radios RTL2 and Fun Radio.
Our editorial teams are enthusiastic adopters of dira which has significantly improved their workflows and is allowing them to concentrate fully on listeners.
We look forward to build on the dira system and its API to further improve our content offering and the flexibility we offer to our teams.
CharlesEmmanuel Bon Directeur Excutif Technique en charge des Dveloppement et des Affaires Publiques RTL France SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 12 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 13 Initial steps have been taken to bring Annova and MandB closer together.
This involves cooperation on a regular basis between respective divisional management as well as daytoday synergies such as crossselling and coselling activities joint trade shows product and innovation as well as product delivery and support.
The divisions will gradually intensify these joint activities.
This will complement Annovas growth initiatives which centre on continued product innovation and an even stronger focus on securing new international business.
Overall Annovas outlook looks very strong with revenues from secured orders and recurring revenues from ongoing maintenance contracts amounting to three quarters of its 2018 revenue target.
Space
Our Space division has delivered a truly stellar performance in 2017.
Revenues grew yearonyear by 18% to 23.5m and the contribution grew by 17% to 4.9m.
The divisions order book more than doubled to 34.1m compared to the previous year.
This is due in large part to the 18m contract win with OHB for the German Heinrich Hertz mission see page 14.
A variety of additional elements have also contributed to the divisions outstanding performance.
Ongoing projects with institutional European space customers delivered results ahead of 2017 expectations in different application domains including Scientific missions such as the European ExoMars mission to Mars.
On this programme SCISYS is responsible for the rover vehicle visual localisation flight software and the ExoMars Mission Management System software which controls the numerous instruments on board the rover and manages the rovers operations on the ground.
SCISYS is a subcontractor to Airbus Defence and Space and Thales Italy on these projects respectively which have an aggregate value of 5.4m.
Earthobservation missions.
In one example SCISYS has a 3.3m contract with Airbus to deliver central software and hardware for the Payload Operations Centre for the FrenchGerman climate satellite mission MERLIN.
Secondly
SCISYS signed a 1.9m contract with GMV Spain early in 2017 to deliver the mission control system for the second generation of EUMETSATs Polar System.
The recurring revenues from EUfunded Galileo projects and from the operations support business to the European Space Agency have delivered strong results during the year.
This accomplishment is particularly impressive because it was made in the climate of Brexit uncertainty surrounding EU funded Space programmes.
SCISYS is and will continue to be a pan European group and as noted in the Chairmans Statement the Board is exploring a wide range of Brexit contingency plans.
Participating conditions apply to certain EUfunded work such as the Galileo satellitenavigation programme which require that the participant be EU based and that the ultimate controlling company of any participant be an EUbased company or require appropriate waivers to be obtained for it to participate in the programme.
While we could plan our Galileo activities to be carried out by our German subsidiary which clearly satisfies the requirement of being an EU based company SCISYS PLC which is the ultimate holding company will not automatically satisfy this test upon Brexit taking effect.
Detailed contingency plans are being prepared to affect a group restructure so that the ultimate parent company of the SCISYS Group is redomiciled and based in the EU following Brexit.
The overarching objective of these plans is to protect shareholder value.
The conclusion of the current negotiations between the UK Government and the EU in respect of the Brexit transition arrangements is expected to be known by late summer
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
2018.
At that juncture the Board if necessary to protect its continued participation in the Galileo programme will seek the necessary formal shareholder resolutions for the group restructure as part of this restructuring procedure.
It has every confidence that all necessary approvals will be forthcoming and thereby eliminate any risk to its continued participation in EUfunded programmes.
The Board also intends to arrange early shareholder consultation and seek support for pursuing this strategy ahead of the SCISYS AGM in June 2018.
Other options that are being actively considered include obtaining appropriate waivers and security ringfencing arrangements.
The above wellestablished revenue streams were complemented by further new business wins as the growth initiatives pursued by the Space division increasingly bears fruit.
Based on our proprietary PLENITER software suite for the planning implementation control and operation of complete satellite missions the division has secured an 18m contract with OHB System AG to deliver the ground station control and communications infrastructure for the German national satellitecommunications mission Heinrich Hertz.
This is significant because it positions SCISYS as the sole supplier of a complete ground segment for a satellite mission and this raises our profile further as a supplier of related technologies.
The divisions initiatives into the commercial socalled New Space sub sector progressed well as evidenced by the continuation of a PLENITERbased project with USbased WorldVu Satellites LLP trading as OneWeb.
Late in 2017 SCISYS added to this momentum with a contract from Sky and Space Global UK to deliver a simulator for its Pearls Constellation mission.
This mission will operate approximately 200 autonomous communication nanosatellites in carefully selected orbits by 2020 giving equatorial coverage of the Earth to create an affordable global communication network and deliver voice data and instant messaging to more than 3 billion people who are currently without mobile coverage.
The Space team has grown by 32 staff to a total of 200 at years end.
The successes of 2017 mean that the division is well positioned for sustained organic growth in the medium term.
Xibis
Xibis our SCISYS PLC subsidiary for mobile apps and website development based in Leicester with a 17strong team has performed broadly in line with expectations often working in collaboration with the ESD division.
With effect from 1 January 2018 Xibis will be reported as a business unit within the ESD division rather than as a standalone entity.
On track for further growth At SCISYS we believe in the opportunities for innovative software systems to benefit our customers operations.
We are dedicated to achieving our customers goals by creating and delivering quality software solutions.
Our
Our strategy has always been to invest in innovation and acquisition for longterm growth.
The 2017 financial year has delivered in this respect and facilitated a step change in financial performance that provides a platform for SCISYS continued success.
We have strengthened our position in established niches and have moved into adjacent markets on the back of our expert knowhow versatile skills and our commitment to innovation.
Our sales people have opened up new territories and started to explore new sectors.
We are continuously investing in our proprietary products and reusable software platforms.
Integration between Annova and MandB has already brought immediate successes.
For
2018 we expect that Annova will benefit from the major contract wins secured during the second half of 2017 and will increasingly meet SCISYS high internal process and governance standards.
As the integration activities continue we are confident that additional synergies will evolve and strengthen SCISYS profile further in the growing segment of system automation and control solutions for the media and broadcast industry.
SCISYS is a people business and much of our success is attributable to our exceptional team.
A significant number of both highly talented graduates and more experienced staff have recently been welcomed into the fold.
During 2017 our staff headcount grew
SOFTWARE FOR SPACE SCISYS has a number of software solutions for the space market including a complete suite for operation planning and control for meteorological satellites and for constellation management.
SOFTWARE SOLUTIONS FOR SPACE 2met egmc
APEX
ANNOVA SYSTEMS SOFTWARE FOR NEWSROOMS OpenMedia is now the leading provider of independent planning and newsroom systems.
This solution provides a modern standard in toolsets for journalist workflows planning rundown management and research.
SOFTWARE FOR NEWSROOMS AND PRODUCTION SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 14 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Strategic Report  Chief Executives Review
Executive Directors and divisional directors meet at divisional board and subsidiary board meetings as well as interacting frequently informally to review the risks and opportunities facing the business the controls established to reduce those risks and the effectiveness of these controls in operation on an ongoing basis.
The aim of these reviews is to provide reasonable assurance that material risks and problems are identified and appropriate action is taken at an early stage.
The SCISYS PLC Board confirms that procedures to identify evaluate and manage any significant risks faced by the Group have been in place throughout the year.
The annual strategic and financial plan is reviewed and approved by the Board.
Financial results with comparisons between planned and forecast results are reported on at least a monthly basis by the divisions and subsidiaries and discussed at the corresponding board meetings together with a report on sales operational achievements objectives and issues encountered.
These reports are supplemented by interim monthly financial information as appropriate.
Significant variances from plan are discussed and actions set in place to address them and also discussed at Board meetings.
Approval levels for authorisation of expenditure are at levels set and cascaded throughout the management structure with any expenditure in excess of predefined levels requiring approval from one or more Executive Directors and selected senior managers.
Accordingly the Directors confirm that they have carried out a robust assessment throughout the year of the principal risks facing the Group including any that would threaten its business model and future financial performance and liquidity.
It follows that the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue in operation and to meet its liabilities as they fall due throughout the next and the following two accounting periods.
UK 16% in Germany not including Annova and 52% including Annova.
It is a fundamental strength of our business that we maintain an emphasis on our core corporate values of mutual trust respect and openness.
This is hugely important for fostering and evolving our corporate culture in line with our values as well as for our strategic objectives as the business continues to grow.
This applies equally to the envisaged integration of Annova on which we will keep working during 2018.
We are pleased that the sound cultural fit with SCISYS that we were expecting at the outset
SOFTWARE FOR FLEETS AND VEHICLES DIGITAL MAPPING SCISYS has developed its own software for specific market segments.
These include MACSYS used for maritime and fleet management and Cartosys used for digital mapping applications.
SOFTWARE
FOR FLEETS AND VEHICLES
FOR MAPPING
SOFTWARE FOR BROADCAST The dira suite of software is targeted at radio operations for large broadcasting enterprises.
It solves the problem of a fastmoving industry by using software to automate replace hardware and bring efficiency.
SOFTWARE FOR RADIO AND of 2017 has proved correct.
Solid foundation and firm trajectory Our record order book of 91.3m in combination with a strong and growing stream of recurring revenues is testimony to the robustness of our business model.
We anticipate that organic revenue growth will continue in 2018 and beyond.
Progressing from this solid foundation we will take all required measures  including additional central requirements e. shareholders customers and staff.
Once again my sincere thanks go to our shareholders our customers our management staff and all other stakeholders who have strongly supported SCISYS in 2017.
The Group has continued to make excellent progress during the year and we are confident in our ability to deliver further progress in 2018 expanding the business in a sustainable resilient balanced way for the benefit of our shareholders customers and staff.
Klaus M.
Heidrich
Chief Executive SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 15 Risk and viability statement Strategic Report  Finance Directors Report
Directors
Report
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 16 I am pleased to report that the rally in trading that we predicted in our Interim Report came to fruition in the second half of 2017 lifting the firsthalf figures to produce an admirable fullyear result.
Both revenues and underlying operating profits reached historic highs and strong cash flows have made a significant dent in the net debt position that peaked in December 2016 with the injection of additional borrowings to fund the ANNOVA Systems GmbH Annova acquisition.
REVENUES
Total revenues for the year were 25% higher at 57.2m 2016 45.7m of which the component relating to professional fees was 48.0m 2016 37.6m.
48% of total revenue was from Eurozone customers 2016 49%.
Following a welcome gain in value against the pound in 2016 the euro strengthened again in 2017 which boosted the Groups revenue figures.
PROFITS
Since 2007 the Board has gauged the underlying performance of business using an adjusted operating profit measure that excludes the costs of the Groups long term share incentive schemes exceptional items and any amortisation of intangible assets arising on business acquisition.
Internal reporting is exclusively based on adjusted performance measures to facilitate comparison between financial years and publicly available research notes on SCISYS published by financial analysts focuses on these same measures.
Adjusted operating profit was up 44% on 2016 at 4.6m 2016 3.2m while statutory operating profit was 4.7m 2016 2.8m.
The adjusted and statutory operating profit measures reconcile as follows 2017 exceptional items totalled 2.1m and reflect the combination of a credit arising from the reassessment of contingent consideration payable under the Annova earnout arrangement and accrued UK Research and Development RandD tax credits.
These exceptional items are explained in further detail later in this report.
By contrast 2016 exceptional items represented charges of 0.4m for noncapitalisable legal and professional fees relating to the Annova acquisition.
On the acquisition of Annova on 31 December 2016 IFRS 3 required SCISYS to make fairvalue consolidation adjustments to the Annova balance sheet.
Intangible assets for fairvalue recognition comprised the 2016 yearend order book and the internally developed intellectual property rights in Annovas OpenMedia product.
Recognition of these assets in the 2016 consolidated Group balance sheet resulted in noncash amortisation charges to the 2017 income statement of 2.0m 2016 nil.
Sharebased payment charges were immaterial following the lapse of option awards granted in 2015 owing to the failure to achieve the associated threeyear performance criteria.
The Groups results were less adversely impacted by variations in the europound exchange rate than in previous years for two reasons.
First the funding structure for the Annova acquisition and the sterling based cash flows of its contract with the BBC served to bring the Groups overall currency requirements more into balance whereas in previous years the Group generated substantial surplus euro income from its German operations and UKbased space market activities.
Second although the currencyhedging contracts taken out in 2016 to convert anticipated surplus euros in 2017 into pounds went significantly out of the money following the EU referendum vote in June 2016 the devaluation was largely reflected in the 2016 accounts.
The Group has not entered into any external currencyhedging contracts for 2018 and beyond.
IntraGroup hedging contracts will be used to balance the Groups currency exposures across its subsidiary companies.
While revenues benefited from a stronger euro the same foreignexchange rate movement increased the sterling value of our eurodenominated costs in Germany.
However on a constantcurrency basis and excluding exceptional items Group Subject to shareholder approval at the AGM.
In Summary Total revenues 25% higher Adjusted operating profit up by 44% 10% uplift in dividend Net debt reduced to 5.9m 2017 2016 m m Adjusted operating profit 4.6 3.2 Share based payments Amortisation of intangible assets comprising consolidation 2.0 Exceptional items 2.1 0.4 Statutory operating profit 4.7 2.8 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Finance Directors Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 17 overheads  representing the costs for provision of shared business services to the divisions  were 4% lower than in 2016 at 8.0m 2016 8.2m.
EPS
Adjusted basic EPS calculated on the profit for the year before posttax exceptional items sharebased payments and amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets were 9% higher at 10.0p 2016 9.2p.
Basic EPS were 11.5p 2016 7.6p.
CASH AND DEBT The Group closed the year with bank deposits net of overdrafts of 8.0m 2016 6.7m while Group borrowings amounted to 13.9m 2016 16.9m.
This resulted in net debt of 5.9m 2016 10.2m.
Cash flow in 2017 was particularly strong for two reasons.
First anomalies in timing of two 2016 yearend receipts reversed in the first half of 2017 and did not recur boosting bank balances by 1.9m.
Second the first earnout payment to Annovas former owners of 1.7m in September was more than covered by receipt from the BBC of a significant milestone payment in August.
Unutilised working capital facilities at the yearend totalled 4.3m 2016 4.4m.
ANNOVA SYSTEMS Annova contributed to Group earnings for the first time in 2017 following completion of its acquisition at the end of 2016.
Strategically the acquisition remains highly favourable.
The order book is building as sales success expands Annovas geographical footprint and crossfertilisation of the customer base with our Media and Broadcast division continues to gain momentum.
Preacquisition due diligence identified that governance and management controls procedures were not as mature as those in the wider SCISYS Group so during 2017 the Board conducted a thorough review of Annovas financial disciplines and reporting processes.
Annova managements financial forecasts for 2017 proved overoptimistic as we had anticipated because they were flagged as a specific risk area during due diligence.
This prompted SCISYS to adopt a purchase consideration structure that placed significant emphasis on performance during the threeyear earnout period 2016 to 2018.
The total purchase price payable for the Annova acquisition is linked both to average profitability and achievement of key commercial milestones in its flagship contract with the BBC.
Annova successfully obtained customer acceptance for a critical phase of this project in August three months earlier than had been provided for in the acquisition balance sheet.
This triggered payment of a first earnout instalment of 2.0m in September 2017 of which 10% was satisfied in new SCISYS PLC shares with the balance paid in cash from existing Group resources.
Annovas overperformance in the first earnout year of 2016 raised expectations in the 2017 Interim Report for the level of contingent consideration that would eventually be payable by SCISYS to Annovas former owners.
Since publication of the first halfyear results Annova management has been included in the detailed Group business planning process for 201821.
Application of planning and forecasting policies consistent with those across the rest of the Group has resulted in scaledback expectations for Annova in 2018.
This led to a reduction in the Groups anticipated liabilities for earnout payments and resulted in an exceptional credit to 2017s Income Statement of 1.6m.
The fair value of remaining contingent consideration for earnout payments included in the consolidated financial statements is nil 2016 3.3m.
This compares with a contractual cap of 12.9m 2016 14.6m.
TAX
The effective Group tax rate for the year was 15% 2016 15%.
SCISYS continues to benefit from the tax credit system for UK expenditure on RandD in SMEs receiving credits in the form of cash rebates from HM Revenue and Customs.
Up to and including 2016 these were incorporated into the net tax charge.
An accounting standard change requires RandD tax credits from 2017 to be treated as deductions from operating expenses.
SCISYS anticipates that it will no longer qualify under the SME tax credit scheme in 2018 as it expects to exceed the headcounteligibility threshold lifting SCISYS into the scheme for Large Enterprises where credits are significantly less generous.
Accordingly the abovethe line tax credit of 0.5m in 2017 is treated as an exceptional item.
The 2017 tax charge reflected the benefit of an adjustment to prioryear credits in respect of UK tax.
A conservative estimate of 0.5m for receipt of RandD tax credits was included in the 2016 accounts whereas the amount actually received was 0.7m.
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS No material changes in accounting standards have impacted the Group accounts for 2017.
The next significant change affecting SCISYS will be in 2018 when IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers will be adopted.
Detailed analysis by the SCISYS Board has established that implementation of the new standard will have a negligible impact on the phasing of anticipated operating profits although reported revenues will be depressed compared with previously applied treatment.
The reduction reflects provisions in the standard whereby only the markup on third party costs can be recognised as revenue in situations where SCISYS acts in the capacity of an Agent simply passing the thirdpartys goods and services to customers through its books.
If IFRS 15 had been applied in 2017 revenues would have been 5.5m lower than reported and operating profits would have been unaffected.
SHARE OPTIONS During the year a total of 0.4m share options were exercised of which 0.3m were granted in 2008 under the Enterprise Management Incentive scheme for which the exercise window closed at the end of 2017.
All 0.3m outstanding options under the 2015 CSOP award lapsed during the year due to the failure to achieve the threeyear performance criteria as a consequence of the disappointing results in 2015.
Option awards in 2016 and 2017 remain in the money and on track to vest in full.
ORDER BOOK Boosted by the October contract award from OHB Systems for the Heinrich Hertz satellite communications mission ground segment infrastructure the yearend order book was at a record level 41% ahead of the prioryear at 91.3m 2016 64.6m.
Of this total 36.5m 2016 31.2m is invoiceable within one year and 51.8m 2016 38.4m within two years.
The longerterm balance principally reflects Annovas contract with the BBC which runs to at least 2027.
57% 2016 34% of the total order book value was denominated in euros.
Chris Cheetham Finance Director Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model
Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 18 OUR STRATEGY and PURPOSE At SCISYS we strive to create premium value for our customers based on our excellence in a variety of niche markets.
We have demonstrated this fundamental capability for more than three decades flexibly responding to the everchanging market demands in a fastmoving software industry with our well balanced portfolio of solutions services and products.
Based on this foundation we continue to aspire to grow our commercial success in a balanced and resilient way providing systems and services that form an indispensable part of our customers value generation helping us to establish and maintain longterm relationships.
Trusted relationships with all our stakeholders are essential to progress our vision.
Honesty transparency and respect are the core of our corporate values.
Our corporate culture focuses on commitment and flexibility and we rely on our excellent staff who help us innovate in line with customer and market needs frequently as thought leaders.
OUR BUSINESS MODEL Our value proposition The depth and breadth of our knowledge and experience ensures that customers with complex issues can rely on us.
Our
Viewed from the perspective of staff healthy growth delivers career opportunities and the upholding of SCISYS values and culture.
For customers this inspires confidence in the longterm prospects of the
SCISYS solutions empower leading organisations and agencies to achieve their business goals.
We combine and apply leadingedge knowledge and technology to solve complex problems by delivering reliable robust solutions.
In many cases this requires a deep understanding of the wider context of how the software is being operated and the expert ability to connect it to the real world.
This is a valuable capability that generates important knowhow that we can exploit in similar or other fields.
We believe our markets have scope for continued growth and that our skills and products will continue to be valued in them.
Our projects are usually critical to our customers operational success so our impeccable record of delivery performance is important to them.
Value is achieved because the vast majority of our client relationships are
GROWING.
SCISYS
30 YEARS OF LONGTERM GROWTH OUR VISION To prosper by delivering premium value to customers.
To live an ethos of excellence.
To benefit from mutually respectful relationships.
OUR MISSION Our mission is to empower leading organisations and agencies to achieve their goals by creating and delivering quality software and IT solutions and services.
OUR
PURPOSE
OUR
VISION
OUR VALUES OUR PRINCIPLES
MISSION Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 19 longterm and ongoing.
All of these factors result in an ability to win contracts when bidding against larger companies.
Key markets segments and relationships The marketfacing divisions within the SCISYS Group drive their businesses with a high degree of autonomy positioning themselves as experts and recognised thought leaders in their respective markets.
Each one of our divisions focuses on a variety of vertical markets in which they have been active for many years.
They excel using their specialised indepth sectorspecific domain knowledge and their proven technical and programmatic capabilities.
The majority of our customers across all sectors are bluechip organisations.
Many of them are in the public sector such as the European Space Agency major public broadcasters nongovernment institutions and government departments although the balance of work with commercial customers is increasing.
Longterm relationships with our customers and business partners are fundamental to our business and we strive to maintain these relationships over many years if not decades.
Frequently and increasingly we work directly for the end customer but we also engage with business partners on various levels.
Large system integrators act as our prime contractors when we work as a subcontractor particularly in the space and defence sectors.
Wherever needed we complement our own capabilities by involving specialists premium suppliers of standard hardware and software products and reputed research institutes.
Local agents also support our sales team in certain international markets.
Our diversity is what gives us a high level of resilience against changing market trends and we also benefit from sharing divisional expertise internally to innovate with customers.
Our revenue streams and outcomes Our activities span the entire software lifecycle engaging with customers leads to innovative concepts that we translate into highquality robust software solutions.
We integrate these solutions on a system level in the customers environment where they typically become part of the customers core infrastructure.
In addition we frequently maintain and support  and even operate
Our
Key markets segments
Reinvest for growth
SCISYS BUSINESS MODEL WHAT WE DO KEY MARKETS MEDIA and
MARITIME MEDIA NEWS
INSTITUTIONAL AND
SECURITY and DEFENCE GOVERNMENT COMMERCIAL RETAIL
DEVELOP
INTEGRATE
DESIGN
SUPPORT
NNOVATE systems on behalf of our customers using Cloud and other infrastructure providers.
As a consequence the revenue streams for each of our divisions range from fixed price contracts to time and materialbased services as well as multiyear maintenance and support contracts.
In general  and particularly with Annova now being part of the Group  we increasingly add licence and royaltybased revenues as we progressively create portfolios of reusable software that allow us to employ our solutions in similar environments or in adjacent markets.
All of our divisions generate a large proportion of recurring revenues that add to the underlying strength and reliability of our business and provide us with a solid basis for future revenue profit and margin growth.
Being a successful business that excels at generating value for our customers makes us attractive for highly qualified staff which in turn supports our objective to develop and retain a team that can deliver excellence.
Key resources activities and partners Our key resource is a team of more than 580 highly qualified staff working in 7 major offices across the UK and Germany.
This committed team provide us with indepth domain knowledge and superior technical
MATE
IMAGE OHB SYSTEM AG Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 20 expertise.
We achieve this by working to keep and recruit highly motivated talented and skilled employees.
Strong financial resources complement our teams excellence.
We benefit from our strong balance sheet a number of substantial freehold properties longterm relationships with our financial partners and our robust working capital facilities.
Reinvest for growth Our objective is to grow the business on a steady basis.
We therefore continue to reinvest in the areas that we see are the main drivers for our business success.
We constantly develop our sales team to establish new and to foster existing customer relationships and to expand into untapped regions.
Permanent technical innovation including the development of proprietary software and regular staff development allows us to maintain our reputation as leadingedge technology experts.
We invest in acquisitions to complement our organic growth aspiration always thoroughly assessing the business benefit and cultural fit.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES and KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Balanced evolution sustainable growth Our strategic objective is to grow our business in terms of revenues operating profit and operating margin so that we deliver sustainable longterm value to our shareholders our customers and to our entire team.
This is done in line with corporate values that are reflected in the SCISYS culture of being committed honest customer focused respectful and supportive to all of our stakeholders.
The divisions continuously broaden their pipelines of prospective clients building on the positive reputation gained with existing clients and seeking to extend their business development and sales activities to new territories.
They are also moving into adjacent areas by evolving the range of their services and products.
Our strategy for growing SCISYS also incorporates identifying acquisitions that help us to accelerate progress.
We continue to select opportunities carefully and aim to acquire companies that expand our customer base geographical reach or add unique expertise  and most importantly are a good cultural fit to ensure successful integration.
Progress in 2017 The key objective in 2017 for the Board was to grow the business on a yearonyear basis compared with the strong recovery made during 2016 and reflecting the acquisition of Munichbased ANNOVA Systems GmbH Annova which completed on 31 December 2016.
Total revenue grew by 25% and the adjusted operating profit was up 44% compared with 2016.
Taking market expectations as a guideline these targets were overachieved by 6% for revenue and 2% for adjusted EBITA.
In addition to the yearonyear comparative the performance delivered in 2017 shows compound growth rates of 7% for revenue and 10% for adjusted EBITA over a 4year term starting in 2013 compared with 4% and 5% respectively for the period 20122016.
The results include the step change from the Annova acquisition.
The directly comparable compound growth rates on an organic basis are 4% for revenue and 6% for adjusted
This highlights the success of our strategic approach of balanced evolution and underpins sustainable growth in a demanding business environment.
As for our overall financial performance we have been able to make very good progress against our strategic priorities for 2017 across all of our divisions.
Our yearend orderbook position has reached a record high for the second consecutive year.
It benefited from the Heinrich Hertz contract which added 18m to the order book for the Space division and was bolstered by Annovas strong order book.
The strength of the order book quantifies the progress we have made with respect to our mediumterm aspirations.
We have taken action to implement the complex contract assessment process as mandated by the new IFRS 15 standard which becomes applicable from 1 January 2018.
The way we implement this process in SCISYS adds to the continuous measures we take to harmonise contract review and risk management procedures across all divisions.
See pages 32 to 35.
Another priority was to improve utilisation of the Groups property.
We took the initiative to market the Chippenham property assets of the Group more effectively back in 2016 and currently have 3 tenants at Chippenham.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 21 Operating profit adjusted up 44% Operating margin adjusted up 13% Revenues up 25% Earnings per share adjusted basic EPS up 9% In 2016 we set our mediumterm strategic objectives with a 3 to 5year term in mind.
With total revenues we are already close to the mediumterm target much earlier than initially aspired.
We ended 2017 with an adjusted operating margin of 8% slightly lower margin growth than 2016.
The reason is that the accelerated revenue growth is partly at the expense of additional costs and therefore slower margin growth.
We therefore anticipate the mediumterm margin target to be delivered later than the revenue target but still within a 2 to 4year timeframe from now.
EPS This has increased by 9% for adjusted basic EPS and basic EPS increased to 11.5p.
First successes from crossselling synergies crystallised in 2017 Annova won MDR as a new customer which was aided by the well established longterm relationship between SCISYS and MDR and the MandB division secured a 6figure licence contract with MDR to integrate dira and OpenMedia.
MandB secured its first contract with French commercial broadcaster RTL which was supported by RTLs established relationship with Annova and their resources in the Parisbased branch office.
Integration of dira and OpenMedia is progressing in the BBC alongside the rollout of OpenMedia.
Various other activities have started despite the ringfencing ranging from regular management level meetings joint showcases at trade shows and various daytoday contacts on working level.
The Space division has delivered a very strong performance during the year.
Strong revenues from the growing satellite navigation business were instrumental to this success despite frequently aired Brexit risks.
The pipeline of future opportunities was proactively grown covering the current Galileo constellation EGNOS and also for early study work in the Galileo Second Generation programme.
The 18m contract with OHB for German Heinrich Hertz mission is a huge success to the PLENITER business as it adds a reference for a complete satellite ground control system entirely based on SCISYS proprietary product suite.
ESD has successfully implemented the internal structure with three different business groups in order to strengthen its sales focus and awareness in the respective markets.
In the defence security and maritime unit another very promising relationship was established with a major defence system integrator which already in 2017 has contributed to ESDs revenues.
An ongoing research project in the maritime defence domain was extended for a second phase in 2018 and beyond.
ESD secured one of 7 places on the Metropolitan Polices Solution Provider framework which has a total value of 320m over 4 years in total first calloffs are expected in 2018.
ESD has managed to grow into adjacent niches in transport partly supported by Xibis as it significantly increased its engagement with Siemens and won initial contracts with Angel Trains and GTR.
OUR
ACHIEVEMENTS
DURING 2017 STRATEGIC PRIORITIES Further grow the space business particularly focusing on satellite navigation and a reuse of the newly established PLENITER product suite for satellite groundsegment solutions.
Further raise awareness of SCISYS expertise in the defence security and maritime sectors and extend the footprint of our ESD division.
The integration of Annova into the SCISYS group so that synergies with our MandB division and other parts of our business are explored early on and initial steps are being taken to bring these to fruition.
OUR
STRATEGIC
PRIORITIES 2017 As per ARFS 2016 We will remain focused on our growth aspiration for operating profit operating margin revenues and also our earnings per share EPS.
Strategic objectives for the medium term.
Objective increased margins We aim to increase our operating margin to at least 10%.
Objective topline growth We aim for revenues to grow to at least 60m.
Anticipate a corresponding increase in SCISYS EPS Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 22 OBJECTIVES GOING FORWARD In principle our main strategic objectives for the mediumterm remain largely unchanged.
We will remain focused on our growth aspiration for operating profit operating margin revenues and also our earnings per share.
With Annova being part of SCISYS from 2017 onwards and the healthy growth we are seeing organically we expect to benefit from the current momentum going forward.
Objective increased margins We aim to increase our operating margin to at least 10%.
Objective topline growth We aim for revenues to grow to at least Our strategic objectives of 60m revenues and doubledigit operating margin in the medium term was reinstated last year.
We are now increasingly confident the revenue objective is achievable within a couple of years.
We also anticipate our operating profit will grow largely in line with our revenues but we expect to reach the operating margin threshold of 10% somewhat later than our revenue target.
Our expectation also includes a corresponding increase in SCISYS EPS.
Based on our track record of sustainable cash generation we plan to maintain our progressive dividend strategy.
We note that due to the nature of our business model we may experience half year on halfyear or yearonyear variability to a degree and therefore use compound annual growth rates as a better measure of achievement.
We also retain the concept of a set of baseline targets that is complemented by a set of more aspirational targets by which we may meet our objectives earlier than assumed for the baseline.
As stated in previous reports these targets can be impacted by exchangerate movements that are beyond our control and also continued order intake deferrals.
Also the transition to the new revenue recognition accounting standard IFRS 15 in 2018 will introduce a revised approach to revenue reporting.
Accordingly the exact quantification and timing of targets may be subject to externally induced changes.
Although the acquisition of Annova will continue to attract a significant amount of the Boards attention during the next years growth through further acquisition remains a key element of our strategy.
Again the fundamental approach will not change we will continue to look for opportunities that add value to the business by complementing our current activities.
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES 2018 For 2018 the Board will be focused on a set of key measures that will help to progress our mediumterm strategy The integration of Annova into the SCISYS group so that synergies with our Media and Broadcast division and other parts of our business are explored early on so that preparations are in place for the post ring fencing era.
Further growing the space business particularly focusing on satellite navigation and a reuse of the newly established PLENITER product suite for satellite groundsegment solutions.
Further raising awareness for SCISYS expertise in the defence security and maritime sector and extending the footprint of our ESD division.
Building on the initiatives started in 2015 as a response to the issues that we experienced we will continue to optimise our risk management processes so that the inherent business risks are managed.
Continued focus will be spent to bring Annova up to speed with the high standards within the SCISYS group.
This forms part of our continual improvement approach which also covers succession planning corporate structure regular process improvement with respect to cyber security and improved forecasting as focal areas.
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Mediumterm target of 60m revenues.
4year CAGR starting 2016 for 60m revenues by 2020  7% on average yearonyear.
Achievement 2017 on 2016 25%.
Adjusted Operating Profit Margin Mediumterm target of min.
10% operating margin.
4year CAGR for adjusted operating profit starting 2016 for 10% adjusted operating profit margin by 2020  17% on average yearonyear.
Achievement 2017 on 2016 44%
8.3% 2.2% 7.1% 8.0% Measuring our progress against our strategic goals.
OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE SUCCEEDED ACROSS THE GROUP IN 2017 THALES ALENIA SPACE ITALIA The Space division will work on activities relevant to the design coding and verification of the Rover Mission Management Software Instruments Layer MMSIL for the ExoMars RSP Rover and Surface Platform 2020 Mission.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Business Strategy and Model SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 23
We are proud to have a list of customers that includes many of the largest leading and distinguished organisations across Europe and the world in a broad spectrum of industries.
CORUS ENTERTAINMENT CANADA Annova started 2017 by securing a contract from Canadas Corus Entertainment for a planning solution to replace an incumbent newsroom solution in Global News with the OpenMedia newsroom solution providing new assignment runningorder management systems.
MDR GERMANY MDR decided on Annovas OpenMedia product as its nextgeneration editorial newsroom solution replacing a competitors systems.
Once fully rolled out up to 1000 journalists across TV radio and online will use OpenMedia as their central tool for planning and crafting news.
A closer look at our Space division SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 24 OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE HAVE SUCCEEDED IN 2017 Spirit Healthcare The team at Xibis created a healthcare web application for clinicians and an associated tablet app for patients that delivers data to an integrated dataanalysis solution for patient monitoring and medical diagnostics.
OUR POSITION The SCISYS Space division enjoys a solid reputation in the space sector for delivering projects on time and to budget.
With 200 highly qualified staff it has grown into a substantial player in the space industry and become a longterm supplier to large spaceindustry prime contractors as well as operating as a prime contractor itself.
The space market consists broadly of the larger traditional institutionalnational arena as well as the smaller emerging commercial arena known as Open Space or New Space.
We operate in both arenas.
We target these different markets from our offices in the UK and in Germany.
SCISYS Space has established itself over 30 years as a reliable and trusted partner to large system integrators Airbus Thales OHB satellite operators and European space institutions such as the European Space Agency ESA EUMETSAT the UK Space Agency UKSA and the German Space Agency DLR.
We bid successfully to these customers for framework contracts for recurring work and foster longterm relationships with them.
SCISYS seamlessly combines work for space institutions in specialist research and development with bespoke software solutions for commercial space operations.
Our unique selling proposition remains a high level of professionalism close and cooperative partnerships with customers and a successful track record.
Satellite and spacebased systems are the backbone of global communications weather products precision navigation and timing nextgeneration intelligent transport systems climate research and security.
Our
The division covers the broader space sectors such as human spaceflight navigation telecommunications Earth Observation EO and exploration missions including Artificial Intelligence AI and robotics as well as related groundsystem infrastructures.
SCISYS is well positioned to exploit these sectors using its proprietary PLENITER software for space operations together with its indepth expertise
SPACE
OUR LONGSTANDING
European Space Agency
EUMETSAT
IPMAPortuguese Weather Service 1990 KNMIDutch Weather Service Finnish Meteorological Institute Thales Alenia Space Airbus Defence and Space DLR the German Space Agency RTL FRANCE The French RTL s network Fun Radio went live with MandBs dira software just before Christmas 2017 while RTL2 will be operational in January 2018 followed by RTL Radio Paris.
A third phase will introduce the software suite to 30 local studios across the RTL Radio network.
REVENUES SPACE % of total revenue
Revenues m 41.1% OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE SUCCEEDED ACROSS THE GROUP IN 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report A closer look at our Space division SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 25 MERLIN CLIMATE MISSION In line with the start of the next phase in the French German MERLIN climate mission the Space division received a contract from Airbus DS GmbH for the realisation of the Payload Operations Centre PLOC for the LIDAR instrument on the MERLIN satellite. of satellite missions.
SCISYS is also at the forefront of developments in EO systems including the downstream sector giving it the opportunity to reuse proven solutions for the benefit of its customers.
THE YEAR IN REVIEW Our divisional goals have been achieved in terms of revenue as well as in growing the order book impressively.
We have consolidated and extended our position in the institutional and commercial markets.
We have been tracking the sales opportunities that have resulted in some of our 2017 key contract wins for a number of years and 2017 was the year to reap the rewards of this investment.
The key milestone is certainly the Heinrich Hertz ground segment contract where SCISYS takes on the responsibility of implementing the ground station control and communications infrastructure for the German national satellitecommunications mission as a ground segment prime contractor to Germanys OHB.
SCISYS Space this year signed a contract with GMV for the design and implementation of a mission control system to support the EUMETSAT Polar System EO programme.
This relates to the second generation of polarorbiting satellites that will provide weatherprediction data to national meteorological services for the next two decades.
Other milestones include winning the Mission Management System MMS for the ExoMars 2020 mission to Mars the payload operations centre for the Merlin mission and the continuation of Galileo activities.
A new commercial customer Sky and Space Global UK selected SCISYS for the delivery of a network management simulator for their Pearls Constellation of nanosatellites image above in 2017.
We also continued our close cooperation with OneWeb for its highprofile satellite programme the worlds largest satellite constellation.
All areas of the Space division have contributed to secure the business and to support the growth.
Main contributors were navigationrelated projects Galileo EGNOS the GOF9 frame contract for ESOC various EO projects but also onboard software has been growing with the project for the ExoMars MMS.
TRENDS AND OUTLOOK We continue to explore the opportunities in commercial and institutional markets for our unique and highly integrated PLENITER software suite for the planning implementation and operation of complete satellite missions.
There are growing opportunities for SCISYS to demonstrate that our PLENITER suite provides substantial benefits for commercial space missions and adds efficiencies through increased automation.
The win of the Heinrich Hertz mission control system the extension of the cooperation with OneWeb and the win of the Pearls Constellation Simulator to Sky and Space Global UK are all evidence of the progress we are making in this area.
Our midterm strategy stands for balanced growth focusing on both our existing and new markets worldwide.
In line with this we continue to foster longterm relationships with European institutional space customers while building new partnerships and capturing market share in the upandcoming commercial space sector.
SCISYS Space based on a substantial list of prospects for 2018 and beyond plans to grow its business further.
These plans are based upon the delivery of the large contracts won this year and further exploiting the business in navigation operations New Space and capitalising on opportunities in the vibrant UK space market.
IMAGE SKY AND SPACE GLOBAL ARD GERMANY Annova Systems will develop a portal for ARD Aktuell based on the groundbreaking proprietary product OpenMedia Newsboard.
This solution will give ARDs journalists a powerful webbased tool that bolsters their existing installation by providing an extended research capability.
26 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 A closer look at our Enterprise Solutions and Defence division % of total revenue 28.8% SKY AND SPACE GLOBAL UK The Space division won a contract with Sky and Space Global UK to deliver a network management simulator for their Pearls Constellation of nanosatellites.
It will be a high performance configurable and portable solution for providing a representation of the constellation and mission operations.
Divisions
ENTERPRISE
SOLUTIONS and DEFENCE ESD OUR POSITION ESD has a reputation as leading experts in the UK for bespoke software innovation and systems integration.
We have a team of around 140 staff all based in the UK.
Across the division we specialise in robust software systems applicable to three broad business sectors the government and emergency services defence security and maritime and the commercial sector.
The common thread is creating software solutions and using them in innovative ways by drawing on reusable and proven software technology.
The division has structured its three units to maximise focus and growth.
Our commercial team covers a wide spectrum of projects for a variety of commercial customers.
The government team develops mainly business systems and creates engineering solutions.
The largest of the three the defence team has a strong reputation for engineering solutions and continues to consolidate its position in providing software solutions particularly for military vehicles and vessels.
It also has a strong footing in the maritime sector.
We are seen as experts in the risk management of leadingedge advanced technology projects.
Our independence and experience means that we can draw on this when tackling new areas.
We have a strong track record in generating systems that use robust software and are less dependent upon hardware.
Our expertise is a key factor in maintaining our many multidecade relationships.
Overall we have a strong market position in the UK.
Sizewise we occupy a sweetspot because we can combine the twin benefits of being both robust and agile at the same time.
Our customers tell us that this balance translates as a lower risk for their projects.
THE YEAR IN REVIEW The divisions revenues achieved expectations and divisional goals with topline sales remaining stable.
The year was the mid point of a fiveyear strategy of establishing our three business units as independent entities with all groups investing in sales with growth in mind.
This year we generated new work from existing customers gained new customers and achieved contract extensions and footholds on several frameworks.
OUR LONGSTANDING
Since
Transport for London TfL 1980s Ministry of Defence MoD 1980s Environment Agency
UK PowerNetworks Eastern 19942003 Edmundson Electrical Siemens formerly Westinghouse Signals 2004 Lockheed Martin 2005
REVENUES ESD
Revenues m OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE SUCCEEDED ACROSS THE GROUP IN 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report A closer look at our Enterprise Solutions and Defence division SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 27 The main trend has been gaining new work and contract extensions from existing customers and having more technical staff working on customer sites on a time and materials contract basis particularly with the UK Ministry of Defence and with Siemens.
We gained work and extensions with the Coal Authority UK Power Networks and the Forestry Commission.
All of the business units have seen growth.
We have ongoing work with TfL Vodafone LockheedMartin Northrop Grumman and the Environment Agency.
Commercial
We have a long history of providing value through our software to the commercial sector.
New work this year includes projects gained from Siemens on software engineering of automatic train controls and signalling systems.
This has helped consolidate our position in the rail sector where we also won contracts for a prototype mobile solution from Angel Trains and work on a mobility app and helppoint solutions for train platforms for Govia Thameslink Railway
Included in these projects have been elements of mobile app development by Xibis.
We have been able to use their capabilities to produce both mobile and web apps for these projects as well as working with customers such as Pets at Home and
Conversely we have been able to bring our capabilities and skills to Xibis also.
Government and Emergency Services Contracts from central government departments and agencies continue to be a rich source of business.
We received substantial new contracts from the Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs Defra Public Health England and the Forestry Commission to provide software services.
The Metropolitan Police framework SPF secured in 2017 has offered some limited bidding opportunities to date in the UK policing arena.
However our relationship with the Metropolitan Police goes from strength to strength and the number of potential opportunities on the SPF Framework is encouraging.
Defence Security and Maritime The defence sector remains the lynchpin of the division and we continue to make inroads into the marine and vehicles sectors.
The Waterguard project continued in 2017 successfully providing software solutions to enable the MoD to be tax efficient and compliant with HMRC regulations for military equipment.
We have ongoing work for the RNLI through our flagship MACSYS product an integrated vessel management system providing situational awareness and navigational control.
This is used in the RNLIs Shannon class of lifeboats and we received fresh orders for additional craft at the end of the year  we have delivered and commissioned 26 boats at the time of writing.
SCISYS and Xibis successfully upgraded Imrays international marine chart plotter enabling the reproduction of charts on iOS compatible mobile devices.
Xibis received an award from the British Cartographic Society in respect of its innovative app for excellence in digital mapping with SCISYS involvement.
TRENDS AND OUTLOOK Entering into 2018 our strategic investments in 201617 are set to contribute towards continued growth across all three business units.
We are well positioned to extend our footprint in the armoured vehicles sector following from previous work on the Warrior upgrade and ongoing research and development contracts.
Military vehicle programmes are key to the MoD and as an internationally recognised specialist in this area we aim to win more work in the coming years.
Our MACSYS system is a strong basis from which to secure additional maritime business.
We see further opportunity in the fields of cybersecurity defence and communications.
Having secured coveted places on key framework agreements such as SPF and GCloud 9 we aim to reap the benefits in 2018 and beyond.
Opportunities for substantial growth abound in the defence and niche maritime sector.
In addition we plan further expansion of our functionally rich family of GIS products including Cartosys which is used by the Coal Authority for example.
We will continue to work on innovative technology in the Internet of Things arena involving monitoring tracking and automation including in the rail sector where we were successful with Siemens and GTR.
IMAGE MOD GMV EUMETSAT The Space division signed a contract for up to 1.9m with GMV for a mission control system to support the EUMETSAT Polar System EO programme.
This relates to the second generation of polarorbiting satellites providing weatherprediction data for national meteorological services during the 2020s and 2030s.
IMRAY NAVIGATOR ESD and Xibis collaborated to create an app for leading nautical publishers Imray.
The app allows realtime navigation on an iOS device using digital versions of Imrays paper charts.
The app obtained a Commended Award from the British Cartographic Society.
28 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 A closer look at our Media and Broadcast division % of total revenue 15.2% FORESTRY COMMISSION ESD won two new contracts with the Forestry Commission in England.
The first is an online managed service for Felling Licence applications which makes use of our Cartosys product.
The second is the takeon and delivery of a managedsupport service for two businesscritical applications.
Divisions
MEDIA and BROADCAST MandB OUR POSITION The Media and Broadcast MandB division of SCISYS has a 20year reputation for being a reliable supplier of robust premium software solutions primarily to the institutional public broadcast market.
Our core business is radio and our core product is the dira software suite.
This is a reliable and flexible suite of radio newsroom and newsmedia production and playout applications supporting the core workflows that any broadcaster needs.
SCISYS is one of the biggest operators in Europe in the radio domain and a smaller player in the global broadcast and multimedia platforms market.
We specialise in the large publicservice broadcast market but are gaining ground in the commercial arena.
The division has a team of 77 based in Dortmund and is structured into three profit centres that correspond to areas of geographic focus namely the Germanspeaking region Germany Austria and Switzerland the UK and the International segments.
We continually invest in improving enhancing and expanding our dira suite in line with customer feedback and technological innovation.
THE YEAR IN REVIEW Our divisional targets have been achieved for 2017.
The focus at the start of the year was in line with our strategy of continuing to look after existing customers and contracts while also pursuing new work.
Although the MandB division has moved to a new larger location in Dortmund this year there have been no major operational restructures.
Business from the German speaking countries remains the strongest accounting for roughly half while the UK is the second largest market.
Additionally our ongoing project with the South African Broadcasting Corporation successfully moved into its deployment phase.
Our sales project implementation and support services are all maintained from our Dortmund Office as is our core product development team.
The first half of the year saw several projects from 2016 completed and new customers acquired in the international domain.
We have won new work in France the United Arab Emirates and Malaysia.
These include RTL the French commercial network and RTM a public broadcaster in Malaysia.
The project for RTL in France required OUR LONGSTANDING
Since
Norddeutscher Rundfunk NDR DE 1993 Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk MDR DE 1995 DeutschlandRadio DE WDR DE BBC 2001 VRT Belgium Deutsche Welle DE RUV IS REVENUES MEDIA and BROADCAST
Revenues m OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE SUCCEEDED ACROSS THE GROUP IN 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report A closer look at our Media and Broadcast division A closer look at our Media and Broadcast division SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 29 Scotty  BBC The BBC chose MandB to modernise its multimedia news delivery system with a cloudhosted service for journalists to securely and quickly deliver multimedia news items to the BBC.
This service is provided to the BBC by using the cloudbased proprietary upload system dira Scotty.
OHB SYSTEM AG Space won a 18m contract by OHB System AG to deliver the ground station control and communications infrastructure for the German national satellite communications mission Heinrich Hertz as ground segment prime contractor supplying OHB direct. commercial broadcasters.
The contract for the Malaysian publicservice broadcaster RTM is an exciting proofofconcept newsroom system for producing editing and playing out news stories for radio.
One of the new software products launched this year was dira Medox which is a multimedia content management system CMS that works with all file types natively.
It has remodelled the traditional concept of a CMS into being more searchengine like  which is new in the market and was launched at the International Broadcasting Conference in Amsterdam.
Collaboration with the Groups December 2016 acquisition Annova has been close this year with joint workshops and strategy meetings taking place regularly.
This includes knowledge exchange between the different organisational units project implementation sharing of expertise and making introductions to respective customers.
We are already working together with respect to our own roadmap development and our latest solution dira Medox has already been integrated into the new OpenMedia NewsBoard solution as a joint solution.
TRENDS AND OUTLOOK We will continue to consolidate our position with existing customers while exploring new opportunities.
Substantial growth potential remains in the international arena.
Our focus this year on France gave us a first foothold in the French market with the influential broadcaster RTL.
From this position we will continue to look to pursue more work in the Frenchspeaking market.
Maintaining a fresh and innovative product portfolio is key to our success and we continue to respond to customer demand and invest in product development and onair applications.
The main demand from the market has been for a new generation of content management system CMS that can treat all file types equally.
Customers are expecting more systems based in the cloud which means that solutions are increasingly becoming webbased.
We have addressed this with our dira Dimension software the 6th and most recent generation of dira This has also meant investing in cybersecurity.
One tool within dira Dimension the dira Medox tool also offers improved online content management functionality to meet customer expectations.
Another area of demand is for greater integration between the playout and the mixing desk which we have responded to by producing a touch screen solution.
We expect further collaboration between SCISYS MandB division and Annova.
We foresee joint work knowledge exchange on the development side as well as joint support activities.
In the future we are likely to see complementary workshare between SCISYS and Annova to create jointly enhanced versions of our respective products we can combine our strength in the content management area with Annovas lead in the planning area.
30 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 A closer look at Annova Systems % of total revenue 12.8% BBC WALES UNITED KINGDOM The BBC awarded a contract to MandB for deployment of dira to their entire radio production and playout operation in Wales.
The project includes delivery to 13 Wales local radio sites based on a single centralised dira platform.
Divisions
ANNOVA
SYSTEMS
OUR POSITION Annova became part of the SCISYS group on 31 December 2016 and is known for newsroom systems focusing on improving journalistic workflows.
We have a reputation for highquality product performance and service.
Lastly we are known for creating trendsetting newsroom products and cross media solutions for TV radio and online news.
We achieve this by understanding journalism knowing the media market and the needs of broadcasters.
Annova has served this sector for over 20 years.
Importantly we are not just a raw software provider we are a solutions provider delivering turnkey solutions  from the very first consultancy via project management and project engineering right up to 24x7 support.
Our OpenMedia software product is a centralised solution sitting at the heart of these processes.
It includes several modules and is scalable to meet the needs of large and small networks alike.
We are split into three teams across Germany France and the UK with a total staff of 76 at the year end.
The UK team manages the project side for the BBC and other UK customers the team in France covers all of the Frenchspeaking countries and a selection of strategic customers in Northern Europe and the German team covers the important Germanspeaking countries Eastern Europe and Rest of World.
All product development is covered from our Munich headquarters.
THE YEAR IN REVIEW While our revenues were not in line with our ambitious targets we were pleased to see new strategic contract wins.
We also embarked on a comprehensive programme of aligning our processes with those of the SCISYS group and commenced the process of increasing sales staff.
From the customer side 2017 was very much focused on completing a key project milestone in respect of our longterm contract with the BBC.
Working in close collaboration with the customer we successfully delivered the critical software implementation and live pilot milestones in the summer.
We then entered the phase to deploy OpenMedia in all BBC newsrooms.
OUR LONGSTANDING
Since
ARDaktuell Germany SWR BR and WRD Germany RTL France France 2008 Red Bull Media House Austria 2009 Omroep Gelderland Netherlands 2010 SRG SSR Switzerland 2011 rbb Germany 2012 REVENUES ANNOVA SYSTEMS
Revenues m na na 16 OUR STRATEGY IN ACTION.
HOW WE SUCCEEDED ACROSS THE GROUP IN 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report A closer look at Annova Systems SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 31 JAPAN METEOROLOGICAL AGENCY The Japan Meteorological Agency JMA has renewed its client relationship with Space which will deliver a combined satellitedata reception system for the prediction of satellite track and reception of satellite imagery.
METROPOLITAN POLICE FRAMEWORK The Metropolitan Police SPF framework secured in 2017 is set to see exciting projects in the UK policing arena.
ESDs relationship with the Met Police goes from strength to strength.
The second area of focus was winning new customers to replace incumbents existing products and solutions.
We won a key customer MDR in Germany.
This is important because of its size and because it is part of the leading ARD group of German broadcasters.
The ARD Group are key players and seen as innovators across the German speaking countries.
Selecting us for MDR is an indication of their confidence in our solutions.
In this case we are replacing fully their existing editorial newsroom systems.
Also part of the ARD group is Radio Bremen which subsequently became our customer this year.
Other new customers include public broadcaster Czech Radio who have contracted us to work on their news rundown management systems.
We have seen key contract wins in 2017 both in new markets and across existing customers.
Annova gained its first customer in Canada  a strategic gateway to North America  Corus Entertainment Global TV a private broadcaster and one of the largest in the country with 39 channels operating in TV and online news.
They have contracted us to equip their news and radio division with our innovative newsgathering system to 20 Canadian markets as well as their London and Washington bureaux.
In 2017 we completed the first phase of four.
We also won a strategic win with ARDAktuell for a crossmedia planning portal for its national prime news programmes.
Annova was chosen over the competition for a new planning system based on our latest product NewsBoard which is being added to their current installation of OpenMedia.
We are delivering a solution using an agile approach for them and this major project has high visibility across the ARD network.
We continuously seek to innovate and develop new products.
Our new product this year has been NewsBoard a tool for online research and social media monitoring for journalists.
This sits on top of our OpenMedia solution which remains the core software solution product.
NewsBoard is generating a lot of interest from existing and potential new clients alike.
Annova felt comfortable being part of the SCISYS group from day one not only gelling with the MandB teams but also with the Space and ESD divisions.
Extensive collaboration and knowledge sharing across the two businesses helped by our common cultures assisted our contract wins within the ARD group.
TRENDS AND OUTLOOK We have a desirable software product based solution and a lot of untapped market potential particularly for increasing market share and sales in new territories.
Having established ourselves in the German markets our business model is now focused internationally and we will continue to pursue new work in North America.
Annova is one of the main players in the worldwide market.
We will seek to continue to win market share and to consolidate our position.
We see plenty of potential for our existing portfolio to cover a wider market share as we access new territories.
Our sales strategy continues to extend our scope with the existing client base win new customers and to expand into new markets.
As for responding to market trends there is high demand for webbased solutions in addition to local installations in order to achieve independent working via a multitude of mobile teams and devices.
This is very much the direction of travel and remains a priority in the radio market.
Our proprietary NewsBoard solution meets these trends headon.
In collaboration with our customers we will continue to invest in enhancing and extending our products through innovation.
We also expect to continue to focus on project deliveries for existing customers throughout next year as well as investing in recruitment to consolidate and grow the business.
Strategic Report  The key risks we manage SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 32 The management of risks clearly goes hand in hand with the opportunity to create value for shareholders.
The Group and its subsidiaries strive to identify the risks associated with the daytoday operational businesses as well as risks associated in the Groups wider business context.
SCISYS operates both a bottomup and a topdown approach to risk management which provides visibility and accountability throughout the Group.
The key challenges risks and uncertainties facing SCISYS primarily arise from the highly competitive and rapidly changing nature of its markets.
The following is a description of those key risks that could impact on the Groups ability to achieve its strategic goals.
These are also provided as a residual risk distribution matrix on page 34.
SALES and COMPETITIVE RISKS The Group makes sales within its markets and at any one time there may be markets that have longer sales cycles than others or that have fewer sales opportunities.
This can impact our ability to sell our services.
Failure to achieve sales targets because of sales pipeline deferrals or diminishing markets will lead to lower revenues being achieved.
The sales pipeline is monitored regularly and we maintain close contact with our customers seeking to anticipate issues in the sales pipeline.
Where possible we prefer to contract with major customers through long term agreements that provide certainty to both parties.
The Group undertakes a number of customer support business development and sales activities to foster continued strong relationships with its customers to ensure that we are considered by them when sales opportunities arise.
In addition new customers are being sought in existing or new markets through acquisitions.
The Divisional and Subsidiary Boards will always consider any move into a new territory recommended by a Director and will request that a risk assessment be made concerning such territory considering risks such as political regulatory financial local competition and reputation.
The respective Board will then decide whether such a move The key risks we manage
AND AGILITY MANAGING RISKS
ANALYSE
IDENTIFY
MITIGATE
OUR RISK
PROCESS Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  The key risks we manage SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 33 represents an acceptable risk to achieve the strategic goals of the Group.
Each of our divisions operates in highly competitive markets and changes in relative competitiveness could have a material impact on business growth and profitability.
As a mediumsized company any consolidation in our markets by our competitors as well as changing procurement patterns or repercussions from changes to the macroeconomic environment can impact on the Groups competitiveness.
Changes in relative competitiveness including those implied by foreign currency exchange rates could result in lower sales revenues or force pricing strategies that deliver lower margins.
Mitigation here is based on ensuring the sales pipeline is closely monitored against actual margins being achieved to identify any downward trends.
The business development teams also ensure customer facing meetings are held and market intelligence is obtained.
The risk of reduced relative competitiveness as induced by foreign currency effects is primarily mitigated by means of financial instruments see below.
COMMERCIAL and DELIVERY RISKS The Group is engaged in a number of large complex Information and Communication Technology ICT projects.
The successful delivery of many of these projects is dependent on a number of factors including availability and management of Group resources subcontractor performance and infrastructure.
SCISYS generally provides its customers with unique tailormade solutions with varying amounts of its own or thirdparty commercial offtheshelf software COTS and hardware.
The complexity and uniqueness of these solutions varies significantly from off theshelf solutions  such as the 2met meteorological and earth observation satellite data acquisition and visualisation solution through to completely bespoke business solutions for major government departments.
Failure to manage or deliver against contracted customer requirements on a timely basis could result in contract disputes claims for damages or cost overruns that could adversely affect profitability and the reputation of the Group.
SCISYS has policies and procedures in place for reviewing projects associated with customer contracts with an objective assessment of the risk inherent within a contract in addition to its size.
Together the size and risk level are used to escalate the review and signoff level of the sale and to dictate the project management review approach to be followed.
Similar risk management principles apply during the bidding stage of a project to align with project risk management procedures.
The failure of a subcontractor to perform to an appropriate standard or a supplier to deliver products could result in delays to a project and adversely affect the Groups capability to meet contractual requirements and damage its reputation with customers.
SCISYS has subcontractor assessment procedures in place to ensure that a riskbased approach is adopted with subcontractors that can adversely impact the Group with these being assessed in more detail than well established COTS suppliers.
Customer projects are managed to recognised project management standards.
Monthly reports are compiled covering variances to plan and cost to complete and regular project progress meetings are held.
The reports are then discussed at monthly senior management meetings where the projects at risk are further assessed and mitigation actions are defined and monitored.
Escalation mechanisms are in place to involve senior managers increasingly for more risky projects.
The Divisional and Subsidiary Boards receive updates from the divisional directors on sales at a high risk impact level and any problematic projects so that actions can be taken to rectify issues.
ECONOMIC RISKS Future economic downturns affecting the eurozone and the UK economies may cause the Groups customers to cancel postpone or reduce spending on existing or future ICT projects.
This is particularly relevant where our customers are in the public or regulated sectors.
The proportion of Group business outside the European Union is low and so economic issues in Africa and the Middle East would have little impact.
Significant changes as to timing or extent of customer spending or future investment planning could adversely impact the Groups order book.
Failure of a customer could result in noncollection of amounts owed.
Failure of a subcontractor or supplier would result in the Group having to find a replacement or undertaking the task itself which could result in delays and additional costs.
Attrition of customer base due to economic difficulties could cause corporate failures.
The Group regularly monitors external Audit Committee of the Board
Internal audits
SCISYS Divisions and Other Subsidiaries Identify assess manage and mitigate risks SCISYS PLC Board
Shared business services A layered approach to risk management is taken at SCISYS where risks and their impacts are identified and managed at the various levels within the business.
Responsibility is delegated to the management and staff who are authorised to take appropriate actions.
Principal risks are identified that have a potentially high level of impact and have a reasonably high likelihood of occurrence which are then escalated to senior levels of management.
The SCISYS PLC Board is ultimately responsible for being aware of these risks and monitoring how the relevant parts of the Group are managing and mitigating them.
Each division andor subsidiary holds regular meetings with the PLC Directors that are a forum for identifying discussing and agreeing the risk mitigation strategy.
In some cases risks cannot be mitigated or there is a remaining residual risk in which case contingency plans and monitoring for occurrence are undertaken.
Strategic Report  The key risks we manage SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 34 economic and political developments to assess their potential impact on the Group prospects.
Monthly assessments of sales pipelines and feedback from sales teams are used to assess underlying developments.
The split of subsidiaries across UK and Germany has reduced this risk by providing a mixture of geographic revenue sources in members of the European Union with stronger economies.
FINANCIAL RISKS The Group is exposed to a number of potential financial risks Credit risks  Our customers do not pay us on time.
Liquidity risk  The Group operates through cash generated by the business and by bank lending facilities.
Foreigncurrency risk  The Group has foreigncurrency denominated earnings that may not be fully hedged so adverse currency fluctuations between sterling and the euro have an impact on the Income
Details of various risks and the strategies in place to mitigate them are described in note 22 to the financial statements on pages 81 to 86.
The Groups customers are predominantly blue chip and governmental organisations so our credit risk is relatively small.
We continue to monitor overdue payments closely and undertake regular credit checks where appropriate.
The Groups treasury operations are robust.
The risk of lending facilities being curtailed or withdrawn is managed by ensuring our bankers are regularly well informed throughout the year on the Groups performance.
The Group has a reasonable balance a natural hedge between its sterlingeuro earnings and sterlingeuro cost base.
To the extent required which was not the case in 2017 it mitigates shortterm currency risk by taking out exchange rate cover on the anticipated net surplus of euro to working capital requirements in Germany.
Where possible it will contract with customers in the same currency as its cost base.
HUMAN RESOURCES RISKS The Groups performance and its ability to mitigate significant risks within its control depend on its employees and management teams.
Future success depends on its ability to recruit and retain the best people with appropriate competencies.
If the Group loses the services of key personnel or is unable to attract and retain employees with the right capabilities and experience it would be likely to have an adverse effect on the Groups ability to implement its business plans and impact on delivering the strategy.
The Group uses a variety of ways to attract retain and motivate its staff.
These include regular review of remuneration packages share incentive schemes and share option plans.
Reviews with employees are undertaken at least annually and consider their performance.
Remuneration policy is regularly reviewed and incentives are in place to assist with the retention and recruitment of key employees.
Equally important the Group offers a culture where each individual is encouraged to achieve their full potential through regular reviews and discussions.
Removal of free movement of staff between UK and EU as a result of Brexit might introduce additional bureaucracy since this is currently a common practice for SCISYS divisions.
ORGANISATIONAL RISKS The Group is exposed to the loss of SCISYS GROUP  RESIDUAL RISKDISTRIBUTION CHART HIGH LIKELIHOOD MEDIUM LIKELIHOOD LOW LIKELIHOOD LOW MODERATE MAJOR LOW RISK MEDIUM RISK HIGH RISK
IMPACT
SALES and COMPETITIVE RISKS COMMERCIAL and DELIVERY RISKS INFORMATION SECURITY AND CYBER SECURITY
ECONOMIC RISKS FOREIGNCURRENCY RISKS EXPANSION VIA ACQUISITION
CREDIT RISKS HUMAN RESOURCES RISKS
LIQUIDITY RISKS ORGANISATIONAL RISKS GDPR RISKS ORGANIC GROWTH RISKS Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  The key risks we manage SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 35 important facilities that could cause disruption to operations impacting revenues.
Comprehensive business continuity plans are in place that cover offices as well as computing and other facilities.
The risk of a significant loss of all or part of an office is mitigated by having alternative facilities in different locations and being able to utilise the computing facilities in these locations remotely.
The key applications are on virtualised platforms to ensure they can be redistributed to another location or ultimately to the Cloud if necessary in the event of a significant outage at an office location.
Staff are also able to operate effectively from alternative locations including from home to ensure business continuity.
SCISYS is a people business so it is highly dependent on talented and motivated individuals.
As a consequence succession plans are regularly discussed to ensure that the impact of the loss of a key staff member is reduced.
INFORMATION SECURITY and CYBER SECURITY RISKS Information Security is high on most customers agendas especially when it comes to managing their own customers or citizens data.
This is being accentuated by the introduction of the EU General Data Protection Regulation 2016 679 GDPR see below.
Many of the solutions SCISYS delivers need to store and manage this data securely and customers need to be assured that SCISYS can manage their data properly.
SCISYS operates comprehensive information management policies and procedures to ensure that the appropriate protections are in place.
While policies and procedures can ensure the appropriate measures are adhered to the risk of a deliberate malicious cyber attack is always a serious possibility.
SCISYS actively protects its networks and computing facilities against all of the common forms of cyber security vulnerabilities.
SCISYS in the UK is now certified to the UK Government Cyber Essential Plus standards and the controls imposed by these standards are being adopted across the Group.
GDPR RISKS GDPR will come into force in May 2018 and is likely to be retained by the UK government for regulating the control and processing of personal data after Brexit.
GDPR introduces more stringent guidelines on the management recording and processing of personal data and infringement could result in substantial fines.
SCISYS is well under way at implementing improvements to its current policies processes and procedures across the Group to ensure compliance in all countries.
SCISYS is also assessing its exposure due to customer contracts where it is a data processor under the new regulations.
ORGANIC GROWTH SCISYS is currently seeing substantial organic growth which is generally achieved by recruiting talented staff as a result of actual or pending contract awards.
This can introduce risks associated with the introduction of new staff to fulfil new and existing contracts.
All staff undergo extensive induction into SCISYS processes and are generally allocated to preexisting rather than new teams to mitigate the newstarter risk.
New contracts can introduce new risks to the business but these are dealt with in line with and as set out in the Commercial and Delivery Risks section page 33.
EXPANSION VIA ACQUISITION The Group in seeking to fulfil its strategic objectives may need to look to inorganic growth through business acquisitions.
Acquisitions are generally risky because they can fail if the assumptions made at the time of acquiring are not fulfilled.
Failure to achieve the expected benefits from an acquisition and integration of the acquired business into the Group processes could result in an adverse impact on the Groups prospects strategic goals and profitability.
It can also lead to significant financial loss and damage to Group reputation.
Acquisition opportunities are initially reviewed by the Chief Mergers and Acquisitions Officer and the MandA Committee who report to the PLC Board.
If the PLC Board approves its continued interest then an offer may be made subject to contract and undertaking detailed due diligence.
It is essential that any acquisition matches Group values and culture.
When a business is acquired detailed integration plans are developed and monitored to ensure successful integration of the business so that the internal control processes of the Group are achieved.
Clearly the acquisition of Annova is a substantial one and there has been a considerable amount of detailed planning regarding the acquisition and the integration approach following acquisition.
This project is under the full scrutiny of the PLC Board on a daytoday basis.
A NOTE ON BREXIT The Board continues to explore a wide range of Brexit options.
Participating conditions apply to certain EU funded work such as the Galileo satellite navigation programme which require the ultimate controlling company to be an EUbased company or require appropriate waivers.
While our German subsidiary satisfies the requirement of being an EU based company current options include a restructure and redomicile for SCISYS PLC so that it remains based in the EU following Brexit.
Other options include consideration of appropriate waivers and security deed arrangements.
Please also see note on Brexit in the Chief Executives Review on page 13.
Strategic Report  Corporate Social Responsibility SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 36 OUR VALUES SCISYS recognises that values stem from our principles and that these shape our internal behaviours and culture across the Group.
We believe in the values of openness integrity honesty and being supportive.
We are also committed to the principles of inclusion flexibility enthusiasm commitment and above all being genuine open and accountable.
These are the foundations of good conduct and ethical behaviours.
We also understand that company values and purpose are set from the top  by the Board and senior management  and they can only be embedded in company culture when staff are led by example.
SCISYS expects that all of its business is conducted in compliance with high ethical standards and good business practice.
We seek to apply these standards to all dealings with employees customers suppliers and other stakeholders.
This is reflected in our governance policies and we expect professionalism and integrity from all employees and operations.
OUR CULTURE Culture is what drives performance.
Strong growth and value creation can be achieved only when purpose and values are embedded and aligned with company culture.
We understand that this must be done with openness because of the integral role that it plays in the future of our business.
We know it is important for our employees to value their work trust their colleagues and feel empowered to work together.
For these reasons we invest in making SCISYS a desirable place to work.
Not only does doing so demonstrate that we care about their long term futures it also gives staff a high level of reassurance that they are trusted valued and supported.
This also comes from listening to feedback.
These endeavours are good for the Company because we also know that our staff perform better when they feel their voices are heard right at the top.
We support our longterm aims by creating close ties between our business values with company culture as well as ensuring that all appraisals incentives and rewards are equally aligned in this way.
We believe that this has a positive impact on growth and greater performance.
Our HR teams in both the UK and Germany recruit not just for skills and excellence but also seek cultural fit.
This fosters a diverse and healthy company culture which is evident in our commitment to inclusiveness as well as our opportunities for professional development and skills training.
Values culture and principles CORPORATE SOCIAL
COMMITTED TO OUR PEOPLE AND COMMUNITY OUR VALUES Our values are guided by our principles.
SCISYS believes in openness integrity honesty and being supportive.
These are the foundations of good conduct and ethical behaviours.
OUR PRINCIPLES We are committed to the principles of commitment enthusiasm belief focus inclusion trust accountability and being flexible and genuine.
OUR
PURPOSE
OUR
VISION
OUR VALUES OUR PRINCIPLES
MISSION Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Corporate Social Responsibility SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 37 QUALITY ENVIRONMENT and SAFETY POLICIES SCISYS has the objective of continuously improving the quality of the products and services we provide our customers.
Across the Group we are certified with various ISO benchmarks.
In SCISYS UK Ltd we maintain the following Quality ISO 9001 Environment ISO  IT Service Management ISO 200001 and Information Security ISO .
In SCISYS Deutschland GmbH we hold Quality ISO 9001 Environment ISO  and Occupational Health and Safety OHSAS .
Annova is currently working towards certification to ISO 9001 and ISO 27001.
With the exception of health and safety the Technical Director is the Director appointed by the Board to have responsibility for these areas of governance and certification.
The Finance Director is appointed by the Board to be responsible for the health and safety performance across the Group.
The
Group policy places responsibility for the management of health and safety matters on local subsidiary management who are supported by Group representatives and local external advisers where necessary.
The nature of our business means that we do not inhabit a highrisk working environment.
Policies and procedures are nonetheless in place to ensure that risks remain minimal.
We are committed to maintaining a safe working environment for all employees customers and suppliers.
Our staff have experienced only infrequent minor accidents causing injuries such as sprains cuts abrasions etc.
There have been no major accidents in our threedecade Group history.
A clean environment and wellbeing both contribute to our company performance and reputation.
We promote a culture of health wellbeing and fitness by providing our staff where possible  access to subsidised facilities for cyclists fitness rooms and on site cafs that provide healthy food choices.
In addition staff receive regular training on health and safety procedures such as fire safety throughout the year.
COMMITTED TO THE ENVIRONMENT Good environmental practice and consideration of the impact that our operations have on the environment are of great importance to SCISYS.
Our
Therefore our environmental policies aim to adopt responsible practices and comply with local state and national environmental legislation in all jurisdictions that we operate in.
This involves continual improvement over time.
Our office sites operate to meet ISO 14001 certified environmental management systems.
This is an internationally agreed standard that sets out criteria for an environmental management system.
We expect SCISYS companies to implement policies designed to proactively mitigate their environmental impact rather than policies just for carbon offsetting.
The Company uses this framework for measuring and improving its environmental impact.
We recognise that these have many sources heating cooling and powering offices and equipment electricity for computing equipment gas for heating travel by air road and rail to visit clients suppliers and for internal meetings water in offices used for a variety of purposes consumable resources such as paper waste including paper plastic and IT consumables e. toner.
Other environmental measures also include promoting cycling to work car sharingpooling video conferencing recycling and cutting down on our usage of printer paper etc.
We have an ongoing programme to reduce production across our UK sites.
This has proved successful and we strive to continue minimising CO wherever possible.
We seek to improve our environmental performance further annually.
This year we engaged in an extensive LED lighting replacement scheme across our UK sites that has already seen a vast reduction in our energy consumption.
In addition we have commenced refurbishment to create new efficiencies as well as begun a plantreplacement programme which includes replacing legacy airconditioning units with modern efficient units to further reduce energy usage.
In the first half of 2017 our UK sites managed to achieve a 6% reduction in overall energy consumption year on year.
Our subsidiaries monitor their energy consumption closely and where viable they have introduced energyefficiency measures.
SCISYS Deutschland GmbH too has a programme of CO reduction.
For instance its premises in Bochum use groundsource heating and cooling systems and solar panels that reduce the consumption of gridelectricity.
We produce few physical products and therefore have little endoflife recycling and disposal obligations.
Our businesses comply with the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Regulations the WEEE Regulations and we either return our redundant IT hardware to the original equipment manufacturer or distribute it for reuse by the local community wherever possible.
COMMUNITY
SCISYS strives to be a responsible partner in the local communities in which we operate.
We encourage all our subsidiaries to support the needs of their communities by contributing to charities and community initiatives.
SUPPORTING LOCAL CHARITIES SCISYS PLC SCISYS UK Ltd and SCISYS Deutschland GmbH are proud to continue to support several national and local charities in the UK and Germany for example fundraising for Children in Need and other local charities.
Additionally SCISYS has this year made donations and raised funds for Alzheimers Society  The UKs leading dementia support and research charity for people living with dementia their families and carers.
British Heart Foundation  The nations leading heart charity and the largest independent funder of cardiovascular research.
Macmillan Cancer Support  Macmillans ambition is to reach and improve the lives of everyone living with cancer and to inspire millions of others to do the same.
They provide information and support that helps people take back control of their lives.
Childrens Hospice South West  Childrens Hospice South West provides hospice care for lifelimited children and their families from across the South West of England.
Dressability  A small charity that provides a clothingadaptation service for people who need tailored clothes that fit and are easy to take on or off.
They help those with physical disabilities learning difficulties over65s etc.
Friedensdorf International  Friedensdorf International helps victims in areas of war and crisis.
They offer medical help and support international aid schemes onsite.
Furthermore Friedensdorf International provides an educational establishment available to all citizens to promote peace.
Strategic Report  Our People and Workplace Our people and workplace SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 38 WE VALUE OUR PEOPLE There cannot be innovation or robust solutions without the people who create and contribute to them.
In order to attract the right people SCISYS strives to be an employer known for providing attractive careers and interesting work opportunities.
For those who are part of the SCISYS family we seek to develop them in a way that helps them realise their full potential while also meeting the companys business needs.
We also offer flexible working arrangements where we can support this.
SCISYS makes it a part of its corporate culture to respect individuality we present ourselves as we are.
The Company strives to ensure that staff understand the company they work for the role they play and that they are valued stakeholders.
We issue regular news bulletins on the Groups intranet sites and internal newsletters highlighting the valuable work being done across the Group.
The divisions also have regular meetings to discuss what is happening within that division.
We conduct regular allstaff meetings and presentations to discuss the performance of all companies in the SCISYS Group.
We encourage staff to invest in continuous learning and keeping their skills up to date.
Training needs throughout the year are determined at either company division project customer or individual levels.
These are typically available for boosting technical and management skills as well as for personal and developmental skills.
We provide staff with a range of training resources including inductions selfpaced training materials as well as a library of books and journals.
A FAIR AND DESIRABLE WORKPLACE We have a longterm outlook and are committed to providing meaningful and challenging roles for all of our employees.
In order to attract and retain the right people we try hard to be a great company to work for.
It is critical to our success to foster a working environment that encourages innovation and supports a culture of entrepreneurship and partnership.
Our HR teams not only look for skills and talent but also seek out drive and the motivation to develop and succeed.
Appropriate career paths and internal recognition programmes are developed for all staff.
A variety of technical support and managerial courses and training materials are available to employees.
These employment development opportunities are structured to align with both the Group and divisions goals and objectives.
Our leadershipdevelopment and successionplanning processes are equally important to the business.
These are regularly discussed and updated as the competition for talented employees increases and as the leadership needs of our business grow.
Formal performance reviews are conducted and are linked to the values of the organisation.
It goes without saying that we respect equality of opportunity to all existing and prospective employees without unlawful or unfair discrimination regardless of age gender background or ethnic origin.
WORK EXPERIENCE PLACEMENTS and STEM AMBASSADORS In the UK there is an overall skill shortage in the areas of science technology engineering and mathematics STEM and computing.
SCISYS recognises that it has a role to play in CASE STUDY  BREXIT IN THE UK SCISYS recognises that the ongoing Brexit negotiations and associated changes in immigration policies resulting from Britains leaving the EU are likely to be of concern to our UK employees from the EU as well as British employees with partners or children who are EU nationals.
Although there have been minimal concrete or direct changes in the year 2017 SCISYS PLC and its UK human resources teams felt that it was important to support all staff who believed they were affected by the changes.
We have kept a close eye on progress and communicated with staff.
We also brought in an external consultant to deliver a Brexit workshop that outlined the latest options for staff.
At the end of the year we ran a survey with EU staff in the UK and they told us that they gained a lot from the workshop as well as indicating where they required additional support.
Overall all staff said that they felt supported by the company making them feel valued and appreciated.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Strategic Report  Our People and Workplace SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 39 mitigating these challenges.
Gender equality is encouraged at SCISYS but there is an underrepresentation of women in university computing and STEM courses.
In line with this SCISYS helps promote and encourage careers in the IT and computing sector by offering a limited number of opportunities each year for enthusiastic schoolage people and undergraduates either as part of or in addition to their studies.
These range from mentorships meaningful work experience summer placements and graduate opportunities.
Our experience is that those who have been through these programmes with us come away with new skills and enhanced interest in the STEM fields.
In the UK SCISYS has taken a number of apprentices into its internal IT support team under the Governments Apprenticeship scheme during 2017.
This not only helps to bring valuable opportunities to school leavers or those seeking to change their skills that can lead to university degrees but it also make use of funding under the UK Governments Apprenticeship Levy.
Further apprentices have already been recruited in 2018.
In Germany we have 4 apprentices in total 2 at Annova and 2 at SCISYS
Another way that SCISYS endeavours to counteract the widespread shortage of skills in the areas of science technology engineering and mathematics is to promote these subjects at all levels of the national curriculum.
These subjects are essential to a digitally connected world and are therefore critical for developing a deep knowledge of software development techniques as well as hardware and network technologies.
SCISYS has a vested interest in encouraging school children to take up and excel in STEM subjects.
In the UK SCISYS does this by having a number of staff who are STEM
They are active in helping local schools and colleges by bringing STEM career opportunities to life.
We are national participants in the STEMNet programme www. temnet. subjects.
We attend events organised by STEMNet especially those that support engineering and software development.
Our
UNITED KINGDOM 2016 254 GERMANY 2016 219 OUR PEOPLE These figures for 31 December 2017 include Xibis Ltd SCISYS UK Ltd and PLC in the UK and Annova Systems and SCISYS Deutschland GmbH in Germany.
For illustration purposes each icon is equivalent to 10 employees.
Our SCISYS MandB division and ANNOVA Systems are based predominantly in Germany.
Our
SCISYS ESD division and Xibis are British based.
Of the Space division roughly 40% of staff are in the UK and 60% are in Germany note 4 Annova staff are in France.
Corporate Governance Report
Leadership and Governance Structure Board of Directors Board Attendance Board Committees Oversight Audit Committee Report
Remuneration Report
Directors Report Statement of Directors Responsibilities SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 40 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Corporate Governance Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 41
We believe in good corporate governance and accountability and we make robust corporate governance part of our culture and business values.
SCISYS PLC the Company complies with the Financial Reporting Councils UK Corporate Governance Code the Code to the extent proportionate and practicable.
In doing so we take into account our size resources and AIMquoted status.
Where we do not comply with the Code we provide an explanation to shareholders and review our position regularly.
LEADERSHIP AND GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE The Board The Board exercises full and effective control over the Group.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved specifically for its decisions relating to strategy finance risk operations and governance.
There were no personnel changes during 2017.
The Chairman is responsible for the effective and proper running of the Board while the Chief Executive Officer is charged with managing the Groups business.
The roles of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer are distinct.
The Code requires an appropriate combination of Executive and NonExecutive
The split is between five Executive and two NonExecutive Directors including the NonExecutive Chairman.
The Board believes the current split between Executive and NonExecutive Directors is appropriate.
This composition continues to provide the expertise breadth of experience and independence of thought needed while maintaining efficient Board meetings.
The Board reviews its composition against the requirements of the Code and the need for any additional independent NonExecutive Directors andor senior independent Directors is monitored.
The composition of the Board paragraph B.1.2 of the Code its Audit Committee C.3.1 and Remuneration Committee D.2.1 does not meet the Codes recommendations.
Corporate
Governance
Report
Natasha Laird Company Secretary We recognise the importance of high standards of corporate governance.
During the course of 2018 we will be looking to adopt the QCA corporate governance code in furtherance of these standards.
Mike Love Chairman Setting and delivering strategy Enforcing sound risk management and internal controls Reviewing trading and operational performance Ensuring adequate financing is in place Setting the tone for business values Leading the Company and its subsidiaries Engaging with shareholders and other stakeholders Promoting the interests of shareholders customers employees and other stakeholders Monitoring compliance with legislative and London Stock Market obligations and industry best practices Carrying out risk reviews Considering succession planning and Reviewing and implementing investment opportunities.
Board responsibilities and accountability
Leadership and governance structure Audit Committee Remuneration
Nomination
Committee
Chairman
SCISYS PLC Board
Divisional
Boards
Annova
Systems
Xibis
NonExecutive
Mike Love Chairman David Coghlan Independent NonExecutive Director
Klaus Heidrich CEO David Jones Deputy Chairman Chris Cheetham Finance Director Klaus Meng Chief Mergers and Acquisitions Director Steve Brignall Technical Director The Board Corporate Governance Report  Board of Directors
Nc
Rc
Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Denotes Chairman SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 42 Board of
Mike Love Chairman Mike was Chief Executive of SCISYS formerly CODASCISYS from 1986 when he led the management buyin of the business until 2003 when he became NonExecutive
He stepped back in as Executive Chairman in late 2007 but from 2012 stepped back out as Non Steve Brignall Technical Director Steve joined the Science Systems group in 1986 as a senior analystprogrammer.
He was appointed Technical Director of Science Systems Industrial in 1999 and Technical Director of the SCISYS Division in 2004.
He was appointed Executive Director on 26 September 2006.
Before joining SCISYS he spent 5 years at RollsRoyce Aero and Westinghouse Systems.
He studied mathematics at Manchester University.
David Jones Executive Director and Deputy Chairman David joined the Board as a Non Executive Director in June 2002 and stepped in as an Executive Director in late 2007.
He was appointed Chief Operations Officer on 1 January 2010 and then
Chief Executive Officer on 1
January 2012.
He ceased to
be Chief Executive Officer
Director.
Klaus Heidrich CEO Klaus studied electrical engineering with a focus on communications engineering at the University of Dortmund and gained a masters degree in electronics engineering.
In 1989 he joined VCS AG now SCISYS Deutschland Klaus Meng Executive Director Klaus studied electrical engineering at the University of Bochum and graduated as a PhD in optic communication engineering in 1987.
He was appointed a NonExecutive Director of SCISYS PLC in January 2009 and was appointed an Executive Director in July 2012 responsible for mergers and acquisitions as well as remaining a Director of SCISYS Deutschland
Chris Cheetham Finance Director Chris is an engineering graduate of Cambridge University who qualified as a Chartered Accountant with Ernst and Young in 1990 and worked in the Corporate Finance department until 1996.
He has extensive experience gained from working as Finance Director and Company Secretary within the software industry for the six years prior to joining
He was appointed Finance Director on 1 January 2007.
NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS Executive Chairman.
Mike has a PhD in theoretical physics and 30 years experience in the software industry.
He serves as NonExecutive Chairman at Dillistone Group PLC and is a Director of Redcliffe Precision Limited and of The Nepal Trust.
He is a previous member of the AIM Advisory Group of the London Stock Exchange.
David Coghlan Independent Non Executive Director David has more than a twenty year track record in the technology sector with experience of working on both UK and US boards.
He has been a Director of the AIMlisted Synectics PLC since 1993 and Chairman since 2005 and was recently appointed to the board of AIMlisted Eckoh PLC December 2017.
He cofounded Quadrant Group Limited in 2002 a flight and air traffic control simulation and services company and remains its Chairman.
He is a founding investor and NonExecutive Director of TrafficLand Inc.
USbased provider of live traffic video to a broad customer base.
David was previously a partner at strategy consultants Bain and
He has degrees in Law and in Finance from the University of New South Wales and an MBA from the Wharton School University of Pennsylvania.
Davids appointment was effective from 2 January 2013.
He chairs the Audit Committee and sits on the Remuneration Committee.
GmbH as a sales engineer.
From 1992 he was responsible for marketing and sales of VCS and developed VCS media activities until he briefly left VCS returning a year later taking responsibility for strategic business development within corporate management.
From 2005 to 2011 he was a Director of the Media and Broadcast division.
On 1 January 2012 he became an Executive Director and Chief Operations Officer of SCISYS PLC and from 1 January 2014 became CEO.
Board attendance Mike Love David Jones Chris Cheetham Steve Brignall David Coghlan Klaus Meng Klaus Heidrich
Audit
Remuneration
Nomination
Meetings attended by invitation.
General group structure and succession planning were discussed at Board meetings in 2017 Number of meetings in the year Number of meetings attended Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Corporate Governance Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 43 Nevertheless the Board considers its composition appropriate for an AIMquoted company of its size and its individual circumstances.
Currently one third of the Board submits itself for reelection at each AGM as part of the Companys formal retirement by rotation policy.
Under the current Articles every Director must offer himself for re election every three years.
As the NonExecutive Chairman is subject to reelection every three years rather than annually we do not comply with paragraph B.7.1.
We consider a reelection every three years appropriate for all Directors.
All Directors are given full and timely access to all relevant management and accounting information.
All Directors are able to seek independent professional advice in the course of their duties at the Companys expense.
If any Director has concerns regarding unresolved business issues they are entitled to require the Company Secretary to minute their concerns.
All Directors are inducted and kept abreast by the Company Secretary of material changes to laws and regulations affecting the Groups business.
She advises the Board on legal developments regulatory matters and Board procedures.
The Board considers itself sufficiently diverse when considering the background knowledge and experience that each individual member brings to the Board.
Where Board appointments are made the Terms of Reference of the Nomination Committee set out the factors to be taken into account.
Due regard is given to diversity.
Specifically the Nomination Committee is required to consider candidates on merit and against objective criteria and with due regard for the benefits of diversity on the Board including gender when identifying and recommending candidates.
No member of the Board is female.
Board appointments are made solely on merit and independent of gender.
The Nomination Committee will continue to recommend appointments to the Board based on the existing balance of skills knowledge and experience on the Board as well as the merit and capabilities of the nominee.
It will look at the amount of time that any nominee is able to devote to the role.
The Chairman He is responsible for leading an effective Board.
In particular the Chairman is tasked with Chairing Board meetings and setting the agenda Ensuring adequate time is available for all agenda items Encouraging discussion of agenda items Ensuring that accurate and comprehensive management information is distributed to the Board members in a timely manner Ensuring compliance with high standards of corporate governance and ethical behaviour and Facilitating a twoyearly evaluation of the Board.
As one of the original founders of the Company and a significant shareholder the NonExecutive Chairman contributes relevant experience and expertise.
He has regular discussions with the independent NonExecutive Director to review Board matters without the Executive Directors specifically from shareholders and other stakeholders perspectives.
He also provides support and advice to the Chief Executive Officer and the Finance Director.
The Chairman was not independent on appointment and is not considered independent now in accordance with the Code.
The other NonExecutive Director is considered independent in accordance with the Code.
Both provide constructive challenges during Board meetings and have the experience and gravitas to do so.
BOARD EFFECTIVENESS The approximate time spent by the Board discussing a variety of agenda items during the year to 31 December 2017 was as follows Strategy 40% Finance and risk 35% Operations 15% Governance 10% The Board reviews trading and operational performance regularly.
Divergences from expected performance are followed up promptly and rigorously.
BOARD ATTENDANCE The Board held four scheduled Board meetings during the year 3 at its head office in Chippenham and 1 in Bochum Germany.
For details of the attendance by Directors at Board and Committee meetings for the year ended 31 December 2017 see the table on page 42.
In 2017 the Board evaluated its own performance internally based on questionnaires against key areas of its responsibility including adherence to Group strategy operational performance cash flow and net assets budgetary control value created through acquisitions and the share price.
It also internally evaluated its balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the business as well as its diversity.
The Board does not undertake an annual independent evaluation as recommended by paragraph B.6 of the Code.
A two yearly internal evaluation is considered appropriate given the smaller size of the Board and regular daytoday contact between Board members.
BOARD COMMITTEES OVERSIGHT We have three main Board Committees an Audit Committee a Nomination Committee and a Remuneration Committee.
The Chairmen of these Board Committees will be available to answer questions at the 2018 AGM.
A description of their activities is available on the SCISYS website sitewhowearecorporategovernance. tml.
Terms of reference of each Board Committee are available on request Board agenda Time spent discussing a variety of agenda items 40%
10%
15%
35%
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 44 from the Company Secretary and will be available for inspection at the forthcoming AGM.
Each Committee generally invites Directors to attend Board Committee meetings to the extent appropriate.
The Board Committees terms of reference are reviewed annually.
Any necessary changes are recommended to the Board.
The minutes of the Committee meetings are available to all Directors and verbal briefings are given at Board meetings.
A smaller Mergers and Acquisitions Board Committee considers acquisitions and mergers on an ongoing basis headed by Klaus Meng reporting to the Board.
Divisional board meetings Xibis Ltd and Annova Systems GmbH Monthly Divisional board meetings These are led by the Chief Executive Officer and oversee the operational and financial performance of each individual division Space Media and Broadcast and Enterprise Solutions and Defence.
Commercial issues sales opportunities and risk management are discussed and dayto day management decisions are made.
Divisional board meetings provide a forum for the Directors and senior managers to assess performance and if necessary to expedite any remedial steps.
Each division operates as a separate profit and loss centre on the basis of a 13year business plan with agreed short and mediumterm targets consistent with PLC strategy.
Divisional board meetings therefore perform a key riskmanagement function.
The Chief Executive Officer Finance Director and Technical Director are members of and attend most divisional board meetings.
Members of the divisional board also have regular interaction when carrying out their work.
Xibis Limited Xibis is a separate subsidiary of SCISYS PLC and its board now reports through ESD.
During 2017 Xibis had monthly board meetings in Oadby of the Directors Neil Morjaria Ian Newson Fiona Holder Steve Brignall and Andy Whitehead.
These meetings also assessed the operational and financial performance of Xibis its sales opportunities and strategies and risk management.
Annova Systems GmbH During 2017 Annova had monthly board meetings in Munich between the Directors Michael Schller Silvio Kltzig Klaus Heidrich and Chris Cheetham.
These meetings also assessed the operational and financial performance of Annova its sales opportunities and strategies and risk management.
SCISYS UK Limited board meetings During 2017 SCISYS UK Limited held monthly board meetings between its Directors Steve Brignall Dave Gawthorpe and Chris
Spencer Ziegler Klaus Heidrich and Andy Whitehead also attended by invitation.
During these monthly board meetings a range of regulatory strategic management and operational matters were discussed and resolved.
Natasha Laird attended as Company Secretary of SCISYS UK Limited and provided legal updates.
SCISYS Deutschland GmbH board meetings During the course of 2017 SCISYS Deutschland GmbH held regular board meetings to deal with regulatory matters and strategic decisions affecting SCISYS Deutschland GmbH.
In 2017 the Directors of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH were Klaus Meng Chair Sandra Krewerth KarlW Pieper and Horst Wulf.
SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH was an acquisition vehicle for the purchase of Annova Systems GmbH and is the holding company of Annova Systems GmbH and the majority shareholder of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH.
Its Directors are Klaus Heidrich Chris Cheetham and Klaus Meng.
Accountability and Internal Controls Governance The Board undertakes a regular and robust assessment of the effectiveness of the Groups systems of risk management and internal financial controls which is set out within the Directors strategic report on pages 32 to 35.
Internal Governance Comprises senior managers across the Group who consider and make decisions on aspects of the Groups activities that impact on its governance at operational levels.
Its
It is responsible for establishing policies and procedures across the Group and ensuring compliance with these policies.
It ensures that SCISYS remains compliant with current and future legislation relevant to health and safety environment and information security.
It reviews security risks including particularly those identified by ISO 27001 compliance and the response of the business to managing those risks.
It meets quarterly.
A separate GDPR Committee met throughout the year headed by Steve Brignall the Technical Director and attended by the General Counsel Natasha Laird to implement appropriate technical and organisational measures and update dataprotection policies in view of the forthcoming GDPR.
During the course of 2018 a processes board will meet and senior managers will discuss and establish the internal governance processes needed across the business.
Management Meetings CIT meets on a twomonthly basis to address and review operational issues financial issues and the security performance of our IT infrastructure.
The UK MM meets on a monthly basis and addresses daytoday UK management and operational issues legal and regulatory developments.
HR and the General Counsel meet quarterly to discuss developments in employment law.
In Germany the MTM meets to discuss day to day operational management and legal issues these meetings are chaired by a Director of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH.
Other Management Committees Audit Committee Oversees the Groups financial reporting internal financial controls their effectiveness and riskmanagement processes.
It also oversees the external audit process.
The Committee met twice during the year  details are contained in the report on page Membership is David Coghlan as Chairman with Mike Love.
Nomination Committee Deals with appointments to the Board monitors potential conflicts of interest and reviews and considers the recommendations for independent NonExecutive Directors.
It meets when required and addresses recommendations to the Board on policy and strategy with respect to succession planning.
The Committee did not meet during 2017.
Membership is Mike Love as Chairman with David Coghlan.
Remuneration Committee Sets the remuneration of the Directors including basic salary bonuses and other incentivisation payments and awards.
It also ratifies policy proposals in respect of the remuneration of senior executives within the Group.
The Committee met three times during the year.
Details are contained in the Report on pages 48 to 53.
Membership is Mike Love as Chairman with David Coghlan.
For main Board Committees.
Committee oversight 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Corporate Governance Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 45 Gender Pay Gap Reporting 2018 SCISYS UK Limited will publish its gender pay gap report in April 2019.
It will have met the employee threshold for gender pay gap reporting on the snapshot date in April 2018.
The Group did not need to publish a gender pay gap report for the snapshot date in April 2017 as we had not at that stage exceeded the required minimum Group employee count.
Diversity policy SCISYS UK Limited has an equality and diversity policy in place and the Group aims to create a workforce that is diverse and positive regardless of the age gender ethnicity background or other characteristics of our employees.
Equality and diversity is encouraged throughout the Group.
Risk of bribery facilitating tax evasion by others and modern slavery statement 2017 The Group has an antibribery policy in place.
Each of its subsidiaries has implemented this policy and has appropriate procedures required by the Bribery Act 2010 to prevent bribery.
It has procedures in place aimed at preventing the facilitation of tax evasion by third parties.
The
Chief Executive Officer is the Board member responsible for the Groups compliance.
The Groups antibribery policy is reviewed regularly.
The Group is also fully committed to eradicating human trafficking and modern slavery.
The Company publishes annual modern slavery statements pursuant to the Modern Slavery Act 2015 which can be found at sitewhowearecorporategovernance scisysplcantislaverystatement. tml.
AIM Rule Compliance Report SCISYS PLC is quoted on AIM.
We have complied with AIM Rule 31 during 2017 by having sufficient procedures resources and controls in place to enable compliance with the AIM rules seeking advice from our Nominated Adviser NomAd regarding compliance with the AIM Rules whenever appropriate and taking that advice into account providing the Companys NomAd with any information reasonably requested for our NomAd to carry out their responsibilities under the AIM Rules for Nominated Advisers ensuring that each of the Companys PLC Directors accepts full responsibility collectively and individually for compliance with the AIM rules and ensuring that each PLC Director discloses without delay all information which the Company needs in order to comply with AIM Rule 17 Disclosure of Miscellaneous Information and AIM Rule 11 General Disclosure of PriceSensitive Information insofar as that information is known to the Director or could with reasonable diligence be ascertained by the Director.
Relations with shareholders The Board recognises its primary role of representing and promoting the interests of the Groups shareholders.
The Board is accountable to shareholders for the longterm performance and success of the
Being an AIMquoted company the NonExecutive Chairman Finance Director and Chief Executive Officer continue to hold regular meetings with institutional shareholders and private client brokers to discuss and review the Groups activities strategies and performance.
This provides a dialogue with current and potential future shareholders brokers and an opportunity to explain the Groups strategy and performance.
The Annual General Meeting AGM is our main forum for meeting private shareholders.
The Board is available to answer questions and shareholder participation is encouraged.
We sent out our INSCIGHT newsletter once during 2017 which updates shareholders and other stakeholders on activities and progress.
The Company website sitewhoweareinvestors. can directly discuss particular issues with the Company.
Space Division Klaus Heidrich
Chris Cheetham Finance Director Steve Brignall Technical Director Horst Wulf Chair and divisional director During 2017 the Divisional boards comprised Enterprise Solutions and Defence Division Klaus Heidrich
Chris Cheetham Finance Director Steve Brignall Technical Director Dave Gawthorpe Chair and divisional director Andy Whitehead divisional director Media and Broadcast
Klaus Heidrich
Chris Cheetham Finance Director Steve Brignall Technical Director KarlW Pieper Chair and divisional director Annova Systems
Klaus Heidrich CEO and Managing Director of Annova Chris Cheetham Finance Director and Managing Director of
Michael Schller Chair and Managing Director of Annova Silvio Kltzig Managing Director of Annova During 2017 the Annova Board comprised Xibis Ltd Neil Morjaria Managing Director Steve Brignall
Andy Whitehead
Fiona Holder
Ian Newson Technical Director During 2017 the Xibis Board comprised Corporate Governance Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 46 In conjunction with the Companys Nominated Advisor NomAd and other financial advisers we distribute news in a timely fashion through appropriate channels to ensure that shareholders are able to access material information about the Companys progress.
The Chief Executive Officer and the Finance Director are available to meet shareholders during the year.
The Chairman and the Independent NonExecutive Director make themselves available to discuss any issues or concerns that shareholders may have on a casebycase basis.
Other key stakeholders how we engage with employees customers suppliers and lenders.
Our approach to corporate social responsibility is set out on page 36.
Our staff are key to the business and the Directors recognise the need for engagement with employees.
Executive Directors meet staff formally by providing twiceyearly results presentations at all office locations and for larger groups of offsite employees.
Management staff meet the Directors through regular meetings such as the meetings mentioned above.
Our smaller size means that Directors and management staff are relatively accessible to all employees.
We encourage staff engagement and our size allows our management structures to be relatively flat.
Our customers are clearly essential to our business.
We maintain longterm relationships with our customers.
SCISYS operates a system of key account managers whose role is to communicate with them and ensure close liaison in addition to the daytoday communication that occurs with every customer contract.
Our bankers are a key constituent of the Companys ongoing ability to maximise profitability.
We develop long standing relationships with our bankers and keep them regularly updated as to how the business is performing.
We also seek to maintain longterm relationships with suppliers and seek to engage suppliers on industrystandard terms and conditions.
When Board decisions are taken the Board takes into account its duty to promote the success of the Company the interests of shareholders as well as the interests of and relationships with suppliers customers and employees.
The Board is aware of and complies with its obligations under section 172 of the Companies Act 2006.
The impact of the Companys operations on the community and the environment is also considered carefully.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Corporate Governance  Audit Committee Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 47
Committee
Report
David Coghlan
Annual statement made by the Audit Committee Chairman The Audit Committees role is to assist the Board with the discharge of its responsibilities in relation to internal and external audits and financial controls.
I chaired the Audit Committee which met twice during 2017.
I have the requisite recent and relevant financial experience to do so.
Meetings are planned around the financial calendar for the Company.
The Finance Director and Chief Executive Officer and other senior management attend meetings by invitation only and the Committee also meets the external auditors without any SCISYS Executive Directors being present.
On behalf of the Audit Committee I report to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities.
During the year the Audit Committee operating under its terms of reference discharged its responsibilities including reviewing and monitoring the financialreporting process in the Companys interim and annual reports including consideration of the appropriateness of accounting policies and material assumptions and estimates adopted by management developments in accounting and reporting requirements the external auditors plan for the yearend audit of the Company and its subsidiaries its own effectiveness the composition of the Audit Committee the systems of internal financial control and risk management and their effectiveness reporting and making new recommendations to the Board and receiving regular updates on key risk areas of financial control the policy on whistleblowing whereby staff may raise concerns in confidence about possible improprieties the audit fees charged by the external auditors considering the performance and formal engagement terms entered into with the external auditors and their appointment reappointment or removal and concluding that there will be a competitive audit tender process during 2018 which did not take place in 2017 as proposed for the appointment of the external auditor and considering whether there is a need for an internal audit function and concluding due to the current size and complexity of the Group that a formal internal audit function was not required and making a recommendation to the Board to that effect.
Given the nature of the Companys business the Audit Committee pays particularly close attention to reviewing directly and in discussion with the external auditors the managements judgements on the application of SCISYS revenuerecognition policies in relation to material projects.
Audit independence The Audit Committee and the Board place great emphasis on the objectivity of the external auditor in its reporting to shareholders.
The audit partner and senior manager are present at Audit Committee meetings as required to ensure full communication of matters relating to the audit.
The overall performance of the auditor is reviewed annually by the Audit Committee taking into account the views of management and feedback is provided when necessary to senior members of the audit firm unrelated to the audit.
The Audit Committee also has discussions with the auditor without management being present on the adequacy of controls and on any judgemental areas.
The scope of the forthcoming years audit is discussed in advance by the Audit Committee and will involve the need for compliance with IFRS 15.
Preparations in this regard have been ongoing throughout 2017.
Audit fees are approved by the Audit
The review of the performance independence and objectivity of the external auditors concluded in a recommendation to the Board on the reappointment of the auditors by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting subject to the stage reached in the retendering process.
The auditors provide annually a letter to the Committee confirming their independence and stating the methods they employ to safeguard their independence.
David Coghlan Chairman of the Audit Committee 13 April 2018 Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 48
Report
Mike Love
Annual statement made by the Remuneration Committee Chairman I am pleased to introduce the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
This report has been prepared by the Remuneration Committee and is approved by the Board.
Notwithstanding that the Company is quoted on AIM and is not subject to schedule 8 of The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the Remuneration Committee is supportive of the spirit of the UK Governments drive to improve transparency and clarity in the reporting of Directors remuneration and takes into account guidance issued by the Investment
We continue to make disclosures as transparent as possible.
Our aim is to satisfy our shareholders desire for clarity in our disclosures.
The Remuneration Committee has taken the commitment and calibre of employees into account generally when setting remuneration awards for 2018.
The responsibility for deciding on individual Directors remuneration rests with the Remuneration Committee alone and no Director is involved in deciding his remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee will consider the pay for senior managers in 2018 and will have a wider remit as a result.
There is an upper cap on all elements of remuneration and no bonus opportunities exceed 100% of salary.
Our remuneration policy remains to attract retain and incentivise highquality individuals in order to implement our business strategy.
The Committee considers that salary increases for 2018 are justified by the performance of the Group and the continuing increased executive commitments required as a result of integrating Annova with the Group and organic growth.
Full retrospective disclosure has been provided for the 2017 executive targets and performance.
We recognise that remuneration policies need to be designed with the longterm success of the Group in mind and we note that larger listed companies are required to implement withholding and clawback provisions for variable pay.
Against this backdrop we believe that our remuneration policy promotes the longterm success of the Group although we do not implement any clawback or malus withholding provisions.
We believe that performance related elements should be transparent and stretching.
The remuneration of each Director is linked to the performance of the individual and the Group performance through base salary and performancerelated pay together with other benefits.
All bonuses are capped.
The Committee and the Board continues to balance reward with restraint.
I look forward to your support for the resolution seeking approval of the Remuneration Report at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Mike Love Remuneration Committee Chairman 13 April 2018 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 49 Role of the Remuneration Committee The Committee has responsibility for making recommendations to the Board on the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors as well as monitoring the level and structure of remuneration for senior management which includes making recommendations to the Board on the Companys existing remuneration policy for Directors and senior staff and to oversee longterm incentive plans including share option schemes ensuring remuneration is both appropriate to the level of responsibility and adequate to attract andor retain Directors senior management and staff of the calibre required by the Company and ensuring that remuneration is in line with current industry practice.
The Remuneration Committee has sole responsibility for deciding the Executive Directors remuneration and from 2018 divisional directors Directors of subsidiaries and managers of profit centres.
It is sensitive to possible conflicts of interests when receiving views from Executive Directors about its proposals.
No Director is involved in deciding his own remuneration.
Remuneration policy The table below shows how the remuneration policy is linked to overall Group strategy.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
Objective and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value
Base salary Reflects level of responsibility and achievement of the individual.
Maintains an appropriate balance between fixed and variable pay ensuring good risk management and no undue emphasis on variable pay.
Base salary is set annually on 1
Salary levels are reviewed on an annual basis by reference to comparable positions in similarly sized AIMlisted companies.
We do not depend on formulaic methods for determining this salary.
When considering any increases to base salaries in the normal course of events as opposed to a change in role or responsibility the Committee will take into consideration increases being given in comparable groups pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group and inflation.
Not applicable
The payment of performancerelated pay is linked to the profitability of the Company and agreed key personal objectives and drives short and mediumterm performance.
Cash payments.
Executive Directors participate in an annual performance related payment scheme.
For shortterm targets quarterly payments are made based on an assessment of progress towards the annual target.
25% is retained until the yearend accounts are completed to allow for any downturn in trading later in the year.
Payments are made once the accounts for a quarter have been approved by the Board i.
Q1 payment is paid in May payroll Q2 in Sep Q3 in Nov and Q4 in Mar.
Entitlements are assessed cumulatively so that under performance in earlier quarters which is subsequently recovered will result in a catch up of payments.
There is no clawback or malus withholding if the quarterly payments on account already made exceed the total due for the year.
Variable pay linked to medium targets will be paid after the audited statutory accounts of SCISYS PLC for the last year of the respective mediumterm period have been published.
During 2017 the split of total variable pay between payments related to Company profitability Performance Related Pay PRP and personal Key Performance Indicators KPI was 7030.
During 2017 50% out of the 70% PRP element related to a shortterm adjusted EBITA and to a mediumterm target for average Groupadjusted EBITA performance between 2016 and 2019.
The shortterm adjusted EBITA target for 2017 was 4.56m.
The remaining 20% of the PRP was split between two targets namely a shortterm total revenue target 10% and a mediumterm total revenue target 10%.
The shortterm revenue target for 2017 was 55.12m.
Additionally a bonus of up to 40000 each for Chris Cheetham Klaus Heidrich and Steve Brignall is payable in March 2019 if an average target surplus increase in Group adjusted EBITA is met during the period 2016 to 2018.
Klaus Meng will receive a bonus of up to 10000 if this ambitious surplus increase is met.
Personal KPIbased payments represented a maximum of 30% of the variable pay total for Executive Directors.
Performance was reviewed in MayJune and December by the Executives peers.
Profitability linked to a targetadjusted EBITA being achieved.
Revenue performance was related to a total revenue target.
KPI tied to individual objectives set for each Executive Director to achieve during the year.
Longterm incentive Longterm incentives are awarded to align the interests of the Executive Director with shareholders and drive longterm performance.
Executive Directors received an annual allocation of share options.
These are subject to performance conditions to be met over a period of three years.
The performance conditions have been chosen to align the longterm incentive to the performance of the business.
Options awarded during 2017 were set at an option price of The maximum potential benefit is therefore linked to the upward movement in the share price at the time the Executive Director elects to exercise the option should the performance conditions be achieved at the end of the three year holding period.
The Option may be exercised between 3 and 10 years from the date it was granted subject to performance conditions being met.
During 2017 the performance condition was tied to the longterm financial performance of the group based on growth in EPS and average earnings over a threeyear period.
Pension To provide competitive levels of retirement benefit.
The UKdomiciled Executive Directors are entitled to a Company pension contribution at a rate from 6.75% to 8.5% of pensionable pay to be paid into the defined contribution pension scheme open to all of the Companys permanent employees.
Pensionable pay is set at basic salary plus 10%.
During 2017 Klaus Heidrich as a Germandomiciled Executive Director received a pension contribution.
Not applicable Not applicable Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 50 Executive Directors
Salary
Performance related pay
Total
Total
Pension contribution Pension contribution David Jones 40000 23303 365 63668 70312 Chris Cheetham 125800 33752 3195 162747 143395 9804 8866 Steve Brignall 112800 32252 2909 147961 138668 8134 7975 Klaus Heidrich 156718 81524 5909 244151 196696 18516 19154 Klaus Meng 66869 23938  90807 68400 Total 502187 194769 12378 709334 617471 36454 35995 Klaus Meng also received 80000 remuneration for his duties as a director of subsidiary SCISYS Deutschland GmbH during 2017.
NONEXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN AND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Element
Objective and link to strategy Operation
Performance conditions Base salary To attract a Chairman with the requisite skills and experience to perform this role.
Base salary is set annually on 1 January.
Salary levels are reviewed on an annual basis by reference to comparable positions in similar sized AIMlisted companies.
The Chairmans salary is determined by the Remuneration Committee in consultation with the Executive
We do not depend on formulaic methods for determining this salary.
When considering any increases to base salaries in the normal course of events as opposed to a change in role or responsibility the Committee will take into consideration increases being given in comparable groups pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group and inflation.
Not applicable
The payment of performance related pay is linked to profitability of the Company and the key strategic objectives and drives short term and mediumterm performance.
Cash payments.
The Chairman participated in an annual performance related payment scheme covering a part of his total potential earnings.
Quarterly payment arrangements are on the same terms as for the Executive Directors as set out above.
During 2017 50% out of the 70% PRP element related to a shortterm adjusted EBITA and a mediumterm target for average Group adjusted EBITA performance between 2016 and 2019.
The shortterm adjusted EBITA target for 2017 was 4.56m.
The remaining 20% of the PRP is split between two targets namely a short term total revenue target 10% and a mediumterm total revenue target 10%.
The revenue target for 2017 was Performance against the personal objectives of the Chairman was reviewed by the CEO in May and December.
Profitability linked to a target adjusted EBITA being achieved.
Revenue performance was related to a total revenue target.
Individual
Other
To provide competitive levels of employment benefits.
Benefits for the Chairman principally comprise reasonable business expenses.
Not applicable Not applicable NonExecutive Director
Objective and link to strategy Operation Maximum potential value
Base salary To attract an independent NonExecutive Director with the requisite skills and experience to perform this role.
Base salary is set annually on 1 January.
Salary levels are reviewed on an annual basis by reference to comparable positions in similarly sized AIMlisted companies.
We do not depend on formulaic methods for determining this salary.
The NonExecutives salary is determined by the full Board.
He was first appointed in January 2013 and reappointed on 1 January 2016 for a further threeyear term.
When considering any increases to base salaries in the normal course of events as opposed to a change in role or responsibility the Board will take into consideration increases being given in comparable groups pay and conditions of employees throughout the Group and inflation.
Not applicable
To provide competitive levels of employment benefits.
Benefits for the NonExecutive Director comprise reasonable business expenses.
Not applicable Not applicable Executive Directors remuneration audited information The remuneration package of the Executive Directors includes basic salary other benefits and performancerelated pay.
Details of the payments made to Executive Directors for the year ended 31 December 2017 were as follows EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS CONTINUED
Objective and link to strategy Operation
Performance conditions
To provide competitive levels of employment benefits.
Benefits for Executive Directors principally comprise medical insurance deathin service life assurance permanent health insurance car allowancecompany car and fuel expenses and reasonable business expenses.
Not applicable Not applicable Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 51 NonExecutive Remuneration Fees Benefits Performancerelated pay 2017 Total 2016 Total Mike Love 34000  10854 44854 41652 David Coghlan 26000   26000 26000 Total 60000  10854 70854 67652 The aggregate emoluments of the highest paid Director were 244151 2016 196696.
Significant remuneration policy changes Additionally a bonus of up to 40000 for Chris Cheetham Klaus Heidrich and Steve Brignall will be payable in March 2019 if an ambitious surplus increase in Groupadjusted EBITA is met during the period 2016 to 2018.
Klaus Meng will receive a bonus of up to 10000 if this surplus increase is met.
SERVICE CONTRACTS The Companys policy on Directors service contracts is that they should be on a rolling basis without a specific end date.
Klaus
Heidrichs and Klaus Mengs service contracts are under German law and consequently while they provide for termination on 12 months notice they would be compensated based on 24 months salary unless the termination was due to the individuals default.
To align the service contracts of the UK resident Directors with those of the DE resident Directors following a change of control causing the termination of their service contracts they are entitled to the equivalent of 24 months salary unless such termination resulted from their default or the previous poor performance of the Company as decided in the sole discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Under their letters of appointment the Chairman and NonExecutive Director are entitled to receive 6 months notice of termination of their employment.
Director Effective Term Notice period Steve Brignall Rolling with no fixed expiry date 12 months by the Company and by the Director Chris Cheetham Rolling with no fixed expiry date 12 months by the Company and by the Director Klaus Heidrich Rolling with no fixed expiry date 12 months by the Company and by the Director David Jones Rolling with no fixed expiry date 12 months by the Company and by the Director Klaus Meng Rolling with no fixed expiry date 12 months by the Company and by the Director The Boards policy is that service contracts of Executive Directors should provide for termination by SCISYS on no more than one years notice.
The service contracts of David Jones Steve Brignall and Chris Cheetham provide for such a period of notice.
DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN SHARES The Directors who held office at the end of the financial year reported having the following beneficial interests in the 25p ordinary shares of the Company as at the end of December 2017 Interest in ordinary shares Total interest in HMRC approved Company Share Option Plan CSOP Total interest in options granted under the Enterprise Management Incentive EMI scheme Total interest in
Share Option Plan Total interest in sharestelteltel 2016 Mike Love 4337103 4308105 75000 75000 0 27300 0 0 4412103 4410405 Steve Brignall 168632 127241 135000 135000 0 40258 0 0 303632 302499 Chris Cheetham 114978 74720 135000 135000 0 40258 0 0 249978 249978 David Jones 187668 160368 125000 125000 0 27300 0 0 312668 312668 Klaus Meng 2832826 2832 2832826 2832826 Klaus Heidrich 102760 60 106000 138300 208760 198760 David Coghlan 6276 6 6276 6276 Totals 7750243 7569996 470000 470000 0 135116 106000 138300 8326243 8313412 Ordinary shares under option by Directors as at the end of December 2017 were as follows  all options have performance conditions applied As at 1 January 2017 Granted Exercised
As at 31 December Date of grant Date from which options can be exercised Mike Love EMI Scheme option price 46.25p 27300  27300   Jan08 2011 CSOP option price of 25p 35000    35000 Jan09 2012 CSOP option price of 52p 20000    20000 Apr10 2013 CSOP option price of 50.50p 20000    20000 Apr11 2014 Total 102300    75000
Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 52 As at 1 January 2017 Granted Exercised
As at 31 December Date of grant Date from which options can be exercised Chris Cheetham EMI Scheme option price 46.25p 40258  40258   Jan08 2011 CSOP option price of 25p 35000    35000 Jan09 2012 CSOP option price of 52p 20000    20000 Apr10 2013 CSOP option price of 50.50p 20000    20000 Apr11 2014 CSOP option price of 51p 20000    20000 Apr12 2015 CSOP option price 82.5p 20000   20000  Apr15 2018 CSOP option price 71p 20000    20000 Apr16 2019 CSOP option price 101.5p  20000   20000 Apr17 2020 Total 175258 20000 40258 20000 135000 As at 1 January 2017 Granted Exercised
As at 31 December Date of grant Date from which options can be exercised Steve Brignall EMI Scheme option price 46.25p 40258  40258   Jan08 2011 CSOP option price of 25p 35000    35000 Jan09 2012 CSOP option price of 52p 20000    20000 Apr10 2013 CSOP option price of 50.50p 20000    20000 Apr11 2014 CSOP option price of 51p 20000    20000 Apr12 2015 CSOP option price 82.5p 20000   20000  Apr15 2018 CSOP option price 71p 20000    20000 Apr16 2019 CSOP option price 101.5p  20000   20000 Apri17 2020 Total 175258 20000 40258 20000 135000 As at 1 January 2017 Granted Exercised
As at 31 December Date of grant Date from which options can be exercised Klaus Heidrich unapproved option price of 46.25p 27300  27300   Jan08 2011 unapproved option price of 25p 15000  15000   Jan09 2012 unapproved option price of 52p 8000    8000 Apr10 2013 unapproved option price of 50.50p 8000    8000 Apr11 2014 unapproved option price of 51p 30000    30000 Apr12 2015 unapproved option price of 82.5p 20000   20000  Apr15 2018 unapproved option price of 71p 30000    30000 Apr16 2019 unapproved option price of 101.50p  30000   30000 Apr17 2020 Total 138300 30000 42300 20000 106000 DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN SHARES As at 1 January 2017 Granted Exercised
As at 31 December Date of grant Date from which options can be exercised David Jones EMI Scheme option price 46.25p 27300  27300   Jan08 2011 CSOP option price of 25p 35000    35000 Jan09 2012 CSOP option price of 52p 20000    20000 Apr10 2013 CSOP option price of 50.50p 20000    20000 Apr11 2014 CSOP option price of 51p 50000    50000 Apr12 2015 Total 152300 27300 125000 David Coghlan holds 6276 ordinary shares in SCISYS PLC but does not hold any options over SCISYS PLC shares.
Klaus Meng does not hold any options in SCISYS PLC shares.
The Register of Directors interests is available for inspection during business hours at the Groups head office at Methuen Park Chippenham and also at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report
Corporate Governance  Remuneration Report
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 53 SHARE SCHEMES Share Incentive Plan The Group operates an allstaff HMRC approved Share Incentive Plan SIP which was set up in 2001.
The UK Directors may participate in this scheme.
During the year eligible staff were able to invest up to 1800 per annum out of pretax pay in purchasing Partnership
At certain times the Company may award Free Shares to eligible employees under the SIP.
As at 31 December 2017 the trust set up to administer the Free and Partnership shares held 843652 ordinary shares 2016 894087 ordinary shares in SCISYS PLC.
Share Option Schemes The Company continues to operate share plans for senior executives and managers as a combined reward and incentive for those who have made a major contribution to the business and will continue to play a key role in helping the Group achieve its strategic objectives.
Additionally awards are made to key staff with high potential or in recognition of significant achievements.
Enterprise Management Incentive EMI Scheme All EMI share options have been exercised and this scheme terminated on 31 December 2017.
Company Share Option Plan CSOP SCISYS adopted a CSOP approved by HMRC in January 2009.
Options may be exercised between 3 and 10 years following grant provided that the performance conditions have been met.
During 2017 SCISYS awarded 202500 options under the CSOP granted to Directors senior managers and staff at an issue price of 101.50 pence per share.
The total number of CSOP options that remain capable of being exercised at the year end was 912500.
The number of CSOP options granted to Directors is reported on page 51 to 52.
Unapproved Share Option Scheme The CSOP scheme provides tax benefits for recipients providing they are resident in the UK.
For our senior managers in Germany this would be inappropriate so since January 2008 we have awarded options to them under an unapproved scheme but in accordance with similar rules to the CSOP.
During 2017 SCISYS awarded 137500 options under the Unapproved scheme granted to Directors senior managers and staff at an issue price of 101.5 pence per share.
The total number of these options that remain capable of being exercised at the yearend was 549000.
Options may be exercised between 3 and 10 years following grant provided that the performance conditions have been met.
The number of unapproved options granted to Directors is reported on page 51 to 52.
Share Option Performance Conditions The Remuneration Committee sets performance conditions each time an award of options is made under the CSOP and Unapproved schemes.
The EPS growth and average earnings growth are the two key performance measures currently applied.
Both EPS growth and average earnings growth remain substantially within the control of Directors and management and therefore the Remuneration Committee continues to consider them to be appropriate measures of the underlying financial performance of the Group.
Options exercised during the year Directors exercised a total of 177416 share options during 2017.
The total number of options held by Directors is reported on pages 51 to 52.
Dilution
Awards granted under the CSOP and unapproved schemes are satisfied either with treasury shares or with a new issue of shares which is subject to an informal 10% dilution limit in any 10year period.
The current potential dilution is below this level.
The total of share options awarded and remaining exercisable at year end was 1461500.
The Companys current commitment as at 31 December 2017 in respect of its option grants assuming all performance conditions are met and all option and award holders remain in employment to the final date of exercise under the scheme rules could be satisfied by issuing this number of new shares.
Share Price The closing midmarket price of the Companys shares on 29 December 2017 the last business day in 2017 was 115.5 pence per share.
The high and low share midmarket prices during 2017 were 136.5 pence and 92.0 pence respectively.
The report of the Remuneration Committee has been approved by the Board of Directors for submission to shareholders for their approval at the Annual General Meeting.
Corporate Governance  Directors Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 54 The following matters are reported by the Directors in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 requirements in force at the date of these Annual Report and Financial Statements.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 The Directors present their Annual Report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Principal activities The principal activities of SCISYS PLC the Company and its subsidiary companies the Group are set out within the Strategic Report which comprises the Chairmans Statement and the Strategic Review on pages 5 to 23.
Review of business and future developments The Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 is set out on page 62.
A review of the Groups business activities during the year and its prospects for the future can be found in the Strategic Report on pages 5 to 39.
These reports together with the Corporate Governance Statement the Remuneration Committee Report and the Audit Committee Report are incorporated into this report by reference and should be read as part of this report.
Key performance indicators The Directors measure the Groups performance principally using the financial indicators as reflected in this Annual Report as stated on page 22.
Principal risks and uncertainties Details of the principal risks and uncertainties considered by the Board to affect the Group and the related risk mitigation actions are given on pages 32 to 35.
Group results and dividends The Groups consolidated accounts show an adjusted operating profit before tax for the year of 4.6m 2016 3.2m on revenue of 57.2 2016 45.7m.
The Company paid an interim dividend 0.59 pence per share on 9 November 2017 and the Directors are recommending the payment of a final dividend of 2.16 per share.
Financial instruments Details of financial instruments to which the Group is a party are shown in note 22 to the financial statements.
Capital structure The share capital of SCISYS PLC issued and unissued is comprised entirely of one class of ordinary share of 25 pence each.
Each share ranks equally and carries the same rights to vote and receive dividends and other distributions declared made or paid by the Company.
Restrictions on transfer of securities There are no specific restrictions on the transfer of securities in the Company which is governed by the Articles of Association and prevailing legislation.
Nor is the Company aware of any agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or that may result in restrictions on voting rights.
Treasury shares As at 1 April 2018 the Company held 18167 shares in Treasury to support the trustee of the SCISYS Share Incentive Plan SIP in the event that the SIP trust is unable to procure sufficient shares in the market to fulfil the monthly purchase requirements of staff members of the SIP.
In such circumstances the Company would sell sufficient shares from Treasury at the prevailing market price.
Treasury shares are also used to fulfil the exercise of share options by employees.
All such transactions are announced in accordance with the AIM rules.
Directors
The names of the current Directors and their biographical details are set out on page 42.
Details of the interests of the Directors in the Companys shares at year end are set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 48 to 52.
David Jones Klaus Meng and Klaus Heidrich are required to stand for reelection at the Annual General Meeting in 2018.
The names of the current divisional directors are set out on page 45 together with Annovas Directors.
The powers of the Companys Directors and rules that apply to changes in the Directors are set out in the Companys Articles of Association the
Any changes to the Articles would require the consent of the Companys shareholders.
Directors and Officers Insurance The Group maintains insurance cover for all Directors and Officers of Group companies against liabilities that may be incurred by them while acting as Directors and Officers.
Directors indemnity provisions As permitted by the Articles each of the Directors has the benefit of an indemnity which is a qualifying thirdparty indemnity as defined by section 234 of the Companies Act 2006.
The indemnity was in force throughout the financial year and is currently in force.
No indemnity is provided for the Companys auditor.
Directors conflicts of interest The Company has procedures in place for managing conflicts of interest.
Should a Director become aware that they or their connected parties have an interest in an existing or proposed transaction with SCISYS PLC or any Group company they should notify the Board of the Group company in writing or at the next Board meeting.
Internal
Directors have a continuing duty to update any changes to these conflicts.
Directors
Report Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Corporate Governance  Directors Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 55 Significant shareholdings As at 1 March 2018 the Company has been notified in accordance with chapter 5 of the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the voting rights held as a shareholder of the Company as shown in the table below.
Investor
Number of Shares held % interest in the total voting rights of SCISYS PLC
M.
Love 4337447 14.80
Meng GmbH and Co KG 2832826 9.76 Herald Investment Management Ltd 2443691 8.34 Hargreaves Lansdown 1841974 6.29 Charles Stanley 1655752 5.65
P.
Taylor 1200000 4.10 Ruffer Investment Company 1092500 3.73 Rowan Dartington and Co 945233 3.23 RC Brown Investment Management 892960 3.05 Mr and Mrs Hucker 848723 2.90 Trustees of the SCISYS PLC Share Incentive Plan 838309 2.86 Alto Invest 770448 2.63 Directors interests in shares can be found on pages 51 to 52.
Employee policies The Group has established employment policies that comply with current legislation and codes of practice including in the areas of health and safety diversity and equal opportunities.
The Group consults employees on developments and changes to take account of their views when making decisions that may impact on their interests.
The Group makes effort to recruit and continue the employment training and promotion of those persons who are or become disabled.
From 2018 the Remuneration Committee will have oversight of any employment policy issues notified to it by local Human Resources centres.
Employee engagement The Group engages with its employees regularly through various media email alerts bulletins newsletters team briefings and twice yearly allstaff presentations.
Details of the performance of the Group are shared with all employees at the appropriate time using these methods.
The Company operates a HMRCapproved share incentive plan to encourage employees to take a greater interest in the Groups performance through share ownership.
Details are set out in the
Remuneration Committee Report.
Policy on payment of suppliers The Groups policy during the year was to pay suppliers in accordance with agreed terms which align with good industry practice.
Political donations No political donations were made 2016 nil and it is Company policy not to make such donations.
Going concern The financial statements have been prepared on a goingconcern basis.
The Directors have reviewed the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital financial risk management financial instruments exposure to credit and liquidity risk as well as financial forecasts.
As a result of this review the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Directors continue to adopt the goingconcern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Post balance sheet events There are no post balance sheet events to report.
Annual General Meeting The Companys Annual General Meeting will be held at its offices located at Methuen Park Chippenham Wiltshire SN14 0GB on Thursday 28 June 2018 at noon.
The Notice convening the Annual General Meeting and an explanation of the business to be put to the meeting is contained in the separate circular sent to shareholders and on the website at sitewhoweareinvestors. tml.
Audit information In the case of each of the persons who are Directors of the Company at the date when this Annual Report was approved So far as each of the Directors is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and Each of the Directors has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Auditor
In accordance with the Companys policy of periodically reviewing its relationships with its professional advisers the Company intends to undertake a tendering process for the provision of audit services in the second quarter of 2018.
The current auditor KPMG LLP has indicated its willingness to continue in office and will be invited along with a shortlist of other firms to submit a proposal for its re appointment.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on behalf of the Board.
Natasha Laird Company Secretary 13 April 2018 SCISYS PLC Registered number Registered office Methuen Park Chippenham Wiltshire SN14 0GB SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 56 Corporate Governance  Statement of Directors Responsibilities in respect of the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the Financial Statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report Strategic Report the Directors Report and the Group and parent company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent company financial statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent for the Group financial statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the
Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the parent company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Signed on behalf of the Board.
Klaus Heidrich
Chief Executive Officer
Chris Cheetham Finance Director 13 April 2018
Responsibilities
Chris Cheetham Klaus Heidrich PLC Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 57 Financial Statements
Independent Auditors Report to
Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Principal Accounting Policies Notes for the year ended 31 December 2017 Company Balance Sheet Company statement of Changes in Equity Notes forming part of the Company financial statements Shareholder Information and Financial Calendar Advisers 102 Independent Auditors Report to the members of SCISYS PLC SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 58 Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of SCISYS plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in Equity and the related notes including the accounting policies in the Principal Accounting Policies section.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Independent
Auditors Report
Materiality 530k 2016 450k group financial statements as a whole 0.9% 2016 1% of total revenue
100% 2016 100% of group total revenue Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Recurring Risks Revenue recognition Carrying goodwill
Company only Valuation of investments in subsidaries Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Independent Auditors Report to the members of SCISYS PLC The risk Our response Revenue recognition  estimation of costs to complete on contracts 48042k  2016 37578k Refer to page 67 accounting policy and note 1 financial disclosures Subjective estimate The Group recognises revenue on fixed price development projects by reference to the degree of completion of each project.
The degree of completion is measured by reference to costs incurred at the balance sheet date as a percentage of the total estimated costs to complete the project.
The assumptions underlying the cost to complete estimates involve judgement and any changes in the assumptions could have a material impact on the revenue recognised in relation to these projects.
Our procedures included Control design Evaluated and tested the Groups key processes and controls in place over revenue recognition and forecast cost estimation.
We performed controls testing over the Project Budget Forecast PBF reports produced by the Openplan IT System used in calculating revenue to be recognised P e r s on n el i n t e r v i e w s  Discussed the performance of the projects with the Groups project managers particularly focussing on cost forecasting and contingencies in order to corroborate the judgements made Historical comparisons Challenged the Groups key assumptions in the percentage of completion calculation based on a retrospective review of the accuracy of the Groups previous estimates movements in margins on certain projects or types of project over time and considering the actual historical outturn in relation to each type of project Tests of details Agreed a sample of costs from PBF reports back to supporting timesheets or other documentation Assessing transparency Assessed the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in relation to the risks and steps taken to mitigate those risks in the judgements made in the financial statements.
Carrying value of goodwill 15913k 2016 15593k Refer to page 68 accounting policy and note 13 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation The recoverable amounts of the Groups CashGenerating Units to which goodwill is allocated are determined from value in use calculations which represents a key judgement area as errors in assumptions particularly relating to forecast cash flows and discount rates could result in a material misstatement of the goodwill balance.
Our procedures included Control design Evaluated the Groups budgeting procedures upon which the forecast cash flows are based by assessing whether the forecasts including growth rate were consistent with the Groups current business strategies Historical comparisons Assessed the reasonableness of the budgets by considering the historical accuracy of the previous forecasts Benchmarking assumptions Challenged the Groups selection of discount and growth rates by using external data including competitor analysis to determine an appropriate range and comparing the actual rate used to that range Sensitivity analysis Performed analysis to assess the sensitivity of the impairment reviews to changes in the discount rate growth rate and the forecast cash flows Assessing transparency Assessed whether the Groups disclosures about the sensitivity of the outcome of the impairment assessment to changes in key assumptions reflected the risks inherent in the valuation of goodwill.
Parent Company Carrying value of investments 17029k 2016 17030k Refer to parent company note 1 accounting policy and parent company note 5 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation The recoverable amounts of the parent Companys investments are determined from value in use calculations which represents a key judgement area as errors in assumptions particularly relating to forecast cash flows and discount rates could result in a material misstatement of the goodwill balance.
Our procedures included Assessing forecasts The work on the Groups forecasts as described in the goodwill impairment risk above.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 59 Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows unchanged from 2016 Independent Auditors Report to the members of SCISYS PLC SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 60 Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at 530000 determined with reference to a benchmark of group total revenue of which it represents 0.9% 2016 1.0%.
We consider total revenue to be the most appropriate benchmark as it provides a more stable measure year on year than group profit before tax.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 350000 2016 325000 determined with reference to a benchmark of company total assets of which it represents 1.5% 2016 1.3%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 25000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the groups 6 2016 5 reporting components we subjected all of these to full scope audits for group purposes.
The work on 2 of the 6 components 2016 1 of the 5 components was performed by component auditors and the rest including the audit of the parent company was performed by the Group team.
The Group team instructed component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the information to be reported back.
The Group team approved the component materialities which ranged from 28000 to 400000 2016 25000 to 325000 having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Total revenue 57164k 2016 45744k Group Materiality 530k 2016 450k Whole financial statements materiality 2016 450k Range of materiality at 6 components 28k to 400k 2016 25k to 325k Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 22k Total revenue Group materiality Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Independent Auditors Report to the members of SCISYS PLC SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 61 We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 56 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Robert Fitzpatrick Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 66 Queen Square Bristol BS1 4BE 18 April 2018 Consolidated Income Statement and Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017tel Note 000 000 Revenue 2 57164 45744 Operating costs 52551 42974 Share of results of associates 39 17 Operating profit 5 4652 2787 Adjusted operating profit being operating profit before share based payments exceptional items and amortisation arising on business combinations 4559 3231 Share based payments 30 Amortisation of Intangible assets 1982 Exceptional items 8 2075 458 Operating profit 5 4652 2787 Finance costs 7 718 186 Finance income 6 8 1 Profit before tax 3942 2602 Tax charge 9 593 380 Profit for the period attributable to equity holders of the parent 3349 2222 Earnings per share 11
Diluted
2017 2016 Profit for the period 3349 2222 Other comprehensive expense not recycling through the Income Statement Currency translation differences on foreign currency investments 369 1105 Total comprehensive income for the period attributable to equity holders of the parent 3718 3327 Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 31 December 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 31 December 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Consolidated Statement of Financial Position SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017tel Note 000 000 Noncurrent assets Goodwill 13 15913 15593 Other intangible assets 14 5173 6848 Property plant and equipment 15 9261 9057 Interests in associates 16 Other receivables 92 85 Deferred tax assets 23 26 282 30465 31955 Current assets Inventories 17 321 261 Trade and other receivables 19 21415 19621 Corporation tax receivable 450 1098 Cash and cash equivalents 20 8021 6915 30207 27895 Total assets 60672 59850
Issued share capital 27 7329 7272 Share premium account 268 143 Merger reserve 943 943 Retained earnings 15201 12751 Translation reserve 1890 1521 Other reserves 83 83 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent 25714 22713 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 24 17478 14310 Bank overdrafts and loans 21 2290 3804 Corporation tax payable 347 190 Deferred income 26 240 459 20355 18763 Noncurrent liabilities Bank loans 21 11667 13355 Other payables 28 Provisions 25 1572 Deferred tax 23 1364 1611 14603 18374 Total liabilities 34958 37137 Total equity and liabilities 60672 59850 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 31 December 2017 K M Heidrich
C A Cheetham
The financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 13 April 2018 and signed on its behalf by Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 64 Share Capital Share Premium Merger Reserve
Redemption
Reserve
Translation
Reserve
Retained
Earnings Total Balance as at 1 January 2016 7 11199 20056 Total comprehensive income for the period Profit for the period 2222 2222 Other comprehensive income Foreign currency translation Total comprehensive income for the period 1105 2222 3327 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Dividends paid Share based payments Exercise of share options Total contributions by and distributions to owners Balance as at 31 December 2016 7521 12751 22713 Share Capital Share Premium
Reserve
Capital
Redemption
Reserve
Translation
Reserve
Retained
Earnings Total Balance as at 1 January 2017 7521 12751 22713 Total comprehensive income for the period Profit for the period 3349 3349 Other comprehensive income Foreign currency translation Total comprehensive income for the period 369 3349 3718 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Dividends paid Issue of new shares 57 125 Treasury shares Exercise of share options Total contributions by and distributions to owners 57 125 Balance as at 31 December 2017 7890 15201 25714 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 31 December 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017tel Note 000 000 Cash flow from operating activities Profit before tax 3942 2602 Net finance costs 710 185 Operating profit 4652 2787 Increase in trade receivables 1804 3992 Increase in trade payables 6105 579 Increasedecrease in deferred consideration 1626 3318 Depreciation and amortisation 3081 781 Share of profit of associate 39 17 Share based payments Tax payments 147 1250 Net cash flow from operating activities 10516 2192 Cash flow from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiary Cash acquired with subsidiary Acquisition of investment in an associate 82 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 4 Purchase of plant property and equipment 1259 663 Exercise of share options 158 15 Interest received 8 1 Net cash flow from investing activities 1007 8168 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid 10 586 671 Interest paid 718 186 Issue of new shares 182 Investment in own shares 471 Loans received 262 9906 Debt repayments 3716 939 Net cash flow from financing activities 5047 8110 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 4462 2134 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the period 6666 3625 Exchange and other movements 3107 907 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period 8021 6666 Cash and cash equivalent deposits held in nonUK based banks 6435 6709 Net cash deposits with UK based banks 1586 43 8021 6666 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 31 December 2017 Principal Accounting Policies SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 66 Statement of compliance SCISYS PLC the Company is a public company incorporated domiciled and registered in England in the UK.
The registered number is  and the registered address is 2 Methuen Park Chippenham Wiltshire SN14 0GB UK.
The group financial statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and equity account the Groups interest in associates.
The parent company financial statements present information about the Company as a separate entity and not about its group.
The group financial statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs.
The Company has elected to prepare its parent company financial statements in accordance with FRS 101 these are presented on pages 93 to 94.
Basis of preparation The accounting policies have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently to all periods presented in these group financial statements and on a historical cost basis with the exception of derivative financial instruments which are recognised at fair value.
The following standards have been adopted for the first time in 2017.
None have a significant effect on the consolidated results or financial position of the Group T he Group has adopted the following IFRSs in these financial statements Amendments to IAS 7 Disclosure Initiative.
A mendments to IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses.
There are no new standards or interpretations endorsed by the EU during the year that impact on the financial results or presentation in 2017.
The following Adopted IFRSs have been issued but have not been applied by the Group in these financial statements.
Their adoption is not expected to have a material effect on the financial statements unless otherwise indicated IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective date 1 January 2018.
IF RS 15 Revenue from Contract with Customers effective date 1 January 2018.
IFRS 16 Leases effective date 1 January 2019.
IF RIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration effective date to be confirmed.
IF RIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments effective date to be confirmed.
A nnual Improvements to IFRS Standards 20142016 Cycle effective date to be confirmed.
A mendments to IFRS 2 Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions effective date to be confirmed.
Of the above standards and interpretations in issue but not yet effective only IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and IFRS 16 Leases are anticipated to have any potentially material impact on the results and financial position of the Group.
From 1 January 2018 there are changes as per IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers.
IFRS 15 deals with revenue recognition and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entitys contracts with customers.
The Group will take into account principal v agent considerations.
Where considered an agent only the markup element will be disclosed as revenue currently the full contract value is considered and when recognised disclosed in other revenue.
This may result in additional segmenting of contracts based on individual performance obligations to ensure the various revenue streams are recognised in line with the new standard.
IFRS 15 processes are being implemented now in preparation for 2018.
Implementation of the new IFRS15 standard will have a negligible impact on the phasing of anticipated operating profits although reported revenues will be depressed when compared with previously applied treatment.
The reduction reflects provisions in the standard whereby only the markup on thirdparty costs can be recognised as revenue on situations where SCISYS acts in the capacity of an Agent simply passing the thirdpartys goods and services to customers through its books.
The assessment made by the entity is preliminary as not all transition work requirements have been finalised and therefore may be subject to adjustment.
IFRS 16 is expected to be effective from 1 January 2019 and may require all leases to be reflected onbalance sheet.
The potential impact of IFRS 16 on the Group is minimal.
The group financial statements are presented in pounds sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand 000 except when otherwise indicated.
The Directors consider that it is appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis due to the healthy position of the order book and the availability of committed borrowing facilities that provide adequate headroom over forecast working capital requirements for 2018.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRSs requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts of assets and liabilities income and expenses.
The estimates and associated assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances the results of which form the basis of making the judgements about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
Principal accounting policies Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Principal Accounting Policies SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 67
The group financial statements comprise the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries made up to 31 December each year.
The financial statements of subsidiaries and associates are prepared for the same reporting period as the Company and adjustments are made where necessary to align accounting policies across the Group.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and cease to be consolidated from the date on which control is transferred out of the Group.
Associates are those entities in which the Group has significant influence but not control over the financial and operating policies.
Significant influence is presumed to exist when the Group holds between 20 and 50 per cent of the voting power of another entity.
Associates are accounted for using the equity method equity accounted investees and are initially recognised at cost.
The
Groups investment includes goodwill identified on acquisition net of any accumulated impairment losses.
The consolidated financial statements include the Groups share of the total comprehensive income and equity movements of equity accounted investees from the date that significant influence commences until the date that significant influence ceases.
When the Groups share of losses exceeds its interest in an equity accounted investee the Groups carrying amount is reduced to nil and recognition of further losses is discontinued except to the extent that the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of an investee.
Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated.
Unrealised gains arising from transactions with equityaccounted investees are eliminated against the investment to the extent of the Groups interest in the investee.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
Business combinations The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the purchase method.
For all acquisitions prior to 1 January 2010 the cost of the acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquired subsidiary plus any costs directly attributable to the business contribution.
Since that date IFRS 3  applies and all acquisition costs are expensed as incurred unless related to the raising of finance.
The acquired subsidiaries identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities that meet the requirement for recognition under IFRS 3 are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is recognised as an asset and initially measured at cost being the excess of the cost of the business combination over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities recognised.
If
Revenue
Revenue from consultancy and other professional services rendered on a fixedprice project is recognised as the services are performed by reference to the degree of completion of the project.
The degree of completion is measured by reference to own labour costs incurred by the balance sheet date as a percentage of the total estimated own labour costs to completion for each project.
Provision is made for all foreseeable losses as soon as they are identified.
Revenue from projects billed on a time and materials basis is recognised in line with performance of the services.
Revenue for software licences is recognised when the product to which the revenue relates is used by the client to process live data in any location typically at the end of an implementation project.
Revenues are not recognised unless their receipt can be predicted with a high level of certainty.
Where Configuration services required to create the customers unique solution and without which the customer obtains no benefit from the licences.
The licences and services are combined in a single Performance Obligation with revenues recognised over time on a % of completion basis subject to a contractual termination for convenience clause and our right to costplus payment.
Revenue from the sale of thirdparty products is recognised on transfer to the customer of the significant risks and rewards of ownership and when it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably.
In practice this is typically on delivery of the thirdparty product to the customer.
All revenues are stated net of discounts VAT and other sales related taxes.
Maintenance revenue is recognised evenly over the term of a contract.
Deferred income comprises the element of maintenance revenues invoiced for which the period of maintenance extends beyond the year end.
Leases
Leases where the lessor retains substantially all the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset are classified as operating leases.
Operating lease rentals are recognised as an expense in the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Benefits received and receivable as an incentive to enter into an operating lease are also spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Exceptional items Items which are both material and considered by the Directors to be unusual in either nature or size are separately disclosed on the face of the Consolidated Income Statement.
Principal accounting policies continued Principal Accounting Policies SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 68 Foreign currency translation The presentation currency of the Group is pounds sterling  which is also the functional currency of the UKbased group companies.
The functional currency of the German subsidiaries is the euro .
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded at the foreign exchange rate prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated to sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at that date.
All differences are recognised in the Consolidated Income
Assets and liabilities of foreign subsidiaries including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Revenues and expenses are translated at the weighted average exchange rate for the year.
The exchange differences arising on the retranslation of the opening net investment in subsidiaries and from the translation of the results of those subsidiaries at average rate are taken directly to a separate component of equity.
The Group has taken advantage of the exemption available under IFRS 1 to deem the cumulative translation differences for all investments in foreign operations to be zero at 1 January 2006 the date of transition to adopted IFRS.
Exchange differences arising after 1 January 2006 from the translation of the net investment in foreign operations are taken to a translation reserve.
They are released into the income statement on disposal.
Pensions
The Group operates definedcontribution group personal pension plans the assets of which are held separately from those of the Group in independently administered funds.
The amount charged against profits represents the contributions payable to the schemes in respect of the accounting period.
Taxation
Tax on profits or losses for the year comprises current and deferred tax and is recognised in the Income Statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity.
The tax currently payable is based on the taxable profit for the year and calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method for temporary differences at the balance sheet date between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or the initial recognition other than in a business combination of an asset or liability in a transaction that affects neither the accounting nor taxable profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries unless the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow all or part of the deferred tax asset to be utilised.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the asset as follows Freehold land Not depreciated Freehold buildings 16 to 50 years Long leasehold property Lower of the lease term or 50 years Short leasehold property Over the lease term Plant and machinery 5 to 20 years Office equipment 3 to 13 years Motor vehicles 5 years Computer equipment 2 to 7 years
Goodwill on consolidation represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired at the date of acquisition.
Following initial recognition goodwill is measured at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired.
Impairment charges are deducted from the carrying value and recognised immediately in the Income Statement.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to each of the Groups cashgenerating units CGUs expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
An impairment loss recognised for goodwill is not reversed in a subsequent period.
Other intangible assets The amortisation periods for the intangible fixed assets below are based on their estimated useful lives as follows Software licences 3 to 5 years Annova order book not straightline basis 11 years Annova acquired software solution 3 years Impairment of noncurrent assets At each reporting date the Group assesses whether there is any Principal accounting policies continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Principal Accounting Policies SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 69 Principal accounting policies continued indication that an asset may be impaired.
If such an indication exists the Group makes a formal estimate of the recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less disposal costs and its value in use.
It is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
Impairment losses recognised in respect of cash generating units are allocated first to reduce the amount of goodwill allocated to the applicable CGUs and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other assets on a prorata basis.
A CGU is the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows from other assets or groups of assets.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset CGU is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset CGU in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised as income immediately.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of purchase or production cost and net realisable value.
Purchase or production cost is based on weighted average values and includes direct costs and attributable indirect costs required by the production process.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Financial instruments Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are stated at their fair value on initial recognition and subsequently at amortised cost i. impairment losses.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are stated at fair value at initial recognition and subsequently at amortised cost.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents in the balance sheet comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Derivative financial instruments Derivatives are used by the Group to reduce or eliminate exposure to foreign exchange risk.
Instruments used include forward exchange deals cylinder options and currency swaps.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Changes in the fair value of derivative financial instruments are recognised in the Income Statement as they arise.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Provisions are measured at the Directors best estimate of the expenditure required to settle the obligation at the balance sheet date and are discounted to present value if the effect of the time value of money is material.
Employee benefits The Group makes provision for employees holiday pay.
The expected cost and associated liability is measured as the additional amount the Group expects to pay as a result of the unused entitlement that has accumulated at the balance sheet date.
Sharebased payment transactions Employees including Executive Directors of the Group receive remuneration in the form of sharebased payment transactions whereby employees render services in exchange for shares or rights over shares equitysettled transactions.
The fair values of the share option schemes in operation have been assessed using BlackScholes and similar models as are appropriate to each scheme at the date of grant.
The fair values of the schemes are expensed evenly over the period between grant and vesting to the extent expected to vest.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 70 In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies management has made the following judgements and estimations that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements.
Revenue recognition The revenue and profit of fixedprice contracts is recognised on a percentage of completion basis when the outcome of a contract can be reliably estimated.
Management exercises judgement in determining whether a contracts outcome can be reliably estimated.
In addition management estimates the remaining costs to completion of contracts.
These are used in determining the percentage of completion and the value of amounts recoverable on contracts.
Using a riskbasis selection Directors perform an independent review of key contracts.
IFRS 15 The next significant change affecting SCISYS will be in 2018 when IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers will be adopted.
Detailed analysis by the SCISYS Board has established that implementation of the new standard will have a negligible impact on the phasing of anticipated operating profits although reported revenues will be depressed when compared with previously applied treatment.
The reduction reflects provisions in the standard whereby only the markup on thirdparty costs can be recognised as revenue on situations where SCISYS acts in the capacity of an Agent simply passing the thirdpartys goods and services to customers through its books.
If IFRS 15 had been applied in 2017 revenues would have been 5.5m lower than reported and operating profits would have been unaffected.
The assessment made by the entity is preliminary as not all transition work requirements have been finalised and therefore may be subject to adjustment.
Impairment of goodwill Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis based on managements estimation of the value in use of the cash generating units CGUs to which the goodwill has been allocated.
The value in use calculation is dependent on managements estimate of future cash flows expected to arise from the CGU and a suitable discount rate.
Cash flows are based on approved detailed operating budgets for the forthcoming year updated as appropriate for actual performance since the year end.
Annual growth rates are based on independent research analysts market commentaries.
The discount rate represents the weighted average cost of capital of a market participant based on managements estimate of the following input parameters for the capital asset pricing model.
Risk free return adopted as the yield on 30year UK Treasury
Market risk premium derived from academic research by the London Business School.
Beta factor approximate market participant value is determined from statistics quoted by Bloomberg for SCISYS PLC and a sample of comparable competitor companies.
Alpha factor derived from the return on equity applied by the Groups professional advisers.
Gearing approximate market participant value is determined from statistics quoted by Bloomberg for SCISYS PLC and a sample of comparable competitor companies.
Cost of debt based on current borrowing rates from the Groups bankers.
Factors also considered Country risk the Group monitors country risk and carefully considers both the level of provisions against such risk and whether the risk disclosures provide the market with a clear picture of actual and potential exposures Forecasting risk the use of statistics and modelling to determine future performance based on current and historical data taking factors such as revenue and economic indicators into account.
The same discount rate has been used for different markets and geographies.
The Groups divisions all deal with governments or pseudogovernment bodies and considers the risk profile of these contracts to be broadly comparable.
Taken together with euro cash flows the derivation of the discount rate is applicable for the different currency flows.
A portfolio of multiple contracts allow the groups divisions to be treated with the same cost of capital which reflects the Groups aggregated portfolio risks.
The only exception is the discount rate used for goodwill impairment testing of the Xibis CGU which is higher than for the other subsidiaries to reflect the higher perceived risk attaching to smaller entities.
Capitalisation of development expenditure Development costs associated with the development of software products or enhancements and their related intellectual property rights are expensed as incurred until management judges that all of the following criteria can be demonstrated in which case it is capitalised as an intangible asset The technical feasibility of completing the tangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale.
An intention to complete the intangible asset and use or sell it.
Ability to use or sell the intangible asset.
How the intangible asset will generate probable future economic benefits.
Among other things the Group can demonstrate the existence of a market for the output of the intangible asset or the intangible asset itself or if it is to be used internally the usefulness of the intangible asset.
The availability of adequate technical financial and other resources to complete the development and to use or sell the intangible asset.
An ability to measure reliably the expenditure attributable to the intangible asset during its development.
Operating segments The management structure and reporting of financial information to the Chief Operating Decision Maker the PLC Board is the basis used to define operating segments.
Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 71 Operating segments continued Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total External revenues 000 000 000 000 000 000 Year ended 31 December 2017 Professional fees revenue 18629 13383 7958 781 7291 48042 Other revenue 4842 3119 757 74 External revenue for reportable segments 23471 16502 8715 855 7291 56834 Other external revenue 330 Consolidated revenue 57164 Year ended 31 December 2016 Professional fees revenue 16293 13284 7541 460 Other revenue 3581 3368 485 412 External revenue for reportable segments 19874 16652 8026 872 Other external revenue 320 Consolidated revenue 45744 Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total Profit before tax 000 000 000 000 000 000 Year ended 31 December 2017 Reportable segment contribution 4891 4212 2625 62 510 12300 Other contribution 22 33 10 Contribution 4913 4245 2635 62 510 12365 Central overheads 5731 EBITA 6634 Amortisation of intangible assets comprising acquired software solution 1246 Amortisation of intangible assets comprising acquired order book 736 Operating Profit 4652 Finance costs 718 Finance income 8 Profit before tax 3942 Year ended 31 December 2016 Reportable segment contribution 4229 4512 2512 104 Other contribution 72 50 Contribution 4157 4462 2512 104 Central overheads 8448 Operating profit 2787 Finance costs 186 Finance income 1 Profit before tax 2602 The Group provides IT services to large corporations and public sector organisations through the following five divisions
Enterprise Solutions and Defence ESD Media and Broadcast MandB Xibis Ltd ANNOVA Systems GmbH The fifth division was active with effect from 1 January 2017 following the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems GmbH on 31 December 2016.
Divisional results assets and liabilities represent items directly attributable to a division.
Unallocated expenses comprise central overheads and corporate expenses.
Assets and liabilities that are allocated to operating divisions comprise trade receivables amounts recoverable on contracts inventories and payments received on account.
Information about reportable segments Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 72 Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total As at 31 December 2017 Reportable segment  noncurrent assets 3511 3380 1090 7931 15912 Reportable segment  current assets 9185 6369 1446 264 2862 20126 12696 6369 4826 1354 10793 36038 Other  noncurrent assets 14553 Other  current assets 10081 Total assets 60672 As at 31 December 2016 Reportable segment  noncurrent assets 3466 3380 1090 7657 15593 Reportable segment  current assets 6657 6836 1534 288 3209 18524 10123 6836 4914 1378 10866 34117 Other  noncurrent assets 16362 Other  current assets 9371 Total assets 59850 Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total Group liabilities 000 000 000 000 000 000 As at 31 December 2017 Reportable segment  current liabilities 1164 3220 727 11 1905 7027 Other  noncurrent liabilities 14603 Other  current liabilities 13328 Total liabilities 34958 As at 31 December 2016 Reportable segment  current liabilities 1050 1360 265 1788 4463 Other  noncurrent liabilities 18374 Other  current liabilities 14300 Total liabilities 37137 UK Rest of Europe Other Total Geographical split 000 000 000 000 Year ended 31 December 2017 Revenue from external customers by location of customers 28485 27273 1406 57164 As at 31 December 2017 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Tangible assets 5847 3414 Other long term assets Year ended 31 December 2016 Revenue from external customers by location of customers 22052 22605 1087 45744 As at 31 December 2016 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Tangible assets 5904 3153 Interests in associates Deferred tax assets Information about reportable segments continued Operating segments continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 73 Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total As at 31 December 2017 Reportable segment  noncurrent assets 3511 3380 1090 7931 15912 Reportable segment  current assets 9185 6369 1446 264 2862 20126 12696 6369 4826 1354 10793 36038 Other  noncurrent assets 14553 Other  current assets 10081 Total assets 60672 As at 31 December 2016 Reportable segment  noncurrent assets 3466 3380 1090 7657 15593 Reportable segment  current assets 6657 6836 1534 288 3209 18524 10123 6836 4914 1378 10866 34117 Other  noncurrent assets 16362 Other  current assets 9371 Total assets 59850 Space ESD MandB Xibis Annova Total Group liabilities 000 000 000 000 000 000 As at 31 December 2017 Reportable segment  current liabilities 1164 3220 727 11 1905 7027 Other  noncurrent liabilities 14603 Other  current liabilities 13328 Total liabilities 34958 As at 31 December 2016 Reportable segment  current liabilities 1050 1360 265 1788 4463 Other  noncurrent liabilities 18374 Other  current liabilities 14300 Total liabilities 37137 UK Rest of Europe Other Total Geographical split 000 000 000 000 Year ended 31 December 2017 Revenue from external customers by location of customers 28485 27273 1406 57164 As at 31 December 2017 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Tangible assets 5847 3414 Other long term assets Year ended 31 December 2016 Revenue from external customers by location of customers 22052 22605 1087 45744 As at 31 December 2016 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Tangible assets 5904 3153 Interests in associates Deferred tax assets 367 tel
No.
The average number of persons employed by the Group during the year was as follows Management 30 23 Professional 456 356 Administration 000 000 The aggregate payroll costs of these persons were as follows Wages and salaries 29583 23167 Social security costs 4134 3094 Pension costs 907 847 IFRS2 share based payments credit 34624 27tel This is stated after charging Net foreign exchange gains on operating activities 100 1167 Hire of other assets  operating leases 152 86 Research and development costs 3554 1996 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 952 738 Amortisation of intangible assets included in operating costs 146 43 Fees paid to the Companys auditors for the audit of the companys audited accounts 23 42 The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 108 71 Total audit fees 131 113 Fees paid to the Companys auditors and their associates for other services to the Group Taxation services and compliance work 9 17 Other services pension advice grant audit 24 6 Total nonaudit fees 33tel Bank deposit interest 8 1 Staff numbers and costs 4 Remuneration of Directors 5 Operating profit 6 Finance income Details of Directors emoluments share options and pension entitlements are given in the Remuneration Report on pages 48 to 53.
The remuneration of the highest paid director was 244000 2016 197000 and Company pension contributions of 19000 2016 19000 were made to a money purchase scheme on his behalf.
Retirement benefits are accruing to 3 directors 2016 3 under money purchase schemes.
Directors remuneration is borne by the parent company and recharged to the operating subsidiaries.
In addition to the above sums one Director received 80000 2016 78000 for his duties as a director of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH.
2017 2016 Interest on bank loans and overdrafts 718 186 7 Finance costs Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 74 Since 2007 the Board has gauged the underlying performance of business using an adjusted operating profit measure that excludes the costs of the Groups longterm share incentive schemes exceptional items and any amortisation of intangible assets arising on business acquisition.
Internal reporting is exclusively based on adjusted performance measures to facilitate comparison between financial years and publicly available research notes on SCISYS published by financial analysts focuses on these same measures.
Contingent consideration payable for the ANNOVA acquisition is linked both to average profitability over a 3year earn out period and achievement of key commercial milestones.
ANNOVA outperformed the firstyear expectations that were reflected in projected amounts payable in the acquisition balance sheet.
The anticipated total contingent consideration payable for ANNOVA was reassessed at 31 December 2017 resulting in the exceptional credit.
Up to and including 2016 RandD tax credits were incorporated into the net tax charge but from 2017 these are to be treated as deductions from operating expenses.
SCISYS anticipates that it will no longer qualify for the SME tax credit scheme in 2018 as it expects to exceed the headcount eligibility threshold so the abovetheline tax credit in the current period is treated as an exceptional item.
The 2016 acquisition costs represent fees paid to professional advisors and statutory charges relating to the acquisition of ANNOVA that do not qualify for capitalisation as costs for issuing debt or equity instruments.
9 Tax 2017 2016 Acquisition costs RandD tax credits 450 Contingent consideration 1625 Exceptional items 2075 458 2017 2016 Current tax UK corporation tax based on the results for the year Adjustment relating to earlier years RandD tax credit 281 105 Overseas corporation tax 898 944 Adjustment relating to earlier years Total current tax 617 393 Deferred tax Overseas deferred taxation note 23 24 13 Total tax charge 593 380 8 Exceptional items The standard rate of tax for the year based on the UK standard rate of corporation tax is 19.25% 2016 20.00%.
The actual effective tax rate for the current year is lower 2016 lower than this standard rate.
A reduction in the UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015 and an additional reduction to 17% effective 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
This will reduce the companys future current tax charge accordingly.
The deferred tax assets and liabilities at 31 December 2017 have been calculated based on these rates.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 75 9 Tax continued 2017 2016 Profit from operations before taxation 3942 2602 Tax charge at standard rate of 19.25% 2016 20.00% 759 520 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 358 174 Other income non taxable 1545 Other items including permanent differences Research and Development tax credits 309 661 Adjustment in respect of foreign tax and exchange rates 1105 354 Short term timing differences 2 3 Movement in deferred tax asset not recognised 407 9 Movement in deferred tax rates 47 97 Movement in respect of change in tax rate Capital allowances in excess of depreciation 41 Adjustment relating to earlier years 268 108 Total tax chargetel 2016 Final dividend for 2015 paid in the year 1.78p per share Interim dividend for 2016 paid in the year 0.53p per share  154 Final dividend for 2016 paid in the year 1.43p per share 414 Interim dividend for 2017 paid in the year 0.59p per share 172 10 Dividends 11 Basic and diluted earnings per share The calculation of the Group basic and diluted earnings per ordinary share is based on the following data Own shares held Own shares held represent the number of shares held in treasury.
Diluted earnings per share The weighted average number of shares for the calculation of diluted earnings per share is computed using the treasury share method.
This takes into account the entitlement of holders of EMI CSOP and unapproved share options to purchase ordinary shares at an exercise price below the average market price for the year.
2017 2016 Weighted average number of shares Excluding own shares held Net number of shares Weighted average number of shares Excluding own shares held Net number of shares Number of shares 000 000 000 000 000 000 Basic earnings per ordinary share 29154 83 29071 29086 39 29047 Diluted earnings per share 29723 83 29640 29616 39 29tel Earnings 000 000 Profit on ordinary activities after taxation 3349 2222 Basic earnings per share 11.5p 7.6p Diluted earnings per share 11.3p 7.5p In order to present a measure of earnings per share that is more representative of the Groups underlying operating performance earnings are adjusted to be net of the pretax costs shown in the highlighted box on the face of the Income Statement.
The calculation of the Group basic adjusted earnings and diluted adjusted earnings per ordinary share is based on the following data 12 Adjusted earnings per share The Board proposes payment of a final dividend for 2017 of 1.57p per share in July 2018.
The total tax charge for the year can be reconciled to the profit per the Income Statement as follows Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 76 Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the cashgenerating units CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated as tabulated below On the acquisition of SCISYS DE GmbH
Internet and
Services GmbH Xibis Limited Annova Systems GmbH Total Cost and carrying amount At 1 January 2016 5603 1070 1090 Recognised on acquisition of a subsidiary note 27 7657 7657 Exchange adjustments At 1 January 2017 5603 1243 1090 7657 15593
Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2017 5603 1288 1090 7932 15tel Space 3511 3466 Media and Broadcast 3380 3380 Xibis 1090 1090 Annova 7932 7657 15913 15593 13 Goodwill Own shares held Own shares held represent the number of shares held in treasury.
Diluted earnings per share The weighted average number of shares for the calculation of diluted earnings per share is computed using the treasury share method.
This takes into account the entitlement of holders of EMI CSOP and unapproved share options to purchase ordinary shares at an exercise price below the average market price for the year.
2017 2016 Weighted average number of shares Excluding own shares held Net number of shares Weighted average number of shares Excluding own shares held Net number of shares Number of shares 000 000 000 000 000 000 Basic earnings per ordinary share 29154 83 29071 29086 39 29047 Diluted earnings per share 29723 83 29640 29616 39 29tel Earnings 000 000 Profit on ordinary activities after taxation 3349 2222 Adjusted for Amortisation of intangible assets comprising acquired software solution 1246 Amortisation of intangible assets comprising acquired order book 736 Deferred tax on amortisation of intangible assets 337 Share based payments Exceptional items 2075 Adjusted profit after taxation 2919 2666 Basic adjusted earnings per share 10.0p 9.2p Diluted adjusted earnings per share 9.8p 9.0p 12 Adjusted earnings per share continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 77 The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined from value in use calculations.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rates growth rates and expected changes to selling prices and direct costs during the period.
Management estimates discount rates using posttax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the
The growth rates are based on industry growth forecasts.
Changes in selling prices and direct costs are based on past practices and expectations of future changes in the market.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts derived from the most recent financial budgets approved by the management for the forthcoming financial year.
Anticipated growth rates for contribution and overheads for the subsequent two years are based on current market and business forecasts.
Cash flows are then assumed to continue to perpetuity with a constant growth rate in contribution or overheads.
With the exception of Annova and Xibis annual contribution of the CGUs is assumed to grow at 4.0% 2016 4% and central overheads at up to 2% 2016 2%.
For Annova the growth rate is 6%.
Cash flows are discounted at 10.1% 2016 10.5% which the Directors believe to be an appropriate and prudent posttax weighted average cost of capital WACC for a market participant in these segments at the yearend date.
This corresponds to a pretax discount rate of 14.7% 2016 15.3%.
The WACCs for each of the Space Media and Broadcast and Annova CGUs are not considered to be materially different due to the comparable nature of their operations and customer bases.
For the Xibis CGU annual contribution is assumed to grow at 10% 2016 10% and its cash flows are discounted using a posttax WACC of 11.5% 2016 10.5% to reflect the higher perceived risk attaching to smaller entities.
This corresponds to a pretax discount rate of 12.0% 2016 15.3%.
The basis for the Directors estimates of the input parameters for calculating the discount rate is outlined in note 1.
To reduce the headroom in the impairment calculation to nil a posttax WACC of 12.9% 2016 13.9% would be required for the Space and Media and Broadcast CGUs 15.4% for the ANNOVA CGU and 11.5% 2016 12.0% for the Xibis CGU.
The Annova CGU has been reviewed for impairment for the first time in 2017.
On the basis of this analysis the Directors consider that no impairment provision is warranted.
Amortisation is included in the income statement under operating costs.
Acquired software solution Order book Software licences Total
At 1 January 2016 Acquired on acquisition of a subsidiary 2209 4433 108 6750
Disposals
Exchange adjustments At 1 January 2017 2209 4433 812 7454
Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2017 2371 4514 1057 7942
At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year
Exchange adjustments At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year 1246 736 146 2128 Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2017 1246 736 787 2769 Carrying amount At 31 December 2017 1125 3778 270 5173 At 31 December 2016 2209 4433 206 6848 At 1 January 2016 14 Other intangible assets 13 Goodwill continued Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 78 The plant property and equipment are all shown at cost not valuation.
The Group has pledged freehold and long leasehold land and buildings having a carrying amount of 7036000 2016 7144000 to secure bank loans and overdrafts granted to the Group.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had entered into contractual commitments for the acquisition of property plant and equipment amounting to 7000 2016 20000.
Freehold and long leasehold property
Cost
At 1 January 2016 8239 4964 2923 1590 17716 Acquired on acquisition of subsidiary
Disposals
Exchange adjustments 35tel977 At 1 January 2017 8618 5715 3210 1814 19357 Additions 051
Disposals
Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2017 8744 6388 3624 1845 20601 Depreciation and impairment At 1 January 2016 1184 4411 2667 819 9081 Charge for the year
Exchange adjustments At 1 January 2017 1474 4952 2857 1017 10300 Charge for the year 20tel953
Exchange adjustments At 31 December 2017 1708 5452 3011 1169 11340 Carrying amount At 31 December 2017 703tel9261 At 31 December 2016 714tel9057 At 1 January 2016 705tel8635 15 Property Plant and Equipment 16 Interests in associates On 11 September 2015 the Groups German subsidiary SCISYS Deutschland GmbH SCISYS DE acquired 33.3% of ToMM Apps GmbH ToMM Apps a supplier of software development services to SCISYS Media and Broadcast division.
ToMM Apps was formed in 2014 as a university spinoff business in Duisburg Germany.
Trading between group companies and ToMM Apps is outlined in note 33.
In September 2017 SCISYS DE acquired an additional 16.7% of ToMM Apps for 1 increasing its investment to 50%.
ToMM Apps will be liquidated under German law and the retained earnings distributed to its shareholders by way of dividends.
SCISYS DE expects its receipts to materially cover the carrying value of its investment.
The following table summarises the financial information of ToMM Apps as included in its own financial statements adjusted for fair value adjustments at acquisition and differences in accounting policies Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 79 16 Interests in associates continued 2017 2016 Percentage ownership interest 50.0% 33.3% Noncurrent assets 1 165 Current assets 227 13 Current liabilities 75 28 Net assets 100% 153 150 Group share of net assets 76 50 Goodwill 24 23 Postacquisition share of posttax profits 56 17 Dividend 156 Carrying amount of interest in associate Revenue 425 271 Profit after tax 100% 112 47 Postacquisition posttax profits 112 47 Group share of posttax profits 56 17 18 Longterm software development contracts All amounts included in trade and other receivables and arising from longterm software development contracts are due for settlement within 12 months for both years.
19 Trade and other receivables The average credit period taken on settlement of sales invoices is 35 days 2016 36.
Due to the nature of the Groups customer base and in line with previous experience the Directors consider that the level of irrecoverable amounts receivable is negligible.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates their fair value.
2017 2016 Contracts in progress at the balance sheet date Amounts due from contract customers included in trade and other receivables note 19 10324 7555 Amounts due to contract customers included in trade and other payables note 24 7026 4463 3298 3tel Amounts receivable from the sale of goods and services 9256 10641 Amounts receivable from long term contracts note 18 10324 7555 Other receivables 927 465 Prepayments and accrued income 908 960 21415 19tel Raw materials 187 113 Workinprogress 128 136 Finished goods  Inventories Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 80 The Groups loans at the year end consisted of a eurodenominated loan of 573000 being the balance remaining on a loan acquired with the SCISYS DE business in 2007.
The loan is secured on SCISYS DEs freehold property in Bochum Germany.
Repayments are payable in equal monthly instalments until June 2018 at which time the terms and conditions for repayment and interest for the balance of the loan are renegotiable.
Interest is payable monthly at a fixed rate of 2.02% p. for the freehold purchase of the Groups Chippenham headquarters on which the loan is secured.
Repayment is by equal monthly instalments on the basis of a 15year notional term.
The loan was renewed for a further 5 years in May 2016 with no variation in terms.
Interest is payable monthly at 3.0% p. improvements to SCISYS DEs freehold property in Bochum Germany on which the loan is secured.
Repayments are by equal monthly instalments until Jan 2027.
Interest is payable monthly at a fixed rate of 1.8% p.
SCISYS DEs freehold property in Bochum Germany on which the loan is secured.
Repayments are by equal monthly instalments until November 2020.
Interest is payable monthly at a fixed rate of 2.39% p.
SCISYS DEs leased Dortmund office Germany on which the loan is secured.
Repayments are by equal monthly instalments until May 2022.
Interest is payable monthly at a fixed rate of 1.59% p. until May 2022. headquarters in Chippenham.
Repayment is due on or before 23 May 2020.
Interest is payable 6 monthly at 5.25% p.
Xibis Limited.
The loan is repayable in equal monthly instalments until March 2018 and is secured by debentures granted by all three UK Group companies and a first legal charge over the Groups long leasehold property in Bristol.
Interest is payable quarterly at 2.5% p. fund the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems GmbH.
The notes are repayable on the 3rd anniversary of the issue date and have second ranking security behind the senior debt providers.
Interest is payable quarterly at a fixed rate of 7.0% p.
2017 2016 Bank overdrafts Loans  due within one year 2290 3555 Total due within one year 2290 3804 Loans  due in year 2 5852 2172 Loans  due in years 35 5483 10771 Loans  due after year 5 332 412 Loans  due after one year 11667 13355 13957 17159 21 Bank overdrafts and loans 20 Cash and cash equivalentsbank overdrafts Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held by the Group and shortterm bank deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
The carrying value of these assets approximates their fair value.
The Group maintains deposit accounts with a number of banks to suit local operations in Germany.
In the UK sterling and foreign currency cash deposit and overdraft facilities for trading operations are provided by two banking groups.
The principal bankers operate a facility agreement that provides for netting off between deposits and borrowings such that interest is payable or receivable on the net overdrawn or credit balance respectively.
A second bank provides an online current account with no overdraft facility.
2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents per balance sheet 8021 6915 Bank overdrafts Cash and cash equivalents per cash flow statement 8021 6666 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 81 Financial risk and treasury policies The Group finance department maintains liquidity manages relations with the Groups bankers identifies and manages foreign exchange risk and controls Group treasury operations.
Treasury dealings such as investments borrowings and foreign exchange are conducted only to support underlying business transactions.
Consequently the Group does not undertake speculative foreign exchange dealings for which there is no underlying exposure.
The Groups policies for management of the financial risks to which it is exposed are outlined below a Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are cash and cash equivalents trade and other receivables and amounts recoverable on contracts.
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations and arises principally from the Groups receivables from customers and monies on deposit with financial institutions.
The customer base of the Group is primarily government and quasigovernment agencies and major prime contractors and previous experience has indicated that no allowance for doubtful receivables is necessary.
The credit risk on liquid funds and derivative financial instruments is limited because the counterparties are banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies.
The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk.
The Groups maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is represented by the carrying value of financial assets as follows 2017 2016 Trade receivables 9256 10641 Amounts recoverable on contracts 10324 7555 Corporation tax receivable 450 1098 Other receivables 927 465 Cash and cash equivalents 8021 6915 28978 26674 22 Financial Instruments 21 Bank overdrafts and loans continued an unsecured eurodenominated loan of 7104000 drawn down in December 2016 to part fund the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems
The loan is repayable in equal quarterly instalments over 5 years and bears interest at a fixed rate of 2.9% p.
This loan has been offset by 184k of capitalised deal fees 10  two subordinated eurodenominated loans of 1598000 and 622000 provided as deferred consideration to part fund the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems on 31 December 2016.
The loans bear interest at a fixed rate of 5% p.
2019.
Interest is payable annually in December.
Loan 2 and the loan notes 8 are subject to annual interest cover and debt service covenants.
The multicurrency UK bank overdraft facility of 2500000 available at the year end is subject to annual review.
A covenant limits utilisation of the overdraft to 60% of trade receivables under 90 days old invoiced by SCISYS UK Limited.
Interest is payable at 3% over bank base rate or currency lending rate as appropriate.
In addition the Group has access to a foreign exchange hedging facility with a maximum exposure limit of 500000.
The UK working capital facilities are secured by debentures from SCISYS PLC and SCISYS UK Limited and a first legal charge over the Groups long leasehold property in Bristol.
The Groups German bankers provide unsecured working capital facilities to cover overdraft and bank guarantee requirements.
Total facilities comprise a 1776000 overdraft 2016 2142000 and 4884000 of bank guarantee lines 2016 5140000.
At the year end there were no overdraft borrowings 2016 nil.
Utilisation of the bank guarantee facilities was 174000 2016 134000.
The aged analysis of trade receivables is Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 82 b Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure as far as possible that it will always have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
The Group uses a combination of monthly and weekly cash flow forecasts to monitor cash requirements and to optimise its return on investments.
The following are the contractual maturities of financial liabilities.
Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as currency rates and interest rates will affect the Groups results.
The objective of market risk management is to manage and control risk to within suitable parameters.
The Group is exposed to foreign currency risk on transactions which are denominated in a currency other than sterling.
A proportion of the Groups Media and Broadcast division and Annovas contracts undertaken in Germany with costs in euros generate revenues Carrying amount Contractual cash flow Less than 12 months 12 years 25 years More than 5 years Bank loans and overdrafts 17159 18069 4035 2374 11226 434 Trade and other payables 14310 14310 14310 Corporation tax payable 190 190 190 Deferred consideration 3318 3318 375 2943 Foreign currency derivatives  liabilities 333 333 333 28008 28918 18202 1999 8283 434 22 Financial instruments continued 2017 2016 0 to 30 days 7102 31 to 60 days 1752 61 to 90 days 157 90 days 245 Standard credit terms are typically 30 days although a small minority of contracts allow for payment up to 90 days from receipt of invoice or in quarterly instalments.
The value of trade receivables included above which is due after more than one year is 25000 2016 92000.
Carrying amount Contractual cash flow Less than 12 months 12 years 25 years More than 5 years Bank loans and overdrafts 13957 16565 2478 6178 7562 347 Trade and other payables 17478 17478 17478 Corporation tax payable 347 347 347 31782 34390 20303 6178 7562 347 At 31 December 2017 the Group had available 4276000 2016 4402000 of undrawn committed borrowing facilities.
Trade receivables Cash and cash equivalentstel 2016 Sterling 2508 4412 4054 1498 Euro 6589 6223 3756 5417 US Dollars 159 6 211 9256 10641 8021 6915 The aged analysis of trade receivables is Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 83 In addition SCISYS Deutschland entered into a series of relatively lowvalue forward contracts to swap sterling receipts for euros in 2018 and 2019.
The fair value of all foreign exchange contracts that were outstanding at 31 December 2017 was an asset of 4000 2016 liability 325000 reflected as a nil liability 2016 333000 in trade and other payables and an 4000 asset 2016 8000 reflected in trade and other receivables.
The Group does not currently designate its foreign currency denominated debt as a hedging instrument for the purpose of hedging the translation of its foreign operation.
2017 2016 Year end rate 1.126 1.167 Average rate for the year 1.142 1.219 Contract date Expiry date Euro amount Protected rate
June 2016 31Mar2017 1.00 million 1.297 June 2016 30Jun2017 1.00 million 1.297 June 2016 30Sep2017 1.00 million 1.274 June 2016 31Dec2017 1.00 million 1.274 22 Financial instruments continued in sterling.
This creates a natural hedge against UKbased Space division contracts denominated in euros for which costs are incurred in sterling.
The main net currency risk for such contracts lies in the period between tender and signature of contract during which it is impractical to enter into committed forward foreign exchange contracts.
In order to mitigate this risk the Groups policy is to take out eurosterling currency hedging agreements to cover anticipated invoicing under existing and tendered contracts up to 18 months in the future.
Sensitivity analysis It is estimated that with all other variables held equal a change of one cent in the value of the euro against sterling would have a 38000 impact on the Groups operating profit for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The method of estimation consistently applied involves assessing the transaction impact of euro cash flows and the translation impact of euro profits.
It is estimated that with all other variables held equal a change of one cent in the value of the US dollar against sterling would have a 1000 impact on the Groups operating profit for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The method of estimation consistently applied involves assessing the transaction impact of dollar cash flows and the translation impact of dollar profits.
Currency hedging contracts are taken out to coincide with quarter end dates.
Depending on the exchange rate of the euro at the time cash is received from a customer compared to the forward rates the Group may enter into currency swaps to transfer any currency receipts into sterling thereby saving sterling overdraft interest until such time as the currency is needed to fulfil a particular forward contract at the end of the quarter.
The Group has investments in German operations.
As a result the Groups sterling income statement and balance sheet can be affected by movements in the eurosterling exchange rates.
The Group does not undertake any hedging activity in this area.
Cash deposits in sterling and foreign currencies are made at prevailing interest rates.
Where rates are fixed the fixed interest period is generally no more than 3 months.
Sterling Euro Total 31 December 2017 Bank loans 3230 10727 13957 31 December 2016 Bank overdrafts Bank loans 3792 13118 16910 3792 13367 17159 The following forward contracts for sales of euros were entered into between 2016 and 2017 for sales of euros to mitigate currency risk in 2017.
The analysis of borrowings by currency is Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017tel On demand or within one year 2290 3804 In the second year 5852 2172 In the third to fifth years inclusive 5483 10771 After five years 332 412 13957 17159 Less amount due for settlement within 12 months shown as current liabilities 2290 3804 Amount due for settlement after 12 months 11667 13355 22 Financial instruments continued d Capital risk management The Groups objective when managing share capital is to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders or issue new shares.
The Groups net debt at the reporting date was 2017 2016 Bank overdrafts Loans 13957 16910 Total borrowings 13957 17159 Cash and cash equivalents note 20 8021 6915 Group net debt 5936 10244 e Fair values The fair values of financial assets and liabilities together with the carrying amounts shown in the balance sheet are Carrying amount Fair value Carrying amount Fair valuetel 2016 Trade receivables 9256 9256 10633 10633 Amounts recoverable on contracts 10324 10324 7555 7555 Corporation tax receivable 450 450 1098 1098 Other receivables 92telForeign currency derivatives  assets Cash and cash equivalents 8021 8021 6915 6915 Bank overdrafts Loans 13957 13957 16910 16915 Corporation tax payable 347 347 Trade and other payables 17378 17378 13977 13977 Foreign currency derivatives  liabilities Deferred consideration 3318 3318 2800 2800 8113 8118 The weighted average interest rate profile for the Groups financial liabilities comprising bank overdrafts and loans is set out below Sensitivity analysis An average rise in interest rates during the year of 1% would have increased interest charges by 60000 2016 57000.
The borrowings are repayable as follows 2017 2016 Bank overdrafts 3.3% 3.4% Bank loans 3.7% 3.3% Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 85 The following summarises the significant methods and assumptions used in estimating the fair values of financial instruments reflected in the table above.
Derivatives
Foreign currency derivatives are valued at the yearend date on a marktomarket basis.
Loans
For periods of fixed interest rates on outstanding loans savings in interest compared with the application of market interest rates are discounted at the posttax riskfree discount rate to derive the gain in fair value over carrying value.
Trade and other receivablespayables 22 Financial instruments continued Level 1 Level 2 Level 3teltel Financial assets 000 000 000 000 000 000 Foreign currency derivatives  assets Level 1 Level 2 Level 3teltel Financial liabilities 000 000 000 000 000 000 Foreign currency derivatives  liabilities Deferred consideration For receivablespayables due after more than one year the notional value is discounted at the posttax weighted average cost of capital to reflect the fair value.
Fair value hierarchy The Groups financial instruments measured at fair value fit with the following fair value hierarchy Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 1.
Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly Level 2.
Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data Level 3.
The following tables illustrate the Groups net financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value at 31 December 2017 and 31 December Level 1 financial instruments The fair value of financial instruments traded in active markets commodity futures is based on quoted market prices at the period end date.
A market is regarded as active if quoted prices are readily and regularly available from an exchange dealer broker industry group pricing services or regulatory agency and those prices represent actual and regularly occurring market transactions on an arms length.
The Group has no Level 1 financial instruments.
Level 2 financial instruments The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market forward foreign exchange contracts are determined by using valuation techniques.
These valuation techniques maximise the use of observable market data where it is available and rely as little as possible on entityspecific estimates.
The fair value of forward foreign exchange contracts are calculated at the present value of the future cash flows based on observable inputs drawn from a reputable thirdparty source.
Level 3 financial instruments The fair value of financial instruments is based on unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity at the statement of financial position dates.
These inputs generally reflect the Groups own assumptions about how a market participant would reasonably be expected to determine the price of a financial instrument.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 86 22 Financial instruments continued The following table shows the valuation techniques used for Level 2 and Level 3 fair values as well as the significant unobservable inputs used for Level 3 items.
Element Valuation technique Significant unobservable inputs Level 3 only Financial instruments measured at fair value Deferred consideration The expected payment reflects the calculated cash out flows under possible earn out scenarios and is discounted using a riskadjusted discount rate The basis for the Directors estimates of the input parameters for calculating the discount rate is outlined in note 1 Exchange rate estimate of the input parameter of 1.2 Euros
The deferred consideration is dependent on the EBITDA generated by ANNOVA over the period 2016 to 2018.
The Directors have based their assessment of forecast EBITDA on projections provided by ANNOVA management adjusted to reflect levels of risk contingency consistent with those used for other Group companies.
Forward exchange contracts Fair value is estimated from the difference between the contractual forward price and the current forward price for the residual maturity of the contract based on a reliable third party provider Financial instruments not measured at fair value Debt securities Other financial liabilities Fair value is calculated based on the present value of future principal and interest cash flows discounted at the market rate of interest at the balance sheet date.
Fair value is calculated based on the present value of future principal and interest cash flows discounted at the market rate of interest at the balance sheet date.
For deferred consideration in evaluating the significance of fair value inputs the Group generally classifies assets or liabilities as Level 3 when their fair value is determined using unobservable inputs that individually or when aggregated with other unobservable inputs represent more than 10% of the fair value of the observable inputs of the assets or liabilities.
There have been no transfers between levels in the year 2016 no transfers in either direction.
Reconciliation of Level 3 fair value It is the Groups policy to recognise all the transfers into the levels at the end of the reporting period.
Deferred consideration Cost and carrying amount At 1 January 2016 On acquisition 3318 At 1 January 2017 3318 Settlement 1855 Writedown 1648 Exchange adjustments 186 At 31 December 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 87 Deferred tax Temporary timing differences At 1 January 2016 301 On acquisition 994 Credit to income 13 Exchange differences 47 At 1 January 2017 1329 Credit to income 24 Exchange differences 33 At 31 December 2017 1338 The deferred tax is disclosed as follows The following are the major deferred tax liabilities recognised by the Group and movements thereon during the current and prior reporting period Unused tax losses for which no deferred tax asset has been recognised are 4417000 2016 4417000 giving rise to a potential deferred tax asset of 751000 2016 751000.
Furthermore there is an unrecognised deferred tax asset in respect of excess management expenses deductible temporary differences and capital allowances of 1902000 2016 1468000.
The total deferred tax asset not recognised computed at the applicable rate of 17% is 2653000 2016 2219000.
2017 2016 Deferred tax liabilities 1364 1611 Deferred tax assets 26 282 Net liability 1338 1329 Trade payables and accruals principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The average credit period taken for trade purchases is 39 days 2016 40 days.
Whilst the typical credit terms from suppliers require payment within 30 days a significant proportion of costs for goods and thirdparty services in Germany are on longer contractual credit terms of between 60 and 180 days.
The
Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade payables approximates to their fair value.
The provisions represent future charges on longterm fixedprice customer contracts where liabilities are uncertain in either or both timing and amount.
Values reflect managements best estimate of expenditure required to settle present obligations discounted to the balance sheet value using a riskfree pretax discount rate.
2017 2016 Trade payables 3290 2976 Payments on account note 18 7026 4463 Taxation and social security 351 350 Other payables 3483 3895 Accruals 3328 2626 17478 14tel Charges on customer contracts 1572 24 Trade and other payables
26 Deferred income 2017 2016 Fixed price support and maintenance contracts 70 53 Rent receivable 17telNotes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 88 Acquisition of subsidiary On 31 December 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Annova Systems GmbH ANNOVA for a consideration of 12878000.
ANNOVA is a leading supplier of editorial solutions for the media sector.
It has a wellestablished customer base and a robust business model based on its mature OpenMedia software solution which provides newsroom system functionality across all media segments including television radio and online solutions.
This transaction has been accounted for by the purchase method of accounting.
Fair value adjustments have been made to the acquisition balance sheet of ANNOVA to reflect the recognition of intangible assets on acquisition and remeasurement of amounts recoverable on contracts in accordance with the Groups accounting policies.
Intangible assets reflect the fair values of the ANNOVA order book at 31 December 2016 and of ANNOVAs proprietary software solution OpenMedia.
The fair value of the acquired order book represents the net present value of the projected net aftertax cashflows arising from unfulfilled orders.
Cashflows were discounted at 10.5% which was the prevailing discount rate at the acquisition date.
The fair value of the software solution represents the depreciated replacement cost of an asset if someone were to create it from scratch.
Further information on these assets is provided in note 14.
The goodwill arising on the acquisition of ANNOVA is attributable to the synergies achievable from the integration of the acquired business The Group holds a stock of Treasury shares to satisfy maturing employee share options and to provide the trustees of the SCISYS SIP with a contingent source of supply of SCISYS PLC shares in illiquid market conditions.
If the trustees are unable to acquire sufficient shares in the market with funds from employees monthly payroll deductions the trustees purchase the shortfall from treasury at the prevailing market price.
The own shares held are deducted from retained earnings.
Other reserves The Share Premium Account was created when the Group issued free shares to employees in 2009.
It has been subsequently increased when new shares have been issued to satisfy maturing employee share options.
The Merger Reserve reflects the difference between the nominal value and agreed consideration value of shares issued as part consideration for the acquisition of SCISYS DE in 2007.
The Capital Redemption Reserve arises when the Company redeems shares wholly out of distributable profits.
The Translation Reserve comprises all foreign exchange differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of nonUK subsidiaries.
The Company has only one class of ordinary shares that carry no right to fixed income.
Shares issued during the year principally represented partpayment of deferred consideration relating to the ANNOVA Systems GmbH acquisition on 31 December 2016.
The balance of shares were issued to satisfy maturing employee share options when there was an insufficient stock of Treasury shares available for the purpose.
The analysis of own shares which are AIM listed investments held by the Group is Share capital No of shares 000 At the beginning of the year 29086075 7272 Issued during the year 232583 57 At the end of the year 29318658 7329 No of own shares % of issued share capital
Market value 31 December 2017 SCISYS SIP 180305 0.6% 45 208 Treasury 23167 0.1% 6 27 203472 0.7% 51 235 31 December 2016 SCISYS SIP 206700 0.7% 52 227 Treasury 12731 0.0% 3 14 219431 0.8% 55 241 Share capital and reserves Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 89 Operating lease arrangements At the balance sheet date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows 2017 2016 Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised as an expense in the year 331 260 Minimum sublease payments received during the year recognised as income in the year 313 293 Acquisition of subsidiary continued with the rest of the SCISYS Group operations.
These include the benefits of increased resilience from diversification into the wider media and broadcast sector extension of delivery capability into new technologies and cross selling opportunities for related services and products into the broadened overlapping customer base.
In addition SCISYS mature infrastructure will provide a more stable platform to support ANNOVAs geographical expansion plans.
The deferred payments comprise incremental earnout payments capped at 16480000 14117000 in total calculated by reference to multiples of between 8.5 and 10.5 times ANNOVAs average EBITDA performance for the financial years to 31 December 2016 2017 and 2018 less in each case an amount equal to 12500000 10708000 plus aggregate earnout payments already paid at the relevant point in time.
All of the earnout payments are conditional on the achievement of certain key commercial milestones in respect of the BBC Contract and are payable in cash or newly issued SCISYS PLC ordinary shares.
The extent to which the total consideration may be satisfied in new shares is subject to a maximum upper limit of 24 per cent.
The fair value of contingent consideration reflects management forecasts for EBITDA achievement over the earnout period capitalised by the relevant multiples with the cash flows being riskadjusted and discounted at the Groups prevailing discount rate of 10.5%.
This takes into account the associated risks on average to all the Groups security holders to finance its assets.
ANNOVA has contributed to the revenues and profits after tax of the Group in 2017.
At the balance sheet date the Group expected to receive future minimum lease payments under noncancellable subleases as follows 2017 2016 Within one year 1418 1160 In second to fifth years inclusive 2067 2501 Over five years 3157 2942 6642 6tel Total minimum sublease payments receivable 553 162 Operating lease payments primarily represent rentals payable by the Group for certain of its office properties.
Leases are typically negotiated for a minimum lease term of 3 to 5 years with rent reviews coinciding with the renewal dates.
The balance of rentals payable are for operating leases on office equipment.
Lease income is received from tenants of the Groups office properties and is shown in revenue in the Income
Sharebased payment charges The Group operates a number of share options plans as set out below.
The fair values of these schemes have been assessed using the Black Scholes model as appropriate to the scheme at the date of grant.
The fair values of the schemes are expensed over the period between grant and vesting.
Charges for sharebased payments under IFRS 2 have been recognised only for issues that were made after 7 November 2002 and had not vested at the transition date as prescribed by IFRS 2 for firsttime adoption.
Enterprise Management Incentives EMI scheme The Group established an EMI scheme in April 2007 to incentivise and aid retention of key employees.
EMI share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the EMI share option grants including EPS related conditions.
Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 90 Sharebased payment charges continued Number of share options Weighted average exercise price
Outstanding at 1 January 2016 675800 0.579 0.250 to 0.925 Granted during the period 132500 0.710 0.710 Exercised during the period 7800 0.463 0.463 Lapsed during the period 107500 0.925 0.925 Outstanding at 1 January 2017 693000 0.552 0.250 to 0.825 Granted during the period 137500 1.105 1.105 Exercised during the period 166500 0.424 0.250 to 0.463 Lapsed during the period 115000 0.825 0.825 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 549000 0.650 0.250 to 1.015 Expected volatility was determined by information that was then currently available to the Group.
09 Apr 2014 29 Apr 2015 21 Apr 2016 27 Apr 2017 Share price at grant 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Exercise price 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Expected life years 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 Expected volatility 40% 40% 40% 40% Risk free rate 4.5% 2.7% 2.3% 1.7% Expected dividends 1% 1% 1% 1% Fair value charge per share 0.235 0.131 0.098 0.107 The information below was used to calculate the IFRS 2 charge for the year.
Company Share Option Plan CSOP The Group introduced an HMRC approved CSOP scheme in January 2009 to incentivise and aid retention of key employees following changes in tax legislation which discontinued the favourable tax treatment for employees in the EMI scheme.
CSOP share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the CSOP share option grants including EPS related conditions.
If the CSOP share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the CSOP share options expire.
CSOP share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The credit recognised in the year was nil 2016 8000.
Unapproved share options Those Group employees subject to German payroll tax are unable to benefit from the favourable tax treatment available to UK employees through the EMI and CSOP schemes.
To incentivise and aid retention of these key employees they were awarded unapproved share options.
The unapproved share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the unapproved share option grants including EPS related conditions.
If the unapproved share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the options expire.
Unapproved share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The credit recognised in the year was nil 2016 6000.
Number of share options Weighted average exercise price
Outstanding at 1 January 2016 208469 0.463 0.463 Lapsed during the period 3356 0.463 0.463 Outstanding at 1 January 2017 205113 0.463 0.463 Lapsed during the period 1679 0.463 0.463 Exercised during the period 203434 0.463 0.463 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 If the EMI share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the EMI share options expire.
EMI share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The charge recognised in the year was nil 2016 nil Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 91 The Group results include those of the SCISYS Share Incentive Plan.
SCISYS Share Incentive Plan SIP The SCISYS PLC shares held in the SIP on behalf of SCISYS Group employees comprise Partnership Shares and Free Shares.
Partnership shares are purchased by employees under an HMRC approved plan from monthly payroll deductions.
The Free Shares were issued by the Group in October 2009.
The SIP is consolidated into the results of both the Group and the Company to the extent that the shareholding relates to the Free Shares in accordance with the principles of IAS 32 and the cost of the Free Shares is deducted from equity.
Administrative costs such as stamp duty dealing commission and legal fees are borne by the Group.
All costs are accounted for as they accrue.
Pensions
The Group operates a defined contribution group personal pension plan in the United Kingdom.
The pension charge for the year which represents contributions payable by the Group to these schemes together with the cost of retirement provision outside the United Kingdom amounted to 907000 2016 847000.
The balance of outstanding payments at 31 December 2017 was 154000 2016139000.
Related party transactions Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries and associate were based on arms length commercial terms.
Related party transactions arising from postinvestment trading with the Groups associate company ToMM Apps are summarised as follows 2017 2016 Operating costs incurred from purchases 39 78 Employees Share Trusts Sharebased payment charges continued The information below was used to calculate the IFRS 2 charge for the year Number of share options Weighted average exercise price Exercise price range Outstanding at 1 January 2016 959500 0.594 0.250 to 0.925 Granted during the period 205000 0.710 0.710 Lapsed during the period 158000 0.918 0.510 to 0.925 Exercised during the period 19000 0.506 0.505 to 0.510 Outstanding at 1 January 2017 987500 0.568 0.250 to 0.825 Granted during the period 202500 1.015 1.015 Lapsed during the period 205500 0.822 0.710 to 0.825 Exercised during the period 72000 0.440 0.250 to 0.520 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 912500 0.620 0.250 to 1.015 09 Apr 2014 29 Apr 2015 21 Apr 2016 27 Apr 2017 Share price at grant 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Exercise price 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Expected life years 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 Expected volatility 40% 40% 40% 40% Risk free rate 4.5% 2.7% 2.3% 1.7% Expected dividends 1% 1% 1% 1% Fair value charge per share 0.235 0.131 0.098 0.107 Expected volatility was determined by information that was then currently available to the Group.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 92 Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 92 In April 2017 the Company made awards of share options either unapproved or under a CSOP scheme to certain employees of the Group at an exercise price of 101.5p.
The Directors interests in the CSOP options are disclosed in the Remuneration report on page 48.
Of the 202500 CSOP and 137500 Unapproved options awarded to other employees senior managers receiving awards of over 10000 each are set out in the following table In May 2017 ANNOVA Systems GmbH Annova purchased software licences for a consideration of 150000 from plantri GmbH Plantri.
Until May 2017 Plantri was a 51% subsidiary of ANNEO Management GmbH Anneo a company owned by five Annova senior managers and directors one of whom M.
Schueller was also a Plantri director.
Anneo sold its shareholding in Plantri and M.
Schueller resigned as a director of Plantri in May 2017.
During the year Group companies entered into the following transactions with related parties who are not members of the Group Related party transactions continued No of share options D Gawthorpe 20000 KW Pieper 20000 A Whitehead 20000 H Wulf 20000 In May 2011 the SCISYS PLC Chairman Dr M D Love made a personal loan to the Group on arms length commercial terms for part financing of the purchase of the freehold in the Group headquarters offices in Chippenham.
The terms of the loan are detailed in note 21.
Dr M D Love also subscribed for 500000 of the first tranche of loan notes detailed in note 21 on the same commercial terms as other unrelated party investors.
A component of the funding structure for the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems GmbH on 31 December 2016 was a subordinated loan from the vendor ANNOVA Holding GmbH now ANNEO Management Holding GmbH which is owned by five senior employees of ANNOVA Systems
The terms of the loan are detailed in note 21 under reference 10.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report SCISYS PLC company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 93 Company balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 The accounts were approved by the Board of Directors on 13 April 2018 and were signed on its behalf by 2017 2016 Fixed assets Tangible assets 4 4680 4804 Investments 5 17029 17030 21709 21834 Current assets Debtors 6 2203 3291 Current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due within one year 7 3319 2838 Net current liabilityassets 1116 453 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 8 3372 3778 Net assets 17221 18509 Capital and reserves Calledup share capital 9 7329 7272 Share premium account 268 143 Merger reserve 943 943 Capital redemption reserve 83 83 Profit and loss account 8598 10068 Shareholders funds 17221 18509 Company registered number K M Heidrich
C A Cheetham
SCISYS PLC the Company financial statements are prepared on a goingconcern basis.
The Company balance sheet contains net current liabilities of 1116000 2016 453000 asset but the Board of Directors have no concerns regarding the effect on the Company due to the consolidated Groups net asset position and the Groups cashflow forecast.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 94 SCISYS PLC company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Company statement of Changes in Equity Share capital Share premium
Capital redemption reserve Profit and loss account Total equity Balance as at 1 January 2017 7068 18509 Total comprehensive income for the period Profit for the period Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Issue of new shares 57 125 Dividends paid Share based payment  Company Share based payment  subsidiaries Exercise of share options Total contributions by and distributions to owners 57 125 Balance as at 31 December 2017 7598 17221 Share capital Share premium
Capital redemption reserve Profit and loss account Total equity Balance as at 1 January 2016 7573 19014 Total comprehensive income for the period Profit for the period Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Contributions by and distributions to owners Dividends paid Share based payment  Company Share based payment  subsidiaries Exercise of share options Total contributions by and distributions to owners Balance as at 31 December 2016 7068 18509 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 95 Significant accounting policies The following accounting policies have been applied consistently in dealing with items which are considered material in relation to the financial statements except as noted below.
Basis of preparation These financial statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
The amendments to FRS 101 201415 Cycle issued in July 2015 and effective immediately have been applied.
In preparing these financial statements the Company applies the recognition measurement and disclosure requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs but makes amendments where necessary in order to comply with Companies Act 2006 and has set out below where advantage of the FRS 101 disclosure exemptions has been taken.
Under section s408 of the Companies Act 2006 the company is exempt from the requirement to present its own profit and loss account.
In these financial statements the company has applied the exemptions available under FRS 101 in respect of the following disclosures A Cash Flow Statement and related notes Comparative period reconciliations for share capital and tangible fixed assets Disclosures in respect of transactions with wholly owned subsidiaries Disclosures in respect of capital management The effects of new but not yet effective IFRSs and Disclosures in respect of the compensation of Key Management
As the consolidated financial statements include the equivalent disclosures the Company has also taken the exemptions under FRS 101 available in respect of the following disclosures IFRS 2 Share Based Payments in respect of group settled sharebased payments.
IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
IFRS 7 Financial Instrument.
The Company proposes to continue to adopt the reduced disclosure framework of FRS 101 in its next financial statements.
The accounting policies set out below have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently to all periods presented in these financial statements.
Investments
Fixed asset investments in subsidiaries are shown at cost less provision for impairment.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value.
Depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the asset as follows Freehold land Not depreciated Freehold buildings 50 years Computer equipment 2 to 7 years Sharebased payment transactions Employees including Executive Directors of the Company receive remuneration in the form of sharebased payment transactions whereby employees render services in exchange for shares or rights over shares equitysettled transactions.
The fair values of the share option schemes in operation have been assessed using the BlackScholes model as appropriate to each scheme at the date of grant.
The fair values of the schemes are expensed evenly over the period between grant and vesting.
Where share options and free issue shares are provided to employees of the Companys subsidiaries the IFRS 2 charge is added to the carrying value of the investment in subsidiaries and recycled in equity.
Recharges to subsidiaries by the Company which are clearly linked to the share based payment are considered to be capital transactions and are deducted from the cost of investment in the subsidiaries.
Employee share schemesOwn shares held Own shares held in the SCISYS Share Incentive Plan the SIP to the extent relating to the issue of free shares in October 2009 are treated as being those of the Company and are therefore reflected in the Company financial statements as follows Other assets and liabilities of the SIP are recognised as the assets and liabilities of the Company Consideration paid or received for the purchase or sale of the Companys own shares are shown in the reconciliation of movements in shareholders funds Finance costs and any administration expenses of the SIP are charged as they accrue Dividends on the free shares held in the SIP are paid to the employee owners.
The SIP has been aggregated with the results of the Company only to the extent that the underlying assets relate to the free share award in October 2009.
A further explanation is provided in note 12.
Foreign currencies Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the yearend exchange rate and gains or losses on translation are included in the profit and loss account.
Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 96 Profit for the year As permitted by Section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account for the year.
SCISYS PLC reported a loss for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 571000 2016 profit 166000.
This is stated after charging 3 Staff numbers and costs for the year Directors remuneration as set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 48 to 53 is borne by the Company and recharged to subsidiary undertakings.
2017 2016 Fees paid to the Companys auditors for the audit of the Companys audited accounts 23 40 Fees paid to the Companys auditors and their associates for other services to the Company No.
No.
The average number of persons employed by the Company during the year was as follows Management 8 6 Administration 000 000 The aggregate payroll costs of these persons were as follows 000 000 Wages and salaries 968 878 Social security costs 93 77 Pension costs 44 46 IFRS 2 share based payments chargecredit 1 3 1106 998 Freehold land and buildings
Cost not valuation At 1 January 2017 5282 167 5449
At 31 December 2017 5282 173 5455
At 1 January Charge for year 106 24 130 At 31 December Net book value at 31 December 2017 4585 95 4680 Net book value at 31 December 2016 4691 113 4804 Tangible fixed assets Investment in subsidiaries Cost and net book value At 1 January 2017 17030 Transfer of 89% of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH 10525 Increase in SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH 10525 Share based payments for awards to employees of subsidiaries 1 At 31 December 2017 17029 5 Investments Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 97 5 Investments continued In November 2016 in order to secure financing for the acquisition of ANNOVA Systems GmbH the Company invested in a newly created intermediate holding company SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH to act as the acquisition vehicle.
Subsequently the Company transferred 89% of its holding in SCISYS Deutschland GmbH to SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH.
The Company has investments in the following companies that affected the profits and net assets of the Group
Country of registration Principal activity Shareholding Class of shares SCISYS UK Limited UK Computer software and consultancy 100% 1 ords SCISYS Deutschland GmbH Germany Computer software and consultancy 11% Noparvalue shares representing 673400 Xibis Limited UK Computer software 100% 1 ords SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH Germany Holding company 100% Noparvalue shares representing 25000 ANNOVA Systems GmbH Germany Computer software 100% Noparvalue shares representing 325000 The investments in SCISYS UK Limited Xibis Limited SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH and 11% of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH are held directly by the Company.
100% of ANNOVA Systems GmbH and 89% of SCISYS Deutschland GmbH are held by SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH.
All investee companies principally operate in the country in which they are registered.
The registered addresses of related undertakings are as follows Company Registered address SCISYS UK Limited Xibis Limited 2 Methuen Park Chippenham Wiltshire SN14 0GB UK SCISYS Deutschland GmbH SCISYS Deutschland Holding GmbH Borgmann Str 2 44894 Bochum DE Annova Systems GmbH LyonelFeiningerStr 26 80807 Munich DE 6 Debtors 2017 2016 Amounts owed by Group undertakings 2178 3265 Other debtors 1 3 Prepayments and accrued income 24 23 2203 3tel Bank loans and overdrafts note 8 2407 1911 Trade creditors 85 169 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 271 Accruals 556 758 3319 2838 7 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 8 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 2017 2016 Loans 3372 3746
3372 3778 Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 98 8 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year continued 2017 2016 Bank overdrafts 2044 1352 Loans  due within one year 363 559 Total due within one year note 7 2407 1911 Loans  due after more than one year 3372 3746 5779 5657 9 Calledup share capital Allotted called up and fully paid No of shares 000 At the beginning of the year 29086075 7272 Issued during the year 232583 57 At the end of the year 29318658 7329 The Companys loans at the year end consist of a term loan of 1530000 being the balance remaining on a 5year term loan of 2450000 taken out in May 2011 as part finance for the freehold purchase of the Groups Chippenham headquarters on which the loan is secured.
Repayment is by equal monthly instalments on the basis of a 15year notional term.
The loan was renewed for a further 5 years in May 2016 with no variation in terms.
Interest is payable monthly at 3.0% p. in Chippenham.
Repayment is due on or before 23 May 2020.
Interest is payable 6 monthly at 5.25% p.
Xibis Limited.
The loan is repayable in equal monthly instalments until March 2018 and is secured by debentures granted by all three UK Group companies and a first legal charge over the Groups long leasehold property in Bristol.
Interest is payable quarterly at 2.5% p. the acquisition of Annova Systems GmbH.
The notes are repayable on the 3rd anniversary of the issue date and have secondranking security behind the senior debt providers.
Interest is payable quarterly at a fixed rate of 7.0% p.
Financial covenants attaching to loan 1 and loan notes 4 above are outlined in note 21 of the Group financial statements Borrowings are repayable as follows The Company has only one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
Shares issued during the year principally represented partpayment of deferred consideration relating to the ANNOVA Systems GmbH acquisition on 31 December 2016.
The balance of shares were issued to satisfy maturing employee share options when there was an insufficient stock of Treasury shares available for the purpose.
The new shares issued during 2009 were awarded free of charge to Group employees and are held in trust for the employees in the SCISYS Share Incentive Plan SIP.
The SIP purchased the shares with funds gifted to it by the Companys subsidiary SCISYS UK Limited.
SCISYS
PLC is regarded as the grantor of an equity settled share based payment arrangement to the subsidiarys employee beneficiaries.
The provision of funds by SCISYS UK Limited is treated as a clearly linked recharge and is deducted from the cost of investment in the subsidiary.
The analysis of own shares which are AIM listed investments held by the Company is No of own shares % of issued share capital
Market value 31 December 2017 SCISYS SIP 180305 0.6% 45 208 Treasury 23167 0.1% 6 27 203472 0.7% 51 235 31 December 2016 SCISYS SIP 206700 0.7% 52 227 Treasury 12731 0.0% 3 14 219431 0.8% 55 241 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 99 9 Calledup share capital continued The Company holds a stock of treasury shares to satisfy maturing employee share options and to provide the trustees of the SCISYS SIP with a contingent source of supply of SCISYS PLC shares in illiquid market conditions.
If the trustees are unable to acquire sufficient shares in the market with the funds from employees monthly payroll deductions the trustees purchase the shortfall from treasury at the prevailing market price.
The own shares held are deducted from retained earnings.
Other reserves The Share Premium Account was created when the Group issued free shares to employees in 2009.
It has been subsequently increased when new shares have been issued to satisfy maturing employee share options.
The Merger Reserve reflects the difference between the nominal value and agreed consideration value of shares issued as part consideration for the acquisition of SCISYS DE in 2007.
The Capital Redemption Reserve arises when the Company redeems shares wholly out of distributable profits.
10 Contingent liabilities The Company has given an unlimited bank guarantee in respect of its UK subsidiary company SCISYS UK Limited.
At 31 December 2017 the gross borrowings of this company were nil 2016 nil.
The Company operates a number of share options plans and a free share scheme as set out below.
The fair values of these schemes have been assessed using the BlackScholes model as appropriate to the scheme at the date of grant.
The fair values of the schemes are expensed over the period between grant and vesting.
Charges for sharebased payments under IFRS 2 have been recognised only for issues that were made after 7 November 2002 and had not vested at the transition date as prescribed by IFRS 2 for firsttime adoption.
Enterprise Management Incentives EMI scheme The group established an EMI scheme in April 2007 to incentivise and aid retention of key employees.
EMI share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the EMI share option grants including EPS related conditions.
If the EMI share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the EMI share options expire.
EMI share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The charge recognised in the year was nil 2016 nil.
The number of EMI options relating to SCISYS PLC employees at the year end was as follows 11 Sharebased payment charges Number of share options Weighted average exercise price Exercise price range Outstanding at 1 January 2016 and 1 January 2017 16889 0.463 0.463 Exercised during the period 16889 0.463 0.463 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 Company Share Option Plan CSOP The Group introduced an HMRC approved CSOP scheme in January 2009 to incentivise and aid retention of key employees following changes in tax legislation which discontinued the favourable tax treatment for employees in the EMI scheme.
CSOP share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the CSOP share option grants including EPS related conditions.
If the CSOP share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the CSOP share options expire.
CSOP share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 99 Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 100 11 Sharebased payment charges continued The information provided below was used to calculate the IFRS 2 charge for the year.
Expected volatility was determined by information that was then currently available to the Company.
09 Apr 2014 29 Apr 2015 21 Apr 2016 27 Apr 2017 Share price at grant 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Exercise price 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Expected life years 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 Expected volatility 40% 40% 40% 40% Risk free rate 4.5% 2.7% 2.3% 1.7% Expected dividends 1% 1% 1% 1% Fair value charge per share 0.235 0.131 0.098 0.107 Unapproved Share Options Those Company employees subject to German payroll tax are unable to benefit from the favourable tax treatment available to UK employees through the EMI and CSOP schemes.
To incentivise and aid retention of these key employees they were awarded unapproved share options.
The unapproved share options are exercisable at a price equal to the quoted midprice of SCISYS PLCs shares on the dealing day last preceding the date of grant.
The vesting period for the options is three years.
There are various performance conditions attaching to the unapproved share option grants including EPS related conditions.
If the unapproved share options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the options expire.
Unapproved share options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The charge recognised in the year was 1000 2016 credit 1000.
The number of unapproved share options relating to SCISYS PLC employees at the year end was as follows Number of share options Weighted average exercise price Exercise price range Outstanding at 1 January 2016 70000 0.719 0.510 to 0.925 Granted during the period 30000 0.710 0.710 Lapsed during the period 20000 0.925 0.925 Outstanding at 1 January 2017 80000 0.664 0.510 to 0.825 Granted during the period 30000 1.015 1.015 Lapsed during the period 20000 0.825 0.825 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 90000 0.664 0.510 to 0.825 Expected volatility was determined by information that was then currently available to the Company.
The credit recognised in the year was nil 2016 2000.
The number of CSOP options relating to SCISYS PLC employees at the year end was as follows Number of share options Weighted average exercise price
Outstanding at 1 January 2016 95000 0.664 0.250 to 0.925 Granted during the period 25750 0.710 0.710 Lapsed during the period 26250 0.925 0.925 Outstanding at 1 January 2017 94500 0.604 0.250 to 0.825 Granted during the period 30750 1.015 1.015 Lapsed during the period 26250 0.825 0.825 Outstanding at 31 December 2017 99000 0.517 0.250 to 1.015 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Notes forming part of the company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 101 11 Sharebased payment charges continued 09 Apr 2014 29 Apr 2015 21 Apr 2016 27 Apr 2017 Share price at grant 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Exercise price 0.925 0.825 0.710 1.015 Expected life years 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 Expected volatility 40% 40% 40% 40% Risk free rate 4.5% 2.7% 2.3% 1.7% Expected dividends 1% 1% 1% 1% Fair value charge per share 0.235 0.131 0.098 0.107 Expected volatility was determined by information that was then currently available to the Company.
12 Employee Share Trusts The Company results include those of the SCISYS Share Incentive Plan.
SCISYS Share Incentive Plan SIP The SCISYS PLC shares held in the SIP on behalf of SCISYS Group employees comprise Partnership Shares and Free Shares.
Partnership
Shares are purchased by employees under an HMRC approved plan from monthly payroll deductions.
The Free Shares were issued by the Company in October 2009.
The SIP is consolidated into the results of both the Group and the Company to the extent that the shareholding relates to the Free Shares.
Administrative costs such as stamp duty dealing commission and legal fees are borne by the Company.
All costs are accounted for as they accrue.
SCISYS PLC Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 102 Shareholder information financial calendar and advisers Shareholders Enquiries If you have an enquiry about the Companys business or about something affecting you as a shareholder other than queries that are dealt with by the Computershare as registrar you should contact the Company Secretary by letter to the Companys registered office or by email to email Share Register Computershare Investor Services PLC maintain the register of members of the Company.
If you have any questions about your personal holding of the Companys shares please contact Computershare Investor Services PLC The Pavilions Bridgwater Road Bristol BS13 8AE.
Telephone 44 0tel Fax 44 0sitesite investor.
If you change your name or address or if details on the envelope enclosing this Annual Report including your postcode are incorrect or incomplete please notify the registrars in writing or use their investor centre portal.
Daily Share Price Listings The Financial Times  AIM Financial Calendar Annual General Meeting 28 June 2018 Final dividend payable 27 July 2018 Expected announcement of results for the year ending 31 December 2018 Halfyear announcement September 2018 Fullyear preliminary announcement March 2019 Company Registered number .
SCISYS PLC is a company registered in England and Wales Dividend Tax Allowance The Company will continue to provide registered shareholders with a confirmation of the dividends paid by SCISYS PLC and this should be included with any other dividend income received when calculating and reporting their total dividend income.
It is the shareholders responsibility to take advice on their tax position and to include all dividend income when calculating any tax liability.
Registered Office Methuen Park
Wiltshire
SN14 0GB Registered in England and Wales number Sign up to Electronic Communications Help us to save paper and get your shareholder information quickly and securely by signing up to receive your shareholder communications by email.
Registering for electronic communications is very straightforward.
Just visit siteecomms.
All you need is your investor code which can be found on your share certificate or your dividend tax voucher.
Bankers
National Westminster Bank 32 Corn Street
BS99 7UG Legal Advisers Burges Salmon One Glass Wharf
BS2 0ZX
KPMG LLP 66 Queen Square
BS1 4BE Nominated Adviser and House Brokers finnCap Ltd 60 New Broad Street London EC2M 1JJ Trademarks To the extent permissible this material is provided for general information purposes only and is not intended to confer any legal rights on you.
Investors should determine for themselves whether any investment is suitable for their investment needs and seek professional advice for their particular situation.
The information is given as of the dates specified and is not updated.
Any forwardlooking statements are made subject to changes and uncertainties in market conditions which means that actual results may differ in material respects.
Our Group registered and unregistered trademarks include dira 2met egmc
PLENITER
SEAF
Digiright
SEAF
OpenMedia
Infinity
Now
Vision
NewsBoard
Cartosys SCISYS PLC Methuen Park
Wiltshire
