ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 REGISTERED COMPANY NUMBER MEDICA GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017
ON DELIVERING QUALITY RESULTS THE LEADING
UK PROVIDER OF RADIOLOGY
MEDICA GROUP PLC REPORTS A YEAR
Highlights 1 At a Glance 2 Strategic Report
Chairmans Statement 4
Investment Case 6 Market Overview 8 Business Model 10 In focus  clinical quality 12 Radiologist QandA 14
Chief Executives Review 16
Financial Review 20
Governance
Board of Directors 26 Corporate Governance Report 28 Report of the Audit Committee 32 Report of the Nominations Committee 34
Remuneration Committee Report 35
Directors Report 54
Independent Auditors Report
Financial Statements Consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income 62 Consolidated statement of financial position 63 Consolidated statement of cash flows 64 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 65 Notes to the financial statements 66 Company statement of financial position 84 Company statement of changes in equity 85 Notes to the financial statements continued 86 Company information IBC 1 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements Overview ANOTHER YEAR OF STRONG GROWTH 48.7% 82% 28.1%
FINANCIAL
OPERATIONAL HIGHLIGHTS
GROSS PROFIT MARGIN CASH CONVERSION ADJUSTED OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN site Visit us for our latest news and developments 18.2% REVENUE INCREASE t otal number of reported body parts increased by 7.7% from 1.35m in 2016 to 1.46m in 2017 n ightHawk volume increased by 31.1% c rosssectional volume increased by 23.8% Recruitment has again been strong throughout 2017 with the total number of radiologists including radiographers and rheumatologists contracting with Medica standing at 306 as at december 2017.
Medica provided services to 103 nHs t rusts and private providers in 2017 2016 99 eBItd A cash conversion is detailed in n ote 31 Adjusted operating profit margin is detailed in n ote 31 2 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 WHAT IS TELERADIOLOGY WHAT WE DO t eleradiology is the electronic transmission of radiological patient images including plain film xrays pF computerised tomography ct  scans and magnetic resonance imaging MRI scans from one location to another for the purposes of diagnostic interpretation and reporting. review and report on the images remotely.
In the case of Medica these are c onsultant Radiologists specialising in the relevant field who typically report on the image from their own home or from one of Medicas dedicated reporting centres. trained specialists 24 hours a day 365 days a year.
RAPID AVAILABILITY OF TRAINED SPECIALISTS Medica provides outsourced interpretation and reporting on MRI CT and plain film images.
The
Company currently offers three primary services to hospital radiology departments NightHawk an outof hours service routine crosssectional Routine CS reporting on MRI and CT scans and routine plain film Routine PF reporting on xray images.
Primary services less than an hour.
Routine CSPF Routine teleradiology reporting of cross sectional and plain film images.
Other services include
Fast daytime reporting 60 minutes.
Colonography s ubspeciality virtual colonoscopy service.
DXA
Flexible reporting by u K rheumatologists.
Radiographer reporting Quality assured radiographer plain film reporting service.
Audit
Highly experienced and robust external auditing service.
Mammography s ubspeciality symptomatic breast reporting.
MEDICA IS THE LARGEST TELERADIOLOGY PROVIDER BY REVENUE IN THE UK AT A GLANCE 3 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements Overview HOW WE DO IT Medica has a bespoke IT platform that provides marketleading linkage between a hospitals Radiology Information System RIS and Consultant Radiologists who contract with Medica. market.
Medicas contracted radiologists equivalence to n Hs inhouse reporting by providing the same radiology history and previous images that an inhouse radiologist would have access to.
What this means direct access to the hospitals RIs system and thus to a patients historical clinical records allows Medica radiologists to give the most complete and accurate reports adhering to the highest standards in the same way that the hospital based radiologist does.
Among other benefits Medica offers hospital radiology departments the ability to manage their workflow more efficiently and flexibly and provides rapid access to specialist c onsultant Radiologists who may not be available to that hospital at the relevant time or at all.
HOSPITALS
Image Store
Patient
Scan
Patient Booking Reporting System
Medica
Group
Radiologist reports directly into hospital
Current and Historic
Medica Radiologist Home OfficeHub Medica Server
Clinical Governance Framework and Support 24 Hour Technical and Administrative Support Secure Medica Firewall Unique technical solution to ensure optimal patient care.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 4 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 4 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 I am pleased to provide my Chairmans statement for Medica Group Plcs first year as a public company.
A STRONG PLATFORM FOR FUTURE GROWTH
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Ro Y dAVIs CHAIRMAN 5 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview In 2017 Medica continued to grow strongly and achieved another impressive set of results. increasing by 18% on last year. radiologists on the prior year.
In March 2017 Medica successfully listed on the Main Market of the l ondon stock exchange raising gross proceeds of 15m for the c ompany which were used to pay down the net debt of the Group to approximately 10m.
By the end of the year cash generation had further reduced the net debt to 5m and Medicas strengthened financial position provides us with a strong platform to support growth and future development of the Group.
Medica is well placed to pursue further organic and other growth opportunities to generate longterm value for shareholders. clinical quality.
Medicas strategy remains to provide the highest quality clinical services and to promote improvements in clinical quality across the u K.
Medicas goal is to work in partnership with n Hs t rusts and independent providers to reduce waiting times and improve patient outcomes. the u K.
Medicas key focus is to support n Hs t rusts at a time when they are dealing with increased demands for reporting against a backdrop of limited inhouse capacity. timely and costeffective manner.
Increasingly Medica is able to partner with clients to bridge geographical and specialist gaps across the u K.
Recruitment of radiologists has been strong in 2017 and is expected to continue to be so as Medica focuses on improving the radiologist reporting experience with Medica through strong technical support and robust clinical governance. reporting capacity in the u K.
Medicas employees have performed exceptionally well again in 2017 supporting clients and radiologists and always focused on trying to ensure the best patient care.
I have been impressed with the level of professionalism and dedication since joining Medica and express my gratitude on behalf of the Board to all of our staff for their contributions during the year.
Groups longterm growth.
Following the interim dividend of 0.55 pence for the period to 30 June 2017 the Board proposes a final dividend of 1.10 pence for the year ended 31 december 2017.
2017 and I believe we are well positioned to continue to create value for all shareholders by delivering high levels of service to our clients and helping to improve patient outcomes.
ROY DAVIS chairman RADIOLOGISTS CONTRACTING WITH MEDICA Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 6 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 6 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 6 LARGE POOL OF
RADIOLOGISTS
Medica contracts with 306 u K c onsultant Radiologists enabling us to provide increased capacity for our customers and a breadth of specialisms that an individual customer may not be able to employ.
EXPERIENCED TEAM t he senior management team has been with the business for an average of more than five years and includes a previous president of the British Institute of Radiology.
STRONG CLINICAL
We have established a highly experienced market leading clinical governance function. audit their own internal radiology departments.
ROBUST and SCALABLE
PLATFORM
We have invested in our bespoke It platform to provide a robust and secure connection with hospital radiology systems that can deliver a simple and quick service with enhanced functionality ultimately improving patient outcomes and providing a bespoke linkage between our customers and Medica Radiologists. to add new service lines.
A STRONG FOUNDATION FOR SUSTAINABLE PROFITABLE GROWTH INVESTMENT CASE 7 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview FAVOURABLE MACRO MARKET DYNAMICS t he number of scans is increasing underpinned by the drive for early diagnosis and preventative healthcare. of teleradiology.
CASH GENERATION t he Group continues to deliver strong cash generation with operating cash flow before tax and exceptional costs at 8.7m 2016 7.7m due to an increase in eBItd A and efficient use of working capital offset by expansionary capex incurred in order to deploy additional radiologists and new customers.
All of this resulted in eBItd A cash flow conversion of 82% 2016 84%.
STRONG
FINANCIAL
PERFORMANCE
Medica has enjoyed strong growth in recent years and this continued throughout 2016 with Group revenues growing by 18.2% to 33.7m 2016 28.5m and eBItd A growing by 15% to 10.6m 2016 9.2m.
HIGH LEVELS OF REPEAT REVENUES o ver 80% of revenue in the financial year ended 31 december 2017 was derived from customers who had worked with Medica for more than three years with strong revenue growth even from customers who have worked with Medica for over five years.
AVERAGE NIGHTHAWK TURN AROUND TIME 24mins 8 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 8 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 An increase in volume and complexity of diagnostic imaging examinations a shortfall in the supply of specialist radiologists and a requirement to update working practices to support a 7 day NHS combine to drive growth in teleradiology.
Market Drivers Growth in Aande admissions Requiring diagnostic imaging n ational Institute for c linical excellence n Ice  guidelines evolving to include more diagnostic imaging.
An ageing demographic Move to 7day working expected to further drive growth t echnical advances Means that more conditions are suitable for diagnostic reporting and more images being produced per scan.
Resulting in improved patient outcomes and reduction in overall cost.
Industry expectations For increased diagnostic response and reduced turnaround time particularly for stroke and cancer care becoming more demanding.
Demand has been highlighted with the news that Clinical Radiology is now on the national shortage occupation list.
The need for examinations continues to grow t he overall market by number of examinations is growing with crosssectional ct and MRI scans growing significantly faster than plain film examinations. demand for examinations.
In england from 20132016 the number of ct and MRI scans respectively rose by more than 30%  three times more than the rate of workforce growth.
Structural shortage of radiologists Hospitals have struggled to add sufficient specialist radiologist capacity particularly in certain areas within the u K. this solution.
While new c onsultant Radiologists are being trained the net increase after retirement of existing radiologists is not sufficient to meet the demand.
According to the Rc R the u K has the third lowest number of radiologist per population in the eu  with 7.5 radiologists per 100000 patients  the eu average is 12.7 per 100000.
In addition increased regional shortages can be an issue as can access to c onsultant Radiologists who are experts in specialist areas. t he Rc R c linical Radiology u K Workforce c ensus 2016 report 2016.
MARKET OVERVIEW A GROWTH MARKET Strong demand driven by NHS and independent healthcare groups.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview even with our support the Royal c ollege of Radiologists stated 230000 patients are currently waiting over a month for their radiology reports.
Key findings from the Rc R c linical Radiology u K Workforce c ensus 2016 report show that 8.5% of n Hs radiologist posts were vacant in 2016 of which 61% were unfilled for more than a year. their reporting requirements.
Medica Group are well placed to support the n Hs to meet this capacity gap.
Demand for radiographer reporting Radiologists are increasingly required to change their job plans away from plain film towards c rosss ectional and Interventional work to meet local needs.
Retiring radiologists also often undertake a higher than average percentage of plain Film reporting. reporting capacity.
Radiographer Reporting is widely adopted within the n Hs and Medica Group are working with Radiographers to offer high quality capacity and expertise.
In 2017 the percentage of our plain Film reporting undertaken by radiographers rose to 14%.
Demand for specialist services t he range of diagnostic imaging examinations being performed increases each year as technology improves.
Working alongside our clients Medica are developing a range of s pecialist Reporting s ervices. not available from local staff. examinations and tailored c ancer Reporting Rec Ist .
230k patients waiting over 1 month for radiology reports.
97% of radiology departments unable to meet requirements.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 10 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 10 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 INPUTS WHAT WE DO
Our people and expertise A dedicated and skilled team of over 89 staff 306 c onsultant Radiologists and a healthy recruitment pipeline.
Technology
Bespoke It platform that provides marketleading linkage between a hospitals Radiology Information system RIs and c onsultant Radiologists who contract with Medica.
Relationships
We are a respected partner to clients including the n Hs  private hospital groups and diagnostic imaging firms.
We are the u K market leader by revenue in the provision of teleradiology services i. interpretation and reporting on radiology images.
OUR CORE SERVICES Routine Routine teleradiology reporting of crosssectional and plain film images  48 hour turnaround time.
NightHawk o utofhours emergency ct and MR reporting  less than 60 minutes. t imely and accurate reporting of images is the most critical aspect of emergency teleradiology. the directors to be considerably shorter than the industry average.
DayHawk Fast daytime reporting 60 minutes.
Radiographer reporting Quality assured radiographer plain film reporting service 14% of plain Film Reporting completed by Radiographers in 2017.
Radiographer Reporting utilising highly skilled and qualified radiographers in addition to Medica Radiologists to conduct pF reporting.
Medicas deployment of Advanced practitioner Radiographers for pF reporting is focused on areas where radiographers are already widely utilised for this purpose in the n Hs . clinical excellence the service has now been introduced to a number of clients. plain Film Reporting allows more Medica Radiologist capacity to be focused on crosssectional reporting. in the n Hs by utilising Reporting Radiographers.
As a result Radiographer p lain Film continues to represent a growth opportunity for the c ompany and an enhancement of the support we are able to offer our customers.
CT colonography sub speciality virtual colonoscopy service.
Duel Energy Xray Absorptiometry DXA Flexible reporting by u K rheumatologists.
Cardiac CT Nuclear Medicine PET CT
Multiparametirc Prostate MRI Clinical Audit Highly experienced and robust external auditing service.
EXAMINATIONS PER YEAR ORGANISATIONS CONNECTED TO THAT CAN USE OUR TELERADIOLOGY SERVICES 37.2% OF REVENUES ROUTINE CS 10.9% OF REVENUES ROUTINE PF 49.8% OF REVENUES
Reinvestment
CREATING VALUE We use our resources and competitive advantage to create value that is shared with our stakeholders BUSINESS MODEL 11 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 11 HOW WE CREATE VALUE OUTCOMES What sets us apart strong clinical governance o ur scale and breadth of speciality interests o ur link to the hospital RIs system allows Medicas Radiologists not only to view the scan in question but also to see a patients radiology history including previous scans We contract with the largest pool of c onsultant Radiologists outside of the n Hs  all of whom have a minimum of two years experience o ur average turnaround time is believed to be considerably shorter than the average including inhouse radiology departments For Our clients t imely turnaround including outofhours assisting hospitals to manage workloads across a wide range of subspecialist expertise and helping patient outcomes via the rapid availability of trained specialists 24 hours per day 365 days per year.
For Our radiologists Attractive and flexible terms with ability to work from home and to focus on speciality interests.
Our Clinical governance As the provider of a highly skilled clinical service Medica places clinical governance and quality assurance and improvement at the heart of its service offering.
Medical Advisory Board MAB and a separate c linical Advisory Group c AG. by the c linical Governance c ommittee.
A role of clinical governance is to review radiologist performance and in doing so strive for continuous improvement in the standard of reporting of Medica Radiologists.
An example of this is the regular sharing of case reviews among the entire radiologist reporting group detailing complex cases and acting as learning and development tool for Medica Radiologists. maintain bestinclass service.
HOW WE WILL MAXIMISE VALUE CREATION Our strategy drive core services develop new service lines Grow nonn Hs o ffer clinical audit Radiographer reporting Reinvestment 12 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 IN FOCUS
QUALITY
Focused on delivering quality results THE BENEFITS Highly experienced clinical governance structure strong leadership from Medical director and c linical Advisory Group consisting of five members including past presidents of the British Institute of Radiology
Quality and 12 clinical s peciality l eads.
Stringent clinical selection and recruitment established and stringent clinical selection and recruitment process in line with GMc standards for the recruitment of doctors.
All Medica radiologists are required to be on the GMc s pecialist Register for clinical Radiology have a minimum of two years in an n Hs consultant post.
Market leading controls and support process in place c linical s upport and Audit providing Quality Assurance Quality control and c linical education All new radiologists initial reporting is audited. reporting. meetings. development support tools.
Governance function has led to customers approaching us to audit their own internal radiology departments.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview dR step Hen dAVIes MEDICAL DIRECTOR c linical quality is a cornerstone of the clinical governance in Medica.
Medica encourages its radiologists to adopt.
Radiologists guidance on l earning from discrepancies.
Medica works in partnership with its clients in the investigation and reporting of clinical incidents.
Where there are individual or organisational learning points Medicas learning culture and processes provides a path for quality improvement. development of special service lines. initiatives in the areas of acute stroke and major trauma management.
Key service developments underway are in the special service lines for cardiac and prostate imaging.
We expect to see further developments in the next 12 months in the special service lines.
Working in partnership with our client healthcare providers to deliver an effective clinical service has been a key focus in 2017 and will continue. key success factors for each client. image quality and protocols.
Medica has invested in growing the c linical Advisory structure in 2017 with further development plans in 2018. clinical service and meet the expected clinical quality standards of our clients.
STATEMENT FROM THE MEDICAL DIRECTOR DR STEPHEN DAVIES 14 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 14 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 What is your role within Medica and tell us a little more about what you do I have several different roles at Medica.
I have been a reporter for three years mostly reporting neurology and chest scans but I am also an auditor and arbitrator providing feedback to other radiologists on their discrepancies. complex cases.
I was also involved in assessing potential new areas for development in Medica including the use of artificial intelligence AI to measure and monitor lung nodules and to assess severity of disease in patients with emphysema.
I am a trained appraiser and carry out regular appraisals on Medica radiologists for whom Medica is their designated body.
I am also involved in writing annual reports for Medica radiologists to present at their n Hs appraisals.
I sit on the clinical governance committee which meets fortnightly to review all serious discrepancies root cause analyses and any concerns about performance of radiologists or radiographers.
I was appointed as clinical audit lead on 1st January 2018.
Its true to say now that NHS radiologists balance a variety of responsibilities  working in the NHS outofhours in private practice for teleradiology providers and teaching and research.
Youve also chosen to adopt the modern concept of a portfolio career why was this attractive to you I enjoy the variety of my job.
I can report from the convenience of my own home without constant interruptions which means I can really focus on what I am doing and provide timely and accurate reports.
My reporting lists are tailored to my areas of expertise and by reporting for a number of specialist neurological centres I feel I have been able to develop my expertise. as I go along which is great for learning.
It can be quite isolating working as a teleradiologist but Medica has a panel of clinical leads who are available to discuss interesting or difficult cases which is a great support.
I get to meet other radiologists in my role as appraiser and I work as part of a team with regular videoconferencing for the governance committee.
My hours for Medica are flexible which means that I have been able to take up a post at Brighton and sussex Medical school teaching the year two students which I thoroughly enjoy.
How important is it to strike worklife balance as a consultant radiologist and how has teleradiology helped you achieve that Having commuted to work for 15 years in the nHs I now report from home which means that I dont waste 23 hours per day travelling. reported in the morning. close family member.
With the majority of your doctors being remote how do you manage performance and quality and how do you quality assure your service the performance of all Medica radiologists is reviewed annually by a member of the clinical governance committee. which have arisen through reflection.
Medica also provide monthly educational reviews for radiologists which are based around interesting and informative cases which have been reviewed at the clinical governance committee.
Medica radiologists are also asked to submit interesting cases to an educational folder for inclusion in these reviews.
RADIOLOGIST QandA dR MAXIne M u RRAY RADIOLOGIST 15 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Does Medicas approach to Clinical Governance and Quality Assurance differ from the NHS and how All Medica radiologists undertake an entry audit in which all of their initial reports are audited for discrepancies. reporting.
Medica radiologists receive a monthly report which details their level of discrepancy and compares this with the Medica average.
All radiologists also receive an annual written report concerning their volume of reporting and discrepancy details for them to present at their nHs appraisal.
In the nHs it is unusual to have regular audit of a radiologists work and most discrepancies are raised on an informal ad hoc basis often through discrepancy review meetings.
Most nHs radiologists are not aware of their individual discrepancy rates.
Even the best doctors make some mistakes how do you reduce this risk and manage errors when they do occur Mistakes are an inevitable part of clinical practice.
By tailoring reporting lists to a particular radiologists experience Medica is able to reduce the risk of radiologists reporting beyond their expertise.
However when mistakes are made it is important to learn from them. process.
Medica radiologists are asked to reflect in writing upon their errors and to identify specific areas where they could improve their practice.
At the end of the year Medica radiologists are asked to review all of their discrepancies looking for patterns or trends which might be amenable to improvement. identify areas of the literature to review.
Tell us about the support network for doctors who work for Medica Working as a teleradiologist can be quite isolating but Medica provides a number of levels of support for radiologists. support by telephone 24 hours a day. with. unusual cases.
In terms of clinical governance all radiologists are provided with a monthly summary of their discrepancy rates but there is also a bespoke appraisal system for those radiologists that work outside the nHs for whom Medica is their designated body.
Appraisals are conducted annually by trained appraisers and are signed off by dr stephen davies as Responsible o fficer.
The demand for teleradiology is growing and we have touched upon how this setup benefits the NHS and doctors tell us how the teleradiology setup impacts patient care Radiology is becoming increasingly subspecialised and individual trusts may have difficulty providing an expert opinion particularly at short notice. an excellent position to provide timely expert advice. which is clearly of benefit to patients.
Urgent cases can be turned around in less than 24 minutes which is clearly of benefit to patients.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 16 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 ANOTHER YEAR OF STRONG GROWTH
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
I am proud to present my Chief Executives review for Medica Group Plcs first year as a public company.
Jo Hn GRAHAM CHIEF EXECUTIVE 17 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview
I am delighted to present my c hief executives Review statement for Medicas first year as a public company.
2017 has been a milestone year in the development of the Group with the successful listing on the Main Market of the l ondon stock exchange an important step in Medicas development. life as a public company.
I would like to thank the whole Medica team for their hard work and dedication this year and we are well positioned to take advantage of the many growth opportunities we see before us. teleradiology and beyond.
Delivered robust volume growth t his has been another strong year of doubledigit growth for Medica with revenue increasing by 18.2% from last year. growth in the year.
Routine c rosss ectional cs computerised tomography ct  and magnetic resonance imaging MRI reporting which saw scan volumes increase by 31.1% and 23.8% respectively.
Routine plain Film xray pF decreased by 5.9%. driven by several factors.
MRI scans performed across the u K increasing yearonyear and continued shortages of radiologists to provide increasingly complex diagnostic reports.
Medica as the market leader in teleradiology are leading the way to support the n Hs through the use of technology to bridge geographical and specialist gaps in resource and using its technical and clinical infrastructure to increase reporting productivity. outsourcing.
Increasingly n Hs t rusts are planning their activities around a deeper partnership with Medica and our services are more embedded within departments than ever before.
Although the overall proportion of scans outsourced remains modest the proportion is growing as the market develops.
Medica continues to attract new clients but the primary reason for growth is through additional reporting for existing customers.
Gross profit margin edged down from 49.8% to 48.7% as anticipated reflecting the ongoing renewal of the Groups contracts at marginally lower prices as the teleradiology market develops and outsourcing becomes normal practice.
Increases
Recruitment
Recruitment remained a key focus during 2017 and we significantly increased the number of radiologists from 248 at the start of the year to 306 at 31st december to meet growing market demand.
Investment
Word of mouth recommendations from existing Medica radiologists who contract with the Group has become the most significant factor in bringing new radiologists into the recruitment process to be converted by our skilled recruitment team.
In addition the Group maintains a presence at many specialist and national events and maintains a database of candidates for recruitment.
Medicas recruitment pipeline remains stronger than ever.
Continued investment and development during 2017 we have continued to invest in our clinical governance technical and operational infrastructure and processes and we continue to raise the bar for the quality of teleradiology services in the u K.
Medicas offering giving clients the confidence to outsource greater volumes and more complex work.
Work in this area has continued apace in 2017 with particular emphasis on improving the quality of clinical internal audit and managing clinical issues.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 As volumes grow it is important to continue to improve the operational processes so as to be able to deal with increasing volume whilst minimising cost increases. important than ever. continued in 2017.
As the volume of scans and the number of clients and radiologists continued to grow the scalable platform has expanded but it has been important that Medica has continued to innovate and improve its systems and that information security has remained at the heart of all we do.
Strategy t he directors have to date focused on building a platform that can deliver a high quality teleradiology service to the Groups core customer base of n Hs hospitals centred on its n ightHawk and Routine offerings. diversification.
Developing the core business t he Groups core strategy remains to develop and grow its business by adding additional Medica reporting capacity to meet growing demand maintaining the highest clinical standards and continuing to win new work for its existing service lines.
Having invested in the Groups It and services platform both in terms of the technical and clinical aspects and the ongoing recruitment of Medica radiologists the directors believe that the business can continue to grow strongly within its existing service lines.
Medicas strategy.
Medica will continue to improve the workflow for clients and radiologists and a good example is the forthcoming launch of a new n ightHawk portal and process. offer.
Increasing specialisation of radiologists and demand from clients will evolve the Routine cs service line and using Medicas substantial and growing pool of specialist radiologists Medica can offer national cover to the n Hs for specialist reporting services.
Radiographer reporting is a key growth area for the core business.
14% of the total pF exams in 2017. minimising backlogs.
Medicas core business.
Accelerating expansion into related areas Medica has developed specialist reporting lines including virtual colonoscopy and dual energy xray absorptiometry dXA o steoporosis scanning.
Medicas business and the next stage is to increase the number of clients using these services.
Most recently we have developed a c ardiac reporting service which has launched in the first quarter of 2018 and there are other specialist services currently under development.
After an initial piloting stage these services can be expanded to new and existing clients.
Medica radiologists.
Having been approached by our customers and others to audit their own inhouse radiology departments there is a clear opportunity to market this service to existing and new clients.
Medica has developed bespoke software in 2017 to facilitate this service with a view to growing demand in 2018.
Broader Opportunities t he directors believe that there are a number of wider telehealth and broader healthcare opportunities that the Group would be wellplaced to take advantage of.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW CONTINUED 19
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview t hese are considered longerterm opportunities and would likely require investment in additional expertise to augment that already in place and in some circumstances may be better achieved through acquisition. opportunities in coming periods.
Outlook
As the market evolves the Board is confident that in the short to medium term Medica will continue to grow revenues at a doubledigit rate similar to that seen in 2017.
JOHN GRAHAM c hief executive o fficer 12 March 2018 20 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 20 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Medicas strong growth has continued throughout 2017.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER
FINANCIAL REVIEW
POSITIVE POSITION FOR FUTURE GROWTH 21 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview A review of the business during the year its strategy and business model future developments and its position at the yearend is included within the c hairman and c hief executives Reviews on pages 45 and 1619.
Both these reports form an integral part of the strategic Report.
Trading results Medica has enjoyed strong growth in recent years and this continued throughout 2017 with Group revenues growing by 18.2% to 33.7m 2016 28.5m and adjusted operating profit growing by 16.4% to 9.5m 2016 8.1m.
3.32m to 4.33m and adjusted basic earnings per share increased by 20.2% from 3.32 pence to 3.99 pence.
Adjusted profit after tax increased by 51% from 4.98m to 7.52m and adjusted basic earnings per share increased by 39.0% from 4.98 pence to 6.92 pence.
A full reconciliation between statutory and adjusted profit metrics is shown in n ote 31.
Revenue
Revenue growth has been driven by an increase in the number of n ightHawk and Routine cs scans which Medica has reported upon.
16.8m a 24.1% increase from 2016 revenue of 13.5m. as new client wins.
Routine c rosssectional revenues increased to 12.5m a 19.4% increase from 2016 revenue of similarly to n ightHawk growth has been driven primarily through existing customers as their scan volumes increased and Medica enhanced its partnership with t rusts reporting a greater quantity and proportion of their work as well as new customer wins.
3.7m a 5.4% decrease from 2016 revenue of 3.9m. c rosss ectional service.
Radiographer reporting from launching in August 2016 started in a controlled way but increased during the year. revenue growth.
Medica added an additional net 58 reporters in 2017 and at 31 december 2017 there were a total of 306 with whom Medica contracted which is a record high for the c ompany.
Gross margins Gross profit margin for the year was 48.7% 2016 49.8%.
Gross profit margin edged down in the year as expected. migration to framework agreements. continue. compensated by increases in volume. its service lines.
In 2017 the gross margins for each service line were as follows nightHawk 50.5% Routine c rosss ectional 52.1% Routine plain Film 49.4% t he only costs included within cost of sales relate to the costs of paying Medicas radiologists and internal clinical audit costs.
Internal clinical audit costs which can be significant are not included within the individual service line gross profit figures above.
Adjusted operating profit Adjusted operating profit for the year grew to 9.5m a 16.4% increase from 2016 levels of 8.1m. overheads in the year. constrained by margin contraction. business.
28.5% in 2016 to 28.1% in 2017.
Exceptional costs t he total costs of listing on the l ondon stock exchange were 2.6m of which 0.8m were recognised in 2016 and 1.8m in 2017. statement. earnings per share.
In addition part of the proceeds were used to repay bank debt and previously capitalised fees of 0.6m have been presented as exceptional financing costs and have also been added back in to calculate adjusted profit before tax and adjusted earnings per share.
Net finance expense Finance costs were 0.7m for the year 2016 2.2m.
10m reducing its bank debt and repaying loan notes from c Bpe c apital llp  the majority owners of Medica prior to the Ipo in full.
Taxation t he Group has incurred a tax charge of 1.3m in the year ended 31 december 2017 compared with 1.0m in the year ended 31 december 2016.
Earnings per share Adjusted earnings per share increased by 39.0% to 6.92 pence reflecting the growth in the business and the altered capital structure post listing. increased by 20.2% to 3.99 pence.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
1.10 pence per share to give a total dividend for the year ended 31 december 2017 of 1.65p per share.
22 June to shareholders listed on the register on 1 June.
Cash flow t he Group continues to deliver strong cash generation with operating cash flow before tax and exceptional Ipo costs of 8.7m 2016 7.7m.
82% 2016 84%.
6.8m the reduction being due to exceptional costs. settling their invoices. in their administrative processes. cash flows from its core business.
1.2m as the business continued to invest in its infrastructure to support volume growth and to improve its efficiency and service offering.
Net debt t he c ompany used the net proceeds of the Ipo to fund the repayment of the 6.9m of outstanding loan notes held by c Bpe as well as contributing to the repayment of 8.6m of the Groups outstanding indebtedness under the Groups existing term loan and revolving credit facilities which the directors believe will result in an appropriate level of gearing going forward given the size of the Group and the c ompanys status as a listed company.
Following this repayment the c ompany had net debt of approximately 10m which reduced to 5m as the business generated cash during the year. proceeds of the o ffer. a 1m revolving credit facility.
Both facilities will mature on 6 March 2022 being the fifth anniversary of entry into the n ew Facilities.
Interest
As at the balance sheet date the revolving credit facility was undrawn.
Intangible assets As at the yearend total intangible assets were 25.2m 31 december 2016 25.3m.
15.9m and other intangible assets from the acquisition by the c ompany of Medica Reporting l imited in May 2013.
In addition there is a small proportion which at the yearend was 1.3m year ended 31 december 2015 0.6m in relation to purchased software and certain capitalised development software and licences. contract for a fiveyear period.
Property plant and equipment As at the yearend total value of property plant and equipment was 1.9m 31 d ecember 2016 1.8m. infrastructure technology. i. software for new projects.
Key Performance Indicators the Group. well as financial KpIs.
As noted above 2017 was a year of record volume and as the business grows a key challenge for the Group is to maintain turnaround times ahead of contractual agreements with clients.
2016s performance.
Medicas performance and we have a robust system of internal clinical audit where 10% of n ightHawk and c rosss ectional exams and 2% of plain Film exams are reviewed. rates. for the year to 31 december 2016.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED 23
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Principal risks and uncertainties t here are potential risks and uncertainties which could impact the Groups performance and these are considered by the Board on a regular basis. in the external environment and in the Groups operations.
RISK DESCRIPTION MITIGATING ACTIVITIES AND
2017 COMMENTARY Clinical quality risk Medica provides radiology reports which form an integral and essential part of the clinical management process for patients.
Inaccurate
Retaining and growing reporting capacity t he performance of the Group depends on its ability to grow its reporting capacity and any reduction in reporting capacity or any increase in reporting costs could negatively impact the Groups business results of operations financial condition or prospects.
If the Groups costs increase its results of operations and financial condition could be materially adversely affected. u K. part of recruitment strategy.
Retention policy is based on providing a comprehensive support structure to Medica radiologists from all parts of the business.
306 maintains a dedicated recruitment team and continues to have a strong pipeline of new recruits.
Reputational risk Quality deficiencies or other issues affecting the Groups accreditations and registrations could adversely impact Medicas reputation and ability to market its services effectively and could have a negative impact on the Groups business results of operations financial condition and prospects.
Iso90012015 and Iso 270012013 certifications as well as maintaining our IG t oolkit compliance and IsAs accreditation.
Failure to retain key management t he Groups executive management team is critical to its continued performance.
As noted in the remuneration report the Group has policies in place to retain and motivate key management which are kept under regular review. n o change.
Industry risk Future changes in healthcare regulation are difficult to predict and may constrain the Group or require it to materially alter the way in which it operates. regulation and on an ongoing basis.
2017.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 24 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
RISK DESCRIPTION MITIGATING ACTIVITIES AND
2017 COMMENTARY Operating risk t he Group currently derives substantially all of its revenue from the n Hs through n Hs t rusts and the reduction of such revenue could adversely impact the Groups business results of operations and financial condition.
Groups services could have a material adverse effect on its business results of operations and financial condition. teleradiology services. team.
2017 and continues to develop its services and be valued by clients. restraints on n Hs budgets.
Data protection risk t he Group is subject to regulations relating to personal information.
Any failure to adequately protect its customers patients personal data could expose the Group to liability. tests on its data security systems. compliance during 2017.
May 2018 deadline.
2017.
Competition risk s ignificant competition could adversely affect the Groups business financial condition and prospects. team. expectations.
Technology risk t he Groups business could be disrupted if its information systems fail or if its databases are destroyed or damaged.
Artificial intelligence could play a role in radiology diagnosis and this represents both a risk and an opportunity. performance of the It systems.
Group continues to keep up to date with innovations in AI and other areas. and improve efficiency. in 2017.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Financial risk management t he directors have outlined the key financial risks facing the business and have discussed the processes in place to mitigate these risks in n ote Social community and human rights issues Medica is committed to the principles of responsible business this is achieved by acting in an ethical manner developing positive relationships with suppliers and recruiting and retaining successful and responsible employees.
Whilst Medica does not have a specific human rights policy it does have policies covering equal o pportunities and Antibribery that adhere to internationally proclaimed human rights principles.
Environment
Medica actively considers its environmental impact and we are conscious of playing our part in tackling climate change.
As a technologybased Group with most staff employed in one office location and radiologists contracted mainly from their own homes we believe our own environmental footprint is small. companies Act 2006. combustion of fuel. purchases and uses.
Groups direct control. emission for the year is zero.
2 emissions are limited to the Groups head office building and the calculations are derived from electricity meter readings.
22.6 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. disclosure for s cope 3 emissions. equivalent employee ratio. benchmark against.
2017 are 0.25 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent.
Employees o ur people are our most valued asset they are vital to Medicas success and growth and we are proud of the mixture of talent and experience they bring.
We strive to make Medica a great place to work and this enables us to attract and retain the best talent and provide the best service for both our clients and radiologists.
Medica has a firm commitment to equality of opportunity in all our employment policies practices and procedures. disability and marital status.
We recognise that a diverse workforce will provide a wide range of perspectives that promotes innovation and business success. discriminated against.
At 31 december 2017 the Group had 88 full time employees and 5 part time staff of which 66 were male and 27 were female. male and one was female.
Board on 12 March 2018 and signed on its behalf.
ANTHONY LEE c hief Financial officer 12 March 2018 26 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS Roy is the c ompanys chairman.
Roy served as the c hief executive o fficer of o ptos plc a leading opthalmology medical device business from 2008 until June 2016 when he stepped down following that companys acquisition by n ikon.
Before joining o ptos he served from 2007 as c hief executive o fficer of Gyrus Group plc a leading medical device company prior to its acquisition by the o lympus c orporation of Japan in 2008 having previously served as c hief o perating o fficer of Gyrus from 2003. and Global Head of its operations management business.
He has also held senior positions with t ricom Reuters and Molex.
Roy holds a mechanical engineering degree from the u niversity of s outhampton and an MBA from the l ondon Business s chool.
ROY DAVIS Independent Chairman John joined Medica as c hief executive in July 2011.
John brings a wealth of experience from his previous healthcare role as Managing director of Allied Respiratory a subsidiary of Allied Healthcare group where he turned a lossmaking business into a successful company before leading the sale of Allied Respiratory to Air l iquide.
He subsequently remained with Air l iquide managing the standalone Allied Respiratory business and then leading the integration of their u K acquisitions. products manufacturing and distribution.
JOHN GRAHAM
Chief Executive Officer
TONY LEE Chief Financial Officer stephen joined Medica in May 2013 as Medical director.
He has responsibility for c linical Governance and oversight of the c linical strategy and is the Groups Responsible o fficer under the GMc designated Body s cheme.
Radiologist at c wm t af u niversity Health Board from 1991 until 2016. clinical studies at t he Royal l ondon Hospital.
He is a past president of both the British Institute of Radiology and the u K Radiology c ongress.
In o ctober 2015 he was awarded the distinguished s ervice Medal by t he British Institute of Radiology.
He has had educational l eadership positions as Associate dean in the u niversity of Wales and educational engagement with the Royal c ollege of Radiologists.
DR STEPHEN DAVIES MA FRCP FRCR Medical Director and Responsible Officer 27 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview steve currently serves as Finance director of dignity plc the only listed provider of funeralrelated services.
He joined dignity in 1999 from KpMG and was appointed Finance director at the beginning of 2009 having spent the previous two years as Financial c ontroller being responsible for the Groups finance function. and equity funding for a 58 million acquisition in 2013.
He is an Fc A and holds a mathematics degree from Warwick u niversity.
STEVE WHITTERN Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Having started his career in hospital medicine specialising in oncology Mike became a General practitioner in 1989 and was a partner in a local Gp practice in c umbria for 20 years until 2009.
Alongside his general practice he developed an interest in education and assessment and became a senior examiner and c hair of Assessment at the Royal c ollege of General practitioners.
In 2008 he was recruited to be the Medical d irector for the c umbria primary c are t rust subsequently serving as Regional Managing director for n Hs e ngland and in 2013 became the national deputy Medical director for n Hs e ngland reporting to sir Bruce Keogh.
Mike took early retirement from the n Hs in 2015.
He undertook his preclinical and clinical studies at st Marys Hospital Medical s chool l ondon.
PROFESSOR MIKE BEWICK Independent NonExecutive Director Anand joined Medica in May 2013 as a nonexecutive director and has supported the business in formulating and executing its strategy.
He is a partner in c Bpe c apital and a member of its investment committee. on businesses in the healthcare and pharmaceutical sector.
Andersen and then deloitte.
He has a degree in mathematics from the u niversity of n ottingham.
ANAND JAIN NonExecutive Director 28 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT
Governance c ode 2016 the code issued by the Financial Reporting c ouncil FRc  as required by the l isting Rules of the Financial Reporting c ouncil FRc and meets the relevant information provisions of the disclosure and t ransparency rules of the Fc A. t he Groups governance principles and structure. committees.
Relations with the Groups shareholders. t he reports of the Audit and n omination c ommittees. t he Remuneration c ommittee report and policy. described on pages 23 to 24. included in the statement of corporate governance.
Statement of Compliance Medica Group plc became a public company upon admission to the Main Market of the l ondon stock exchange on 21 March 2017.
Governance c ode 2016 and did not adopt the provisions on a voluntary basis but did develop the mechanisms to apply the c ode post listing. of the c ode.
For the period after admission the Group has complied with the principles and provisions of the code.
Governance Principles Good governance is important at all levels in the organisation and the Board is committed to maintaining the highest standards for the Group.
All shareholders and other stakeholders should have confidence in the governance of the Group and the Board has adopted the core Governance principles as set out in the c ode.
Leadership  t he Board is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the c ompany and will operate according to the principles of sound governance.
Effectiveness  t he Board is committed to be strong open and effective and will maintain the appropriate balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the company.
Accountability  t he Board will present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups position and prospects and will ensure the implementation and measurement of effective controls.
Remuneration  t he Board will ensure executive remuneration is designed to promote the longterm success of the Group and that a formal and transparent procedure for developing policy on executive remuneration is adhered to.
Relations with shareholders  t he Board will maintain a strong open and transparent twoway dialogue with shareholders based on the mutual understanding of objectives.
OUR
GOVERNANCE
PRINCIPLES
Leadership
Effectiveness
Accountability
Remuneration
Shareholder
Relations
Board of Directors Audit Committee
Nomination Committee
Roy davis Remuneration Committee
Mike Bewick Principal Committees Audit nomination Remuneration 29 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview The role of the Board t he Board are collectively responsible to shareholders for the overall direction of the Group.
Group whilst ensuring the highest standards of corporate governance. o verall leadership of the Group. of the Group. management planning and operating systems.
Monitoring and management of key business risks and internal controls.
Approving annual budgets and reviewing performance against aims and objectives.
Approval of significant financial expenditure including mergers and acquisitions.
Approval of structural changes to the Group.
Approval of Board membership and other senior management appointments or management structural changes. shareholders.
Division of Responsibilities The Chairman t he c hairman is responsible for chairing the Board meetings and setting the agenda to ensure that all important matters are discussed. integrity probity and corporate governance. with stakeholders.
The Chief Executive and other Executive Directors t he c hief executive and other executive directors are responsible for the operational management and control of the Group. strategy once it is adopted by the Board.
NonExecutive Directors t he n onexecutive directors are responsible for scrutinising measuring and reviewing the performance of the executive team. risk management systems for the Group. four n onexecutive directors.
Senior Independent Director t he s enior Independent n onexecutive provides a sounding board for the c hairman and acts as an intermediary for other directors if needed.
Board Committees t here are three standing c ommittees of the Board the Audit c ommittee the Remuneration c ommittee and the n ominations c ommittee. website and their reports are set out on pages 32 to 53.
The Audit Committee t he Audit c ommittee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the financial reporting process risk management and internal control ensuring compliance with u K reporting standards.
Remuneration Committee t he Remuneration c ommittee is responsible for the development and implementation of the Groups remuneration framework and policies for directors and to ensure that these support the strategic aims of a business while also complying with the requirements of regulation.
Nomination Committee t he n omination c ommittee is responsible for the structure of the Board providing advice on Board and s enior Management appointments and succession planning and monitoring the composition of the Board and its committees.
Board composition and independence At the date of this report the Board comprises three executive directors and four n onexecutive directors. and experience. independent judgement. such contact is inappropriate.
Independent director. obligations as directors. every three years.
All of the directors retired and were reelected at the first Annual General Meeting held after
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED Board Operation t here are usually 11 scheduled Board meetings each year including one meeting dedicated to the consideration of the Groups strategy.
Additional meetings can be arranged at short notice at the request of any director.
In addition to scheduled Board meetings there is a regular informal dialogue between all directors. at Board meetings. indicators. from the Medical director. the Medical director also the Groups Responsible o fficer. press information relating to the Group.
When directors are unable to attend a meeting they are advised of the matters to be discussed and given an opportunity to make their views known to the c hairman prior to the meeting. minutes of the meeting if necessary. meeting.
All directors received training during the year on their duties and responsibilities as directors of a public company and this will be refreshed annually.
All directors are able to request access to additional training as appropriate and all directors are able to take independent professional advice relating to their duties if necessary at the c ompanys expense.
Board and Committee attendance t he attendance of Board members at meetings are shown below. c ommittee meetings was by invitation. s ecretary is also s ecretary to each of the c ommittees.
Board Audit Remuneration n omination Total meetings Roy davis steve Whittern professor Mike Bewick Anand Jain John Graham 7 2 na na dr stephen davies 7 na na na Anthony l ee Activities of the Board t he primary focus for the Board at the start of the year was to lead the Group through the Initial public o ffering and admission to the Main Market of the l ondon stock exchange. legal and regulatory requirements were met and that all stakeholders were represented in the process.
Admission the Board focused on its core areas of responsibility and the key activities for the year are set out below.
Strategy and Direction t he Groups core strategy and direction was set out in detail in the Groups prospectus prior to admission and has been reviewed and monitored by the Board throughout the period.
In n ovember the Board together with members of the senior management team held a twoday meeting to review and assess the core business strategy and the wider opportunities and risks for the business. longerterm business plan.
Performance Monitoring t he Board reviewed monthly updates on the business performance in relation to analyst forecasts and business plan. activities and other key performance indicators.
Shareholder Engagement t he Board received investor feedback from the executive directors throughout the year particularly following results announcements and investor roadshows. and analysis of significant changes to the shareholder register.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Governance and Risk t he Board keeps key risk areas under constant review with a detailed review performed as part of the prospectus and upon approval of the Groups interim and full year results. risk and clinical litigation as well as on cyber security.
Financial Review on pages 20 to 25.
Board evaluation After the yearend the n ominations c ommittee coordinated an internal selfassessment Board evaluation.
Boards strengths improvements during the year and areas for additional focus. challenge from n onexecutives.
Risk management and internal controls t he Board is responsible for maintaining a sound system of internal controls including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management and reviews the effectiveness of the system at least annually in order to safeguard shareholders investment and the c ompanys assets. absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss. regularly reviewed by the Board. managed.
Management are responsible for the identification and evaluation of significant risks applicable to their areas of business together with the design and operation of suitable internal controls.
Relationship with Shareholders t he Group recognises the importance of clear communication with shareholders.
Regular contact with institutional investors fund managers and analysts is maintained by the c hief executive and the c hief Financial o fficer to discuss information made public by the Group. by the Board.
Where appropriate or if requested such meetings could include either or both the c hairman or s enior Independent director. with the major shareholders. t he AGM provides an opportunity to meet the Board.
All shareholders are free to attend and put questions to any director and in particular the c hairman of each of the Board c ommittees at the AGM on 23 May 2018.
At least 20 days notice will be given ahead of that meeting.
Annual Report and Accounts are made available to all shareholders at least 20 days before the AGM.
General Meeting issue shares within the limits prescribed within the resolutions.
At the 2017 AGM held on 28 June 2017 the directors were authorised to issue new o rdinary s hares i up to a maximum of 148148.16 nominal value which at the time represented approximately two thirds of the c ompanys issued o rdinary s hare capital in connection with a rights issue and ii in any other case up to a maximum of 74074.08 nominal value which at the time represented approximately one third of the c ompanys issued o rdinary s hare capital and to disapply preemption rights up to approximately 5% of the c ompanys issued o rdinary s hare capital and an additional 5% authority only in connection with an acquisition or specified capital investment.
In addition at the c ompanys 2017 AGM the Board was authorised to make market purchases of its o rdinary s hares up to a maximum of 11111111 o rdinary s hares representing approximately 10% of the c ompanys issued o rdinary s hare capital and within the limits prescribed in the resolution until the earlier of the conclusion of the c ompanys 2018 AGM and 27 september 2018. sought at the c ompanys 2018 AGM. report on pages 54 to 56.
Summary t he directors consider that this Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model risks and strategy.
In order to assess whether the Annual Report and Accounts were fair balanced and understandable the Board received an early draft to enable time for review and comment. nonfinancial management information.
At the meeting they considered the Annual Report and Accounts as a whole and discussed the tone balance and language of the document being mindful of the u K reporting requirements and consistency between narrative sections and financial statements.
As part of the process the Board considered the Groups reporting governance framework and the views of the external auditor as reported to the Audit c ommittee.
By order of the Board ANTHONY LEE company s ecretary 12 March 2018 32 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities in relation to financial reporting risk management and external and internal controls.
The ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the Annual Report and Accounts and the half yearly reports remains with the
The Audit Committee gives due consideration to laws and regulations the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the requirements of the Listing
Introduction
Its primary functions are to Monitor the integrity of the financial statements and other information provided to shareholders to ensure they represent a clear and accurate assessment of the Groups position performance strategy and prospects.
Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced understandable and provides information necessary for shareholders to assess the performance business model and strategy of the Group.
Review significant financial reporting issues and judgements contained in the financial statements.
Review the systems of accounting internal control and risk management.
Monitor and review the significant risks identified by the Group as well as the management and mitigation of those risks.
Make recommendations in relation to the appointment of the external auditors including their remuneration and the provision by them of any nonaudit services. external audit process.
Monitor and review the arrangements by which employees can in confidence raise concerns about any possible improprieties in financial and other matters such as compliance with the Bribery Act.
Membership and meetings t he Audit c ommittee is chaired by steve Whittern and its other members are Roy davis and professor Mike Bewick all of whom are considered independent. relevant financial experience. otherwise as circumstances require. members attended each meeting. executive director attended meetings by invitation.
STEVE WHITTERN c hairman of the Audit c ommittee 33 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Principal activities for the year during 2017 the primary activities of the committee were in relation to the Groups reporting cycle.
It reviewed the financial statements in the 2016 and 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and the 2017 Interim Report.
As part of this review the c ommittee received reports from the external auditors on their audit of that Annual Report and their review of the interim results.
It also reviewed the preliminary and Interim Announcements made to the l ondon stock exchange.
Formally reviewed the going concern assumptions adopted in the preparation of the 2016 and 2017 financial statements. approach to key accounting areas. accounting matters at the conclusion of the audit.
Grant t hornton in the audit of the 2017 financial statements as revenue recognition and discussed with them how this was to be addressed. costs. standards effective in 2018.
Grant t horntons approach and detailed transactional testing.
Nonaudit services provided by the external auditor n onaudit services provided by the c ompanys auditor are kept under review by the c ommittee. accountants in relation to the Groups listing. auditors. director. with auditor independence.
Fees payable to the auditors are set out in n ote 6 on page 72.
Effectiveness and independence of external auditor Grant t hornton u K llp has been the external auditor to Medica Group plc since 2013.
As part of this years decision to recommend the reappointment of the auditor the c ommittee has taken into account the tenure of the auditor and the need to consider at least every ten years whether there should be a full tender process.
Audit c ommittees choice of external auditor.
In accordance with the auditor independence requirements of the revised ethical standard effective 11 June 2016 Grant t hornton u K llp s appointment as auditor cannot be extended beyond the year ending 31 december 2027 without an open tender process taking place. an open tender process.
Grant t hornton u K llp could serve as auditor for a further ten years subsequent to the audit for the year ending 31 december 2027.
Grant t hornton u K llp no longer provide corporation tax compliance services to the c ompany.
Board on the appointment of the auditor assessing their independence and formulating policy on the award of nonaudit work. efficiency.
As a consequence of its satisfaction with the results of its review of the activities outlined above the c ommittee has recommended to the Board that the external auditors are reappointed by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
At the conclusion of each years audit the performance of the external auditor is reviewed by the c ommittee with the executive directors covering such areas as quality of audit team business understanding audit approach and process management.
Where appropriate actions are agreed against the points raised and subsequently monitored for progress. year.
Internal audit function t he c ommittee concluded in 2017 that there was no requirement for the Group to have an internal audit function due to its size and complexity. an annual basis.
STEVE WHITTERN c hairman of the Audit c ommittee 12 March 2018 34 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 REPORT OF THE NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE The Nomination Committees role is to regularly review the structure size and composition of the Board to ensure the skills knowledge and experience matches the requirements of the business.
Introduction
Membership and meetings Roy davis is the chair of the c ommittee and the other members are steve Whittern Mike Bewick and Anand require. members attended.
Board induction All Board members undertook induction training on their responsibilities and duties as directors prior to the Initial public o ffering.
Activities in 2017 t he c ommittee met once in 2017 and reviewed the composition of the Board and the processes surrounding succession planning. suitable for the business to continue to develop.
ROY DAVIS c hairman of n ominations committee 12 March 2018 ROY DAVIS c hairman of n ominations c ommittee 35 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Dear Shareholder As c hairman of the Remuneration c ommittee the c ommittee I am pleased to present Medica Groups first Remuneration c ommittee report Report as a listed company for the financial year ended 31 december 2017.
In line with the reporting Regulations this Report is split into the following three sections t his Annual statement and high level summary o ur Remuneration policy at a glance.
Meeting AGM to be held on 23 May 2018. advisory shareholder vote at our AGM.
Committee members and independence I chair the c ommittee and my fellow c ommittee members are Roy davis and steve Whittern. participate in any decision on their own remuneration.
In accordance with the u K c orporate Governance c ode at least two members of the c ommittee are independent n onexecutive directors. as circumstances require.
Key areas of responsibility t he c ommittees key areas of responsibility include to develop and recommend Medicas policy on executive remuneration. directors and the c ompany s ecretary. by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting. relation to remuneration wherever possible. section of the Medica website.
Activities of the Committee during the period t he c ommittee met formally once during the period from l isting to 31 december 2017 and also spent a significant amount of time during the period including before l isting in finalising executive remuneration arrangements to ensure these were appropriate for Medica and reflect best practice.
Our approach to developing Medicas Remuneration Policy o ur aim is for remuneration at Medica to reflect its culture and support the delivery of its business strategy. environment.
Remuneration levels for the executive directors and senior management have been set at the lower quartile levels that are considered by the c ommittee to be adequate for the size and nature of the business.
As the business matures the committee anticipates that it will consider increasing pay levels commensurate with the size and complexity of the business. performance targets as relevant. environment and reflects current best practice. operate for a threeyear period from the 2018 AGM. company. glance and the details are set out on pages 39 to 48. longerterm success of Medica. risktaking or unsustainable company performance. of financial targets relating to c ompany profit. shareholder value creation.
50% of the 2017 psp award will vest based on threeyear eps growth with the remaining 50% vesting based on Medicas absolute t otal s hareholder Return over a threeyear period.
Financial statements.
We hope that you find this report sets out clearly our proposed policy and how we intend to implement it as well as the rationale for our decisions. submitted for shareholder approval at the AGM. our AGM.
MIKE BEWICK c hairman of the Remuneration c ommittee 12 March 2018 36 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Developing our remuneration policy t he c ommittee has developed the proposed policy set out on pages 39 to 48 the key elements of which are set out below.
March 2017. delivery of Medicas strategy and its longterm success. o ption plan. from the 2018 AGM subject to shareholder approval.
Remuneration principles t he proposed policy is based on the remuneration principles see page 39 adopted by the c ommittee. performance both in the short and long term.
Shareholder consultation t he views of shareholders are important to us and the proposed policy will be subject to a binding vote at the AGM on 23 May 2018. the wider workforce. our policy in the future.
Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended.
It also meets the requirements of the u Kl As l isting Rules.
In accordance with the Regulations the following sections of the Remuneration Report are subject to audit the single total figure of remuneration for executive directors and n onexecutive directors and accompanying notes pages 49 to 53 scheme interests awarded during the financial year page 50 exit payments made in the year page 51 payments to past directors page 51 and the statement of directors shareholdings page 53. the report are not subject to audit.
Components of remuneration t he remuneration package for the executive directors comprises both fixed and variable elements consistent with our remuneration principles.
Fixed Components Base salary ceo  John Graham 200000 c Fo  Anthony l ee 140000 Medical director  dr stephen davies 200000 experience and level of responsibility in their role. well as being factored into future salary increases. s alaries will typically be reviewed on an annual basis. the market.
Pension and other benefits pension ceo  John Graham 7% of base salary c Fo  Anthony l ee 6% of base salary Medical director  dr stephen davies 6% of base salary dr s tephen davies has elected not to receive pension contributions but instead to receive a cash equivalent.
Benefits ceo  John Graham c Fo  Anthony l ee Medical director  dr stephen davies John Graham Anthony l ee and dr stephen davies all have death in service benefits of 4x salary as do all employees.
Policy executive directors may receive a contribution of up to 10% of base salary to a personal pension plan a cash allowance or a combination of these.
All staff including executive directors receive death in service benefits at 4x salary. appropriate and consistent with the wider workforce.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Variable Components Annual bonus Maximum bonus opportunities for 2017 ceo  John Graham 100% of base salary c Fo  Anthony l ee 100% of base salary Medical director  dr stephen davies 100% of base salary performance measures Weighting eBIt 100%
Maximum bonus opportunities for the financial year ending 31 december 2018 will be 100% and for future awards this will not exceed 150% other than in exceptional circumstances.
For e xecutive directors it is expected that not more than 75% of any annual bonus will be payable in cash and the balance will be made in the form of an award over Medicas shares granted under the deferred Bonus plan dBp which will then vest after a period not expected to be less than two years broadly subject to continued employment. clawback provisions as will dBp awards as set out in the rules of the annual bonus plan and dBp. deferral and period for deferral may change in relation to future financial years. u p to 60% of the bonus opportunity will payout for ontarget performance. performance. performance measures targets and weightings are set by the c ommittee at the start of each year.
After the end of the financial year the c ommittee determines the level of bonus to be paid based on performance.
100% of the bonus will be based on achievement of financial targets relating to c ompany profit. as part of the disclosure accompanying any pay outs of annual bonus.
Malus and clawback provisions apply under certain circumstances.
Performance Share Plan PSP Award levels for 2017 ceo  John Graham 150% of base salary c Fo  Anthony l ee 150% of base salary Medical director  dr stephen davies 150% of base salary performance measures Weighting 3year eps growth 50% 3year absolute ts R growth 50%
Awards granted under the psp  psp Awards will take the form of an option to acquire shares for nil consideration. t he maximum award opportunity is normally 100% of base salary.
A psp Award may be granted in excess of this limit but only in circumstances which the c ommittee in its absolute discretion considers to be sufficiently exceptional to justify the grant of a psp Award in excess of such limit and any such psp Award will not in any circumstances exceed 200% of the individuals basic salary at the date of grant.
March 2017 were at 150% of basic salary. ensure they are stretching and aligned with Medicas strategy.
For psp Awards granted in 2017 25% of an award will vest at threshold performance 70% at median and 100% vesting at maximum and a straightline sliding scale between these points.
Future psp Awards granted to e xecutive directors will normally have a performance period of at least three years and normally a minimum normal vesting period of three years. subject to a further holding period after the end of the normal vesting period of a minimum of two years.
Malus and clawback provisions apply under certain circumstances.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Pay at risk
28%
42%
30%
70%
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Pay scenarios 000s
On
Target
John Graham
Stephen Davies Anthony Lee
Min.
On
Target
Max.
Min.
On
Target
Max. tel40tel80tel20tel 6tel8 8 8 4telPension Annual Bonus PSP Shareholding requirements ceo 100% of base salary c Fo 100% of base salary Medical director 100% of base salary executive directors will have five years during which to build up the required ordinary shareholding after commencing employment.
Remuneration for the wider workforce Remuneration for the wider workforce is determined based on broadly consistent principles as those for executive directors.
Annual salary reviews take into account Medicas performance local pay and market conditions to ensure that reward at Medica remains competitive.
Incentive arrangements are in place for some employees below the executive level.
Medica operates a taxadvantaged s aveAsYouearn option plan in which participation is offered to all employees including executive directors of the group who are eligible to participate.
Medica is also proposing to adopt a taxadvantaged c ompany s hare o ption plan under which awards of market value options over shares worth not more than 30000 can be granted to employees including e xecutive directors of the group.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview t his section of the report sets out the policy for the directors that has been developed to reflect the guiding principles set out on page 35. t his policy Report will be put before shareholders for approval at our 2018 AGM. three years.
2018 Remuneration Policy for the Executive Directors purpose and link to strategy o peration o pportunity performance measures Base salary t o attract and retain talented executive directors to deliver Medicas strategy by ensuring base salaries and the implied total packages are competitive in relevant talent markets while not overpaying.
Base salaries will be reviewed by the c ommittee annually and benchmarked periodically against relevant competitor companies. responsibility in their role.
In deciding base salary levels the c ommittee considers personal performance including the individuals contribution to the achievement of Medicas strategic objectives. market conditions.
Base salary increases for the executive directors will normally be aligned with those of the wider workforce but may be made above this level in exceptional circumstances such as a material change in responsibilities size or complexity of the role or if a director was intentionally appointed on a belowmarket salary. increases. of salaries in the market. executive directors. individual.
Base salaries for the year under review and the following year as well as the rationale for any increases will be disclosed in the relevant years Annual Report on
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t 40 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 purpose and link to strategy o peration o pportunity performance measures directors. combination thereof. remuneration that is pensionable. of up to 10% of salary.
Report on Remuneration.
Other benefits t o provide noncash benefits which are competitive in the market in which the executive director is employed.
Medica provides death in service benefits to its executive directors.
Medica may provide benefits in kind where the Remuneration c ommittee considers appropriate. benefits. available to all senior employees.
Incentive plan that is offered to all employees or all employees who meet certain qualifying criteria on the same terms.
Benefits for executive directors are set at a level which the committee considers appropriate compared to wider employee benefits as well as competitive practices in relevant markets. increases in cost.
In addition the c ommittee retains discretion to approve a higher cost in exceptional circumstances e. etc.
Medicas control have changed e. costs.
Benefits in respect of the year under review are disclosed in the Annual
Report on Remuneration.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t CONTINUED 41 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview purpose and link to strategy o peration o pportunity performance measures Annual bonus t o incentivise executive directors to deliver strong financial and non financial performance on an annual basis and reward the delivery of Medicas strategic aims that will underpin the longerterm health and growth of the business. with shareholders. the start of the year.
After the end of the financial year the committee determines the level of bonus to be paid taking into account the extent to which these targets have been achieved.
Medica under the deferred Bonus plan dBp. will be paid in cash.
Awards under the dBp are not subject to further performance conditions and vest after two years broadly subject to continued employment. is 100% of base salary.
150% of base salary. results in nil payout.
Remuneration.
Bonuses are based on achievement of company financial performance targets relating to profit over the financial year.
Malus and clawback provisions apply to the annual bonus and dBp awards in certain circumstances Further details including the performance targets will be disclosed in the relevant Annual Report on the n otes to the policy t able.
Malus and clawback provisions apply to the annual bonus and dBp awards in certain circumstances as set out in the n otes to the policy t able.
Performance Share Plan PSP t o align the interests of executive directors and shareholders in growing the value of Medica over the long term. shares in Medica for nil consideration.
Medicas strategy.
Awards granted under the psp to executive directors will normally have a performance period of not less than three years and normally a minimum normal vesting period of three years. normal vesting period.
If the performance targets have not been met at the end of the relevant performance period awards will not vest. the n otes to the policy t able. n otes to the policy t able.
100% of base salary. circumstances.
In respect of psp awards granted on l isting 25% of an award will vest if performance against each performance condition is at threshold 70% if it is at median and 100% if it is at maximum with straight line vesting in between.
Further details of the psp awards granted to each of the executive directors will be disclosed in the relevant Annual Report on
Vesting of the psp is subject to continued employment during the normal vesting period and the achievement of performance conditions aligned with Medicas strategic plan and shareholder value creation.
Return.
Further details including the performance targets attached to psp awards in respect of each year will be disclosed in the relevant Annual Report on
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t CONTINUED purpose and link to strategy o peration o pportunity performance measures Company Share Option Plan CSOP t o align the interests of employees and shareholders in growing the value of Medica over the long term.
All employees including executive directors are eligible to receive annual awards of an option to acquire shares in Medica for an amount that is not less than the market value of the Medica shares at the date of grant.
Awards granted under the csop will normally have a vesting period of not less than three years.
Awards may but do not need to be subject to performance conditions and targets.
30000 market value as at the date of grant or such other figure as is permitted by the relevant legislation.
Vesting of csop options may be but does not need to be subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
SaveAsYouEarn
SAYE plan t o align the interests of employees and shareholders by encouraging all employees to buy and own Medica shares. eligible employees.
All employees including executive directors may make monthly savings over a period of three or five years or other period set out in the relevant legislation. that invitations to participate are issued. the sAYe savings contract i. interest payable. that apply to plans of this type. wider employee group.
500 per month at the time they are invited to participate.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Notes to the Policy Table Approach to target setting and performance measure selection t he c ommittee considers carefully the selection of performance measures at the start of each performance cycle taking into consideration Medicas strategic objectives and the macroeconomic environment.
Annual bonus measures are selected to align with Medicas shortterm KpIs.
Measures may change from year to year subject to the policy and the rationale for any changes to the bonus measures selected will therefore be disclosed in the relevant Annual Report on Remuneration. shareholders. s hareholder Return over a threeyear period. to Medicas strategy and shareholder interests. t argets are set to be stretching but achievable over the threeyear performance period. other Ftse companies of comparable size and complexity. dividends or other distributions payable by reference to a record date preceding the date of such issue or transfer. t he c ommittee can however determine that dividend equivalents will be awarded.
If dividend equivalents are awarded whenever a dividend or other distribution is paid by Medica in respect of its shares and the vesting date of the dBp or psp award including any additional holding period that applies to the psp award has not passed the number of shares which are subject to the dBp or psp award will be increased to reflect the value of the dividend. t he c ommittee can determine that dividend equivalents will be paid in either shares or in cash.
Share ownership guidelines t he c ommittee recognises the importance of aligning executive directors and shareholders interests through significant shareholdings in Medica.
Medicas shareholding policy is 100% of base salary for e xecutive directors. commencing employment. details of the executive directors current personal shareholdings are provided in on page 53.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t CONTINUED Payforperformance scenario analysis t he charts below provide an estimate of the potential future reward opportunities for the executive directors and the potential split between the different elements of remuneration under three different performance scenarios Maximum o ntarget and Minimum. opportunities. the awards can be exercised. equivalent payments.
Director Pay Scenario 2018 000s
On
Target
John Graham
Stephen Davies Anthony Lee
Min.
On
Target
Max.
Min.
On
Target
Max. tel40tel80tel20tel 6tel8 8 8 4telPension Annual Bonus PSP Executive Director service contracts In accordance with general market practice each of the executive directors has a rolling service contract. terminable on 12 months notice from either party. this practice will also apply for any new executive directors.
John Graham ceo 1 May 2013 15 March 2017 Anthony l ee c Fo 14 May 2013 15 March 2017 dr stephen davies Medical director 14 May 2013 15 March 2017 Exit payments policy Medicas policy on termination payments is to consider the circumstances on a casebycase basis taking into account the relevant contractual terms in the executives service contract and the circumstances of termination. notice period. t ermination payments may take the form of payments in lieu of notice.
If the employment is terminated by Medica the c ommittee retains the discretion to settle any other amount the c ommittee considers reasonable to the executive director including in settlement of claims in respect of legal fees incurred in connection with the termination and fees for outplacement services and relocation costs.
In additional to contractual provisions the table below summarises how awards under each discretionary incentive plan are typically treated in specific circumstances with where relevant the final treatment remaining subject to the c ommittees discretion as provided under the rules of the plan.
In the event of termination any outstanding options granted under the sAYe scheme and any awards made under a s hare Incentive plan that may be established by Medica will be treated in accordance with the rules of the scheme which do not include discretion. him after he ceases will be made in the relevant Annual Report on Remuneration.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Treatment of awards on cessation of employmentchange of control Reason for cessation c alculation of vestingpayment t iming of vestingpayment Annual bonus death or other circumstance as the c ommittee determines t he bonus will remain payable on the normal payment date subject to the performance targets having been met and prorated for the proportion of the performance year worked unless the c ommittee waives prorating. wholly in cash i. determines otherwise.
At the usual payment date All other reasons n o bonus will be paid for the financial year.
Bonus lapses if employment ceases at any time prior to the payment date. before the change of control event. discretion to waive performance conditions and prorating. bonus is paid wholly in cash i. not subject to deferral.
Deferred Bonus Plan death t he c ommittee may in its absolute discretion permit exercise of awards within the 12month period immediately following death.
Awards will be prorated for the proportion of the vesting period worked unless the committee waives prorating.
Ill health injury disability redundancy or sale of the employing company or business Awards may be retained and exercised during the six months following the vesting date or if later six months after the date of cessation. determines.
Awards will be prorated for the proportion of the vesting period worked unless the c ommittee waives prorating.
At the normal vesting date unless discretion is exercised and then on cessation of employment All other reasons including resignation or dismissal for cause Awards normally lapse on cessation of employment or if earlier when the employee gives or is given notice to cease employment unless the committee determines within three months of cessation of employment to permit the holder to keep his awards and exercise them on such terms and within such period following the vesting date as the c ommittee determines. will vest. such event or immediately prior to such event.
Awards will not be subject to prorating.
Performance Share Plan death t he c ommittee may in its absolute discretion permit exercise of awards within the 12month period immediately following death.
Awards will be prorated for the proportion of the normal vesting period not including any additional holding period worked unless the committee waives prorating.
Ill health injury disability redundancy or sale of the employing company or business Awards may be retained and exercised during the six months following the normal vesting date not including any additional holding period or if later six months after the date of cessation. employment as the c ommittee determines.
Awards will be prorated for the proportion of the normal vesting period not including any additional holding period worked unless the committee waives prorating.
At the normal vesting date unless discretion is exercised and then on cessation of employment 46 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Reason for cessation c alculation of vestingpayment t iming of vestingpayment All other reasons including resignation or dismissal for cause Awards normally lapse on cessation of employment or if earlier when the employee gives or is given notice to cease employment unless the committee determines within three months of cessation of employment to permit the holder to keep his awards and exercise them on such terms and within such period following the later of the normal vesting date not including any additional holding period or cessation of employment as the c ommittee determines. determine the extent to which the award will vest. control event. performance conditions and prorating.
Company Share Option the proportion of the vesting period worked. has discretion to waive performance conditions and prorating.
Injury disability redundancy retirement or sale of the employing company or business o ptions can be exercised within the six months following the date of cessation to the extent that any performance conditions have been satisfied and prorated for the proportion of the vesting period worked. performance conditions and prorating.
All other reasons including resignation or dismissal for cause o ptions normally lapse on cessation of employment or if earlier when the employee gives or is given notice to cease employment unless the committee determines within three months of cessation of employment to permit the holder to keep his options and exercise them on such terms and within such period as the c ommittee determines. determine the extent to which the award will vest. elapsed as at the change of control event. discretion to waive performance conditions and prorating.
If
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t CONTINUED 47 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Approach to remuneration on recruitment External appointments In cases of hiring or appointing a new executive director from outside Medica the c ommittee may make use of all existing components of remuneration set out in the policy table up to the disclosed maximum opportunities where applicable.
When determining the remuneration package for a new executive director the c ommittee will take into account all relevant factors based on the circumstances at that time to ensure that arrangements are in the best interests of Medica and its shareholders. comparisons and relevant market data. forfeited on leaving a previous employer i. in the policy table.
In doing so the c ommittee will consider relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to these awards the likelihood of those conditions being met and the time over which they would have vested. being forfeited. necessary to make a oneoff award to an executive director in this context.
Medica to indemnify a new appointment as executive director for any claims that may be made against him by a previous employer in connection with a breach of restrictive covenants or similar restrictions that the new appointment may have breached by taking up employment with Medica.
Internal promotion Where a new executive director is appointed by way of internal promotion the policy will be consistent with that for external appointees as detailed above other than in relation to buyout awards.
Any commitments made prior to an individuals promotion will continue to be honoured even if they would not otherwise be consistent with the policy prevailing when the commitment is fulfilled although Medica may where appropriate seek to revise an individuals existing service contract on promotion to ensure it aligns with other executive directors and good practice.
Remuneration for the year in which recruitment occurred.
External appointments held by Executive Directors executive directors may accept up to one external appointment subject to approval by the Board there being no conflicts of interest and the appointment not leading to deterioration in the individuals performance. directors may retain the fees paid for such roles. will be included in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Consideration of conditions elsewhere in Medica t he c ommittee seeks to promote and maintain good relations with employees as part of its broader employee engagement strategy considers pay practices across Medica and is mindful of the salary increases applying across the rest of the business in relevant markets when considering any increases to salaries for executive directors.
However the c ommittee does not currently consult with employees on its executive remuneration policy.
Consideration of shareholder views t he c ommittee will take into consideration all shareholder views received during the year and at the Annual General Meeting each year as well as guidance from shareholder representative bodies more broadly in shaping Medicas implementation of its policy as well as any future changes to policy.
It is the c ommittees intention to consult with major shareholders in advance of making any material changes to remuneration arrangements.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy for the NonExecutive Directors details of the policy on fees paid to our n onexecutive directors are set out in the table below purpose and link to strategy o peration o pportunity performance measures
Director fees t o attract and retain n onexecutive directors of the highest calibre with broad commercial and other experience relevant to Medica. c ommittee. executive directors.
Fee levels are reviewed annually taking into account external advice on best practice and competitive levels in particular at other Ftse companies of comparable size and complexity. reviewing fees. paid in cash. incurred in relation to these expenses.
For any n onexecutive director that is based overseas Medica will meet travel and accommodation expenditure as required to fulfil their n on executive duties.
Remuneration. c urrent fees are as follows Roy davis steve Whittern professor Mike Bewick 50000 Anand Jain Fee increases will be applied taking into account the outcome of the annual review.
Board t he fees of Anand Jain are paid to c Bpe in respect of Mr Jains services na n onexecutive directors are not eligible to join Medicas pension incentives or share schemes or to participate in any of Medicas other benefit arrangements.
In recruiting a new n onexecutive director the c ommittee will use the policy set out above.
NonExecutive Director letters of appointment n one of the n onexecutive directors has a service contract with Medica. six months notice in respect of Roy davis.
Roy davis Independent c hairman 1 March 2017 15 March 2017 steve Whittern s enior Independent n onexecutive director 1 March 2017 15 March 2017 professor Mike Bewick Independent n onexecutive director 1 March 2017 15 March 2017 Anand Jain n onexecutive director 2 May 2013 15 March 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
ReMune RAt Ion pol Ic Y RepoR t CONTINUED 49 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Annu Al RepoR t on ReMune RAt Ion t his section of the Remuneration Report provides details of how our policy was implemented during the financial year ended 31 december 2017 since l isting and how it will be implemented during the year ending 31 december 2018.
Committee membership in 2017 t he c ommittee is currently composed of three n onexecutive directors Mike Bewick c ommittee c hairman independent Roy davis n onexecutive c hairman independent steve Whittern s enior Independent n onexecutive director t he c ommittee met formally once during the period from l isting to 31 december 2017.
All of the committee members attended this meeting. c ompany s ecretary. relation to remuneration wherever possible.
Advisers
Mercer l imited supported Medica on remunerationrelated matters in the build up to the l isting. formally appointed Mercer l imited as its independent adviser.
Mercer l imited reports to the c ommittee c hairman.
Mercer l imited is a member of the Remuneration c onsultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the c ode of c onduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the u K www. emunerationconsultantsgroup. com.
Mercer l imited does not have any other connection with Medica and is considered to be independent by the c ommittee.
Fees paid to Mercer l imited are determined on a time and materials basis and totalled 12000 excluding expenses and VAt  from l isting to 31 december 2017 in their capacity as advisers to the committee. prior to and since l isting. eversheds s utherland provides legal advice to Medica generally.
Statement of voting at the Annual General Meeting Medica will be proposing resolutions to shareholders in respect of its policy and its Annual Report on Remuneration for the first time at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 23 May 2018. cast for and against and the number of votes withheld will be reported in the next Remuneration Report.
Single total figure of remuneration for Executive Directors audited t he table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each executive director for the financial years ending 2016 and 2017.
As Medica listed in March 2017 part of the 2017 and all of the 2016 remuneration relates to the period when Medica was privately owned. are based on the actual value delivered where known.
2017 Directors remuneration director
Benefits
Annual bonus psp pension benefit other total John Graham 191250 nil nil nil 13387 nil 204637 Anthony l ee 123750 nil nil nil 7425 nil 131175 dr stephen davies 193333 nil nil nil 9000 nil 202333 Kevin t errins 16667 nil nil nil 1000 nil 17667 Martin Wells 16667 nil nil nil 1000 nil 17667 50 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Annu Al RepoR t on ReMune RAt Ion CONTINUED 2016 Directors remuneration director
Benefits
Annual bonus psp pension benefit other total John Graham 165000 nil nil nil 11550 nil 176550 Anthony l ee 75000 nil nil nil 4500 nil 79500 dr stephen davies 124667 nil nil nil nil nil 124667 Kevin t errins 100000 nil 4000 nil 6000 nil 110000 Martin Wells 100000 nil 4000 nil 6000 nil 110000 Medica provides death in service benefits to its executive directors. psp Awards granted in 2017 will be shown in the s ingle total figure of remuneration table for the 2019 financial year to the extent vested.
3 Figures for Kevin t errins and Martin Wells are to 28th February 2017 as they both resigned as directors on 1st March 2017.
Incentive outcomes for the year ended 31 December 2017 audited Annual bonus in respect of performance in the 2017 financial year t he payments under the annual bonus for 2017 have been waived by the directors.
Maximum opportunity Bonus outcome % of max s alary earned for the financial year to 31 december 2017 Bonus for the financial year to 31 december 2017 John Graham 100% of salary nil% 191250 nil Anthony l ee 100% of salary nil% 123750 nil dr stephen davies 100% of salary nil% 193333 nil details of disclosure of targets  to be confirmed Although targets in relation to the 2017 financial year are not disclosed it is the committees intention going forward to disclose annual bonus targets retrospectively at the same time as the performance outcome is disclosed in the remuneration report after the end of each financial year but only to the extent they are not considered commercially sensitive.
Share incentive awards awarded in 2017 audited Performance Share Plan PSP o n the date of l isting executive directors and other key executives were granted awards under the psp comprising a grant of options to acquire shares at nil cost.
Awards granted to executive directors under the psp on the date of l isting were granted in respect of shares with a market value equal to 150% of base salary determined using the price of Medicas shares on l isting 135 pence. to incentivise executive directors while base salaries remained below market levels. will also be subject to a further twoyear holding period after the end of the normal vesting period.
50% depending on eps growth and 50% on absolute ts R over the performance period.
If the minimum eps growth target is met 12.5% of the psp Award will vest.
If the minimum ts R growth target is met 12.5% of the psp Award will vest. n one of the executive directors participated in the sAYe plan in 2017.
John Graham 21 March 2017 psp  nil cost share options 222222 nil 300000 21 March 2020 21 March 2027 Anthony l ee 21 March 2017 psp  nil cost share options 155555 nil 210000 21 March 2020 21 March 2027 dr stephen davies 21 March 2017 psp  nil cost share options 222222 nil 300000 21 March 2020 21 March 2027 the awards are performance share awards for which no exercise price is payable.
135 pence. this assumes that the performance targets are met in full.
Actual value at vesting will depend on the extent to which the awards vest the share price at the date of vesting and any dividend equivalents payable on vested shares. t here will be a twoyear holding period following the normal vesting period for psp awards granted in 2017.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Single total figure of remuneration for NonExecutive Directors audited t he table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each n onexecutive director for the financial years ended 31 december 2016 and 31 d ecember 2017.
Mike Berwick were appointed on 1 March 2017 so the figures reflect the fees from that date and no prior year figures have been shown.
In respect of Anand Jain part of the 2017 and all of the 2016 remuneration relates to the period when Medica was privately owned.
Roy davis 75000 75000 steve Whittern 45000 45000 professor Mike Bewick 37500 37500 Anand Jain 42000 42000 the fees of Anand Jain are paid to c Bpe in respect of Mr Jains services. t he fees were the same in 2016 as in 2017.
Percentage change in CEO remuneration t he ceo s total remuneration increased by 16% from 2016 to 2017.
Relative importance of spend on pay t here were no dividends paid or share buybacks implemented or other significant distributions payments or other uses of profit or cashflow in the 2017 financial year which the directors consider relevant in assisting an understanding of the relative importance of spend on pay. statements  were 3574000 for the same period.
FY17 611 3574 FY16 nil 3048 % change na 17% Payments for loss of office audited n o payments for loss of office were made to directors during the year.
Payments to past Directors audited n o payments were made to past directors in the year.
External appointments n o executive director currently holds any external appointments.
Review of past performance t his graph shows Medicas t otal shareholder Return ts R compared to the Ftse s mall c ap Index. made between the date of l isting 21 March 2017 and 31 d ecember 2017. comparator because Medica is part of this group.
TSR chart for 2017 DRR Growth in the value of a hypothetical 100 holding from l isting to 31 december 2017 9tel115 31Dec17 21Mar17 Value of 100 invested on 21 Mar 2017 Medica Group FTSE SmallCap 52 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Annu Al RepoR t on ReMune RAt Ion CONTINUED t he table below details the ceo s single total figure of remuneration and incentive outcomes over the same period ceo John Graham ceo single figure 204637 Annual bonus % max nil% psp vesting % max na Implementation of Executive Director Remuneration Policy for 2018 Base salary Base salaries were set on l isting taking into account each individuals professional experience and level of responsibility in their role. future salary increases.
John Graham 200000 Anthony l ee 140000 dr stephen davies 200000 executive director salary levels will remain at these levels for 2018 but may be increased in future years.
Pension
John Graham receives pension contributions of 7% of his salary.
Anthony l ee receives pension contributions of 6% of his salary. dr stephen davies receives a cash allowance equal to 6% of his salary in lieu of pension contributions.
Annual bonus For 2018 the executive directors will have a maximum bonus opportunity of 100% of salary. which will then vest after a period of not less than two years broadly subject to continued employment. and dBp. t he level of deferral and period for deferral may change in relation to future financial years. t he annual bonus for 2018 will be based 100% on achievement of c ompany financial targets relating to profits.
Remuneration.
In the event the Board considers these targets to remain commercially sensitive they will be disclosed as soon as possible once they are no longer considered to be sensitive.
Performance Share Plan PSP In 2018 the executive directors will receive nil cost options under the Medica Group psp with face values of 150% of salary.
3year eps growth 50% 3year absolute ts R growth 50% Absolute ts R growth has been selected by the c ommittee to closely align executive interests with those of shareholders.
Medicas ts R performance will be measured over the threeyear period commencing 1 January 2018.
Medicas strategy. t he eps growth will be measured over the threeyear period commencing 1 January 2018. forecasts. t he maximum vesting level is set to represent very stretching performance.
In line with our policy psp awards will also be subject to Medicas malus and clawback provisions.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Implementation of NonExecutive Director Remuneration Policy for 2018 n onexecutive director fees were set on l isting taking into account competitive practice for similar roles.
Role Fee c hairman 100000 s enior Independent n onexecutive director 60000 Independent n onexecutive director 50000 n onexecutive director payable to c Bpe in respect of Mr Jains services 42000 n onexecutive director fees will remain at these levels for 2018.
Directors shareholdings audited t he table below sets out details of the current shareholdings of each director and any relevant connected persons as at 31 december 2017 and for executive directors compares this to their shareholding guideline as set out below. n o prior year data is available given l isting occurred on 21 March 2017. subject to shareholding guidelines of 100% of salary which they have met.
Vested but not exercised u nvested and not subject to performance c urrent shareholding % salary s hareholding guideline % salary John Graham 3608248 nil nil nil 222222 3726% 100% Anthony l ee 515464 nil nil nil 155555 760% 100% dr stephen davies 1546392 nil nil nil 222222 1597% 100% Roy davis 37037 steve Whittern 37037 professor Mike Bewick 11111 Anand Jain current holding measured by reference to the middle market quotation of Medicas share price on 29 december 2017 206.5 pence and as a percentage of base salary at 31 december 2017. publication of this Annual Report.
3 n o shares are owned by Anand Jain but c Bpe n ominees l imited hold 8220551 ordinary s hares as at 9 March 2018.
MIKE BEWICK c hairman of the Remuneration c ommittee 12 March 2018 54 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT t he directors are pleased to present their report to shareholders and the audited financial statements for Medica Group plc and its subsidiaries for the year ended 31 december 2017.
Group plc is .
Statement of Directors responsibilities t he directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations. c ompany law requires the directors to prepare Group and parent financial statements for each financial year.
International Financial Reporting standards IFRs s as adopted by the european u nion and have elected to prepare the parent c ompany financial statements in accordance with u nited Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting practice u nited Kingdom Accounting standards and applicable laws including FRs 101 Reduced disclosure period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRs s and u K Accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the c ompany will continue in business.
Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IA s Regulation. c ompany and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities. aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the c ompanys auditor is aware of that information. t he directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Having taken advice from the Audit c ommittee the directors consider the Annual Report and the financial statements taken as a whole provides the information necessary to assess the c ompanys performance business model and strategy and is fair balanced and understandable. on the c ompanys website. financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Accounting practice give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the c ompany and the Annual Report including the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the c ompany and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Principal risks and uncertainties t he principal risks and uncertainties are set out in the financial review on pages 23 to 24.
Results and dividends t he results for 2017 are set out in the financial statements on pages 62 to 88.
An interim dividend of 0.55 pence per o rdinary s hare was paid to shareholders on 26 o ctober 2017. paid on 22 June 2018 to shareholders on the register at close of business on 1 June 2018.
Review of the period A comprehensive analysis of the Groups progress and development is set out in the strategic Report on pages 4 to 22 which includes the c hairmans statement c hief executives Review and Financial Review. comments on the position of the Group at the end of the financial period.
Significant events after the yearend t here have been no significant events after yearend.
Capital structure t he c ompanys share capital is divided into 111111114 o rdinary s hares of 0.02 each with voting rights. explains the changes to the capital structure during the year.
Significant shareholdings As at 31 december 2017 and 9 March 2018 the directors were aware of the following interests in 3% or more of the voting rights of the issued o rdinary s hare capital. t R1 as per the listing rules.
As at 31 december 2017 As at 9 March 2018 n umber of o rdinary s hares in issue held percentage of o rdinary s hares in issue n umber of o rdinary s hares in issue held percentage of o rdinary s hares in issue c Bpe n ominees l imited 8220551 7.40% 8220551 7.40% J M Graham 3608248 3.25% 3608248 3.25% o ld Mutual plc 20742529 18.66% 20742529 18.66% standard l ife Aberdeen plc 8879083 7.99% 8879083 7.99% GVQ Investment Management l imited 5255556 4.73% 6255038 5.63% l iontrust Investment partners llp 5561315 5.01% 5561315 5.01% Hargreave Hale l imited 4316965 3.89% 4316965 3.89% t he Independent Investment t rust plc 4000000 3.60% 4000000 3.60% Related party transactions details of all related party transactions are set out in n ote 28 to the Financial statements.
CO2 Emissions t he Groups co emissions are disclosed on page 25 of the Financial Review.
Directors insurance t he Group maintains appropriate insurance cover in respect of any legal action against its directors including in respect of the prospectus issued for the initial public offering.
Corporate governance t he directors statement on c orporate Governance is set out on pages 28 to 31 and forms part of this report.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED Going concern assessment t he consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis on the assumption that the Group continues in existence for the foreseeable future. accounts. of preparation in the financial statements.
Viability statement In accordance with provision c .2.2 of the u K c orporate Governance c ode the directors have assessed the viability of the c ompany over a threeyear period to 31 december 2020. as the Groups strategic review considered by the Board encompasses this period.
In making their assessment the directors have considered the Groups current financial position and performance cash flow projections including future capital expenditure in relation to the availability of finance and funding facilities and have considered these factors in relation to the principal risks and uncertainties which are included in the directors Report.
Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity. the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
Accordingly the Board believes that taking into account the Groups current position and subject to the principal risks faced by the business the Group will be able to continue in operation and to meet its liabilities as they fall due for the period up to 31 december 2020. performance business model and strategy.
Future outlook t he strategy of the business is set out in the c hief executives Review on pages 16 to 19.
Annual General Meeting Medicas Annual General Meeting is scheduled to take place on 23 May 2018.
Directors t he directors who served during the year were as follows Roy davis steve Whittern professor Mike Bewick dr stephen davies John Graham Anand Jain Anthony l ee Kevin t errins Resigned 1 March 2017 Martin Wells Resigned 1 March 2017 All of the above directors are male.
Auditors t he auditors Grant t hornton u K llp  will be proposed for reappointment in accordance with section 485 of the companies Act 2006. t his report was approved by the Board on 12 March 2018 and signed on its behalf.
ANTHONY LEE c hief Financial officer 57 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MEDICA GROUP PLC
Our opinion on the financial statements is unmodified We have audited the Financial statements of Medica Group plc the parent c ompany and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 december 2017 which comprise the consolidated Income statement and c onsolidated statement of c omprehensive Income the c onsolidated statement of Financial position the c onsolidated statement of c ash Flows the c onsolidated statement of c hanges in equity the c ompany statement of Financial position the c ompany statement of c hanges in equity and notes to the Financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
Reporting standards IFRs s as adopted by the european u nion.
Accounting standards including Financial Reporting standard 101 Reduced d isclosure Framework u nited Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting practice.
In our opinion the Financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent c ompanys affairs as at 31 december 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group Financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRs s as adopted by the european u nion the parent c ompany Financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with u nited Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting practice the Financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the c ompanies Act 2006 and as regards the Group Financial statements Article 4 of the IAs Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International standards on Auditing u K IsAs u K and applicable law. the Financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent c ompany in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the Financial statements in the u K including the FRc s ethical standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Who we are reporting to t his report is made solely to the c ompanys members as a body in accordance with c hapter 3 of part 16 of the c ompanies Act 2006. those matters we are required to state to them in an Auditors Report and for no other purpose. c ompanys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Conclusions relating to principal risks going concern and viability statement We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the Annual Report in relation to which the IsAs u K require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the strategic Report set out on pages 23 to 24 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors confirmation set out on page 56 of the d irectors Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the directors statement set out on page 56 of the d irectors Report about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the Financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Group and the parent c ompanys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the Financial statements whether the directors statement relating to going concern required under the l isting Rules in accordance with l isting Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the directors explanation set out on page 56 of the d irectors Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Overview of our audit approach t he key audit matter was identified as revenue recognition particularly the risk around the occurrence of revenue o verall Group materiality 476000 which represents 4.5% of the Groups Adjusted e BItd A and We performed full scope audit procedures over all Group entities at the sole operating location in the u nited Kingdom.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the Financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified. overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team. our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Key Audit Matter  Group How the matter was addressed in the audit  Group Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised throughout the Group as the fair value of consideration receivable in respect of the provision of services in relation to the completion of radiology reports.
Revenue is recognised at the point at which the radiology report is submitted to the hospitals RIs Radiology Information system and as such revenue is recognised once the service has been provided and delivered to the customer. time the report is submitted.
However due to the volume of transactions that occur during the year we identified the occurrence of revenue and the existence of the associated receivables as a significant risk. misstatement.
Group to identify measure and recognise revenue and assessing the design effectiveness of those processes and controls particularly in relation to the accurate extraction of data from the picture Archiving and c ommunications system pAcs  as relevant to the recognition of revenue testing the validity of the data extracted from the pAcs  including i an It specialist review of the coding of the computer algorithm used to extract data to gain comfort over the accuracy of the extracted data ii for a sample of the extracted data verifying that the underlying radiology reports have been included on the applicable hospitals Radiology Information system and that they had therefore been appropriately submitted and iii for a sample of the extracted data verifying through examination of customer contracts and other correspondence that the pricing rates applied were in accordance with contractual agreements as appropriate considering the appropriateness of the Groups revenue recognition policy in accordance with International Accounting standard 18 Revenue and testing a sample of revenue items to verify that they were recorded in line with that policy testing a sample of revenue items recognised during the year to determine the existence and occurrence of that revenue by agreeing each item to an underlying customer contract or relationship and to pAcs data testing a sample of year end receivables by directly obtaining confirmations from the customers and where such a confirmation response was not received conducting alternative procedures including the verification of subsequent cash receipts and examination of source documents to gain comfort over the existence of year end receivables. the Financial statements and related disclosures are included in n ote 5.
Audit c ommittee identified revenue recognition as a significant matter in its report on page 33 where the Audit c ommittee also described the consideration that it has given to address this matter.
Key observations o verall based on our audit work our assessment is that the processes applied in recording radiology reporting transactions resulted in appropriate recognition of revenue and associated receivables in the financial statements and our testing did not identify any material misstatements. n o key audit matters were identified in respect of the parent c ompany Financial statements.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MEDICA GROUP PLC CONTINUED 59 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the Financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality in determining the nature timing and extent of our audit work and in evaluating the results of that work.
Materiality was determined as follows Materiality measure Group Parent Company Financial statements as a whole 476000 which is 4.5% of the Groups earnings Before Interest t axes depreciation and Amortisation excluding exceptional Items Adjusted eBItd A. financial performance of the Group.
Materiality for the current year is higher than the level that we determined for the year ended 31 december 2016 to reflect the increase in the Groups Adjusted eBItd A in the year ended 31 december 2017.
428000 which is 2% of the p arent c ompanys t otal Assets capped at 90% of the Group materiality. primarily an investment holding entity.
Materiality for the current year is higher than the level that we determined for the year ended 31 december 2016 to reflect the increase in the c ompanys t otal Assets in the year ended 31 december 2017.
75% of financial statement materiality.
75% of financial statement materiality.
1000 based on our view that d irectors remuneration and related party transactions would be considered material by nature by the users of the Financial statements.
1000 based on our view that d irectors remuneration and related party transactions would be considered material by nature by the users of the Financial statements.
Audit c ommittee 23000 and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds.
21000 and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds. appropriate basis on which to base our materiality.
Group
Parent
Company
Materiality
Adjusted EBITDA
Total Assets 60 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 An overview of the scope of our audit As all Group operations are based in the u K and subject to statutory audit all components of the Group were subjected to a comprehensive audit approach.
Groups business and is riskbased and in particular included performing an evaluation of the design effectiveness of controls over key financial statement risks identified as part of our risk assessment process gaining an understanding of the financial reporting and accounts production process and undertaking substantive testing on significant transactions balances and disclosures the extent of which was based on various factors such as our overall assessment of the control environment the effectiveness of controls over individual systems and the management of specific risks. t he scope of the current year audit has remained consistent with that of the prior year.
Other information t he directors are responsible for the other information. thereon. otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the Financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the Financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the Financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 31  the statement given by the directors that they consider the Annual Report and Financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit c ommittee reporting set out on pages 32 and 33  the section describing the work of the Audit c ommittee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit c ommittee or directors statement of compliance with the u K c orporate Governance c ode set out on page 28  the parts of the directors statement required under the l isting Rules relating to the c ompanys compliance with the u K c orporate Governance c ode containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with l isting Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the uK c orporate Governance code.
Our opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 are unmodified In our opinion the part of the directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the c ompanies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic Report and the directors Report for the financial year for which the Financial statements are prepared is consistent with the Financial statements and the strategic Report and the directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report under the Companies Act 2006 In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent c ompany and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic Report or the directors Report.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF MEDICA GROUP PLC CONTINUED 61 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial statements o verview Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the c ompanies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent c ompany or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent c ompany Financial statements and the part of the directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of Directors for the Financial Statements As explained more fully in the directors Responsibilities statement set out on page 54 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the Financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of Financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the Financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent c ompanys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent c ompany or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the Financial Statements o ur objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the Financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an Auditors Report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with IsAs u K will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these Financial statements.
We are responsible for obtaining reasonable assurance that the Financial statements taken as a whole are free from material misstatement whether caused by fraud or error. audit is properly planned and performed in accordance with the IsAs u K. approach and is explained more fully in the An overview of the scope of our audit section of our Audit Report.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the Financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting c ouncils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Report.
Other matters which we are required to address We were appointed by the Board of directors on 6 August 2013 to audit the Financial statements for the period ending 31 december 2013 and subsequent financial periods. december 2017. c ompany and we remain independent of the Group and the parent c ompany in conducting our audit. o ur audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit c ommittee.
JONATHAN MAILE BSC HONS FCA senior s tatutory Auditor for and on behalf of Grant t hornton uK llp statutory Auditor chartered Accountants crawley date 12 March 2018 62 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 n ote 31 December 31 december Revenue 33715 28522 cost of sales 17282 14313 Gross profit 16433 14209 Administration expenses 7917 6993 o perating profit 6 8516 7216 other expenses  exceptional items 7 1661 757 o perating profit after exceptional items 6855 6459 Finance income 8 50 10 exceptional finance costs 9 582 Finance costs 9 661 2181 Profit before tax 6 5662 4288 Analysed as Adjusted EBITDA 10582 9229 exceptional items 7 1661 757 s hare based payments charge 74 exceptional finance costs 9 582 Finance costs 9 661 2181 Finance income 8 50 10 depreciation 15 775 883 Amortisation 14 1217 1130 Profit before tax 5662 4288 Income tax charge 10 1331 971 Profit attributable to equity holders of the parent 4331 3317 Statement of Comprehensive Income Profit for the year 4331 3317 other comprehensive income Total comprehensive profit for the year attributable to owners of the parent 4331 3317 Profit per share basic and diluted Basic profit per ordinary share pence 11 3.99p 3.32p diluted profit per ordinary share pence 11 3.96p 3.32p t he n otes and accounting policies on pages 66 to 83 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT AND CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME For the year ended 31 december 2017 63 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview n ote At 31
At 31 december Noncurrent assets Goodwill 13 15948 15948 o ther intangible assets 14 9218 9402 property plant and equipment 15 1880 1835 27046 27185 Current assets t rade and other receivables 17 8210 6073 c ash and cash equivalents 6907 4713 15117 10786 Current liabilities t rade and other payables 18 3932 3283 Borrowings 19  1362 derivative financial instruments 24 14 52 3946 4697 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings and other financial liabilities 20 11888 25369 deferred tax 16 1429 1596 13317 26965 Net assets 24900 6309
Retained profit 22 9957 4854 Total equity 24900 6309 t he n otes and accounting policies on pages 66 to 83 form an integral part of these financial statements.
JOHN GRAHAM ANTHONY LEE director director CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION COMPANY REGISTRATION As at 31 december 2017 64 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 12 months ended 31
12 months ended 31 december Operating activities profit for the year 4331 3317 Add taxation 1331 971 profit before tax 5662 4288 Adjustments for depreciation 775 883 Amortisation 1217 1130 s hare based payments 74 Finance income 12 10 exceptional finance costs 582 Finance costs 661 2181 Changes in Increase in trade and other receivables 2138 1740 decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 365 949 Movement of derivative financial instruments 38 30 tax paid 904 924 c ash inflow from operating activities 5514 6787 Investing activities purchase of property plant and equipment 820 789 purchase of software intangibles 612 438 Interest received 12 10 c ash outflow from investing activities 1420 1217 Cash flows from financing activities l oan finance raised  13600 equity funds raised 15000 c osts of equity funds raised 203 Repayment of borrowings 15270 15150 l oan fees paid for refinancing 130 476 dividends paid to ordinary shareholders 611 Interest paid 686 916 n et cash outflow from financing 1900 2942 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 2194 2628 Movement in net cash c ash and cash equivalents beginning of period 4713 2085 Increase in cash and cash equivalents 2194 2628 Cash and cash equivalents end of period 6907 4713 t he n otes and accounting policies on pages 66 to 83 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS For the year ended 31 december 2017 65 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview s hare capital s hare premium
At 1 January 2016 146 1309 1537 2992 profit and total comprehensive income for the period   3317 3317 At 1 January 2017 146 1309 4854 6309 c ancellation of share premium  1309 1309 s hares issued during the year 76 14924  15000 s hare issue costs  203  203 dividends paid to ordinary shareholders   611 611 equity settled share based payments   74 74 Transactions with owner 76 13412 772 14260 profit and total comprehensive income for the period   4331 4331 At 31 December 2017 222 14721 9957 24900 t he n otes and accounting policies on pages 66 to 83 form an integral part of these financial statements. exchange on 21 March 2017 are shown in n otes 20 and 21.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 31 december 2017 66 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 1 Medica Group Plc Medica Group plc the c ompany was incorporated in england and Wales on 22 April 2013 under the companies Act 2006 registration number  and is domiciled in the u nited Kingdom.
Its registered office and principal place of business is Havelock place Havelock Road Hastings east s ussex tn 34 1BG. comprise the c ompany and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group. the provision of teleradiology reporting and it is the leading independent provider in the u K. the c hairmans and c hief executives Reports on pages 45 and 1619.
In addition n ote 25 to the financial statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposure to credit risk and liquidity risk.
2 Basis of preparation Basis of preparation t he c onsolidated financial statements of Medica Group plc and its subsidiary undertakings together the Group for the 12 months ended 31 d ecember 2017 have been prepared by the directors of Medica Group plc.
Reporting standards IFRs  and IFRIc interpretations as adopted by the e uropean u nion eu  and the c ompanies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFR s . accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies. financial statements. the c ompany rounded to the nearest 000.
Going concern t he directors of Medica Group plc have assessed the current financial position of the Group along with future cash flow requirements to determine if the Group has the financial resources to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the approval of the accounts.
As a result of this review the directors of Medica Group plc have concluded that it is appropriate that Medica Group plc be considered a going concern.
For this reason they have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements. include any adjustments that would result in the going concern basis of preparation being inappropriate.
Adoption of new and revised standards n ew and amended standards issued in the year have not had a significant impact on the financial statements.
At the date of authorisation of these financial statements certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published by the IAs B and adopted by the eu but are not yet effective and have not been adopted early by the Group.
Management anticipates that all of the relevant pronouncements will be adopted in the Groups accounting policies for the first period beginning after the effective date of the pronouncement.
Information on new standards amendments and interpretations that are expected to be relevant to the Groups financial statements is provided below. not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
IFRs 9 Financial Instruments effective 1 January 2018.
IFRs 15 Revenue from contracts with customers effective date 1 January 2018.
IFRs 16 l eases effective date 1 January 2019 endorsed by the eu.
Based on the Groups historic transaction history and anticipated future transaction profile IFRs 9 is not expected to have a significant impact on the measurement financial instruments however there will be minor changes to the disclosures in the financial statements in order to comply with the new standard. there will be minor changes to the disclosures in the financial statements in order to comply with the new standard.
If the standard had been applied to the financial statements for the year ended 31 december 2017 there would have been no impact on revenue recognition.
IFRs 16 will impact the measurement and disclosure of lease liabilities and the liabilities shown on the Groups balance sheet.
A number of IFRs and IFRI c interpretations are also currently in issue which are not relevant for the Groups activities and which have not therefore been adopted in preparing these financial statements.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 31 december 2017 67 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview Summary of accounting policies t hese accounting policies have been used throughout all periods presented in the financial statements except where the Group has applied certain accounting policies and exemptions upon transition to IFRs .
Basis of consolidation t he Group financial statements consolidate those of the parent c ompany and all of its subsidiary undertakings drawn up to 31 december 2017.
All subsidiaries have the same reporting date and use accounting policies consistent with those of the parent c ompany.
Medica Group plc the Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the subsidiary and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity. is transferred to the Group. u nrealised gains and losses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Amounts reported in the financial statements of subsidiaries have been adjusted where necessary to ensure consistency with the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
Business combinations are dealt with by the acquisition method. acquisition. accordance with the Group accounting policies.
Goodwill is stated after separating out identifiable intangible assets.
Goodwill represents the excess of acquisition cost over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition. recognised from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as applicable.
Revenue
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts and sales related taxes.
Revenue is recognised when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the entity the costs incurred or to be incurred can be measured reliably and when the criteria for each of the Groups different activities have been met.
Radiology image submissions the service is deemed to have been provided and subsequent revenue recognised when the c ompany submits its radiology report to the customer.
Revenue for all service lines are recognised on the same basis.
Interest incomeInterest expense Interest income and expenses are reported on an accrual basis using the effective interest method.
Segment reporting IFRs 8 requires operating segments to be identified on the same basis as is used internally for the review of performance and allocation of resources by the Group c hief executive chief operating decision maker  cod M. activities take place on an integrated basis. integrated basis for the Group as a whole.
Leasing
Management applies judgement in considering the substance of a lease agreement and whether it transfers substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of the leased asset.
Key factors considered include the length of the lease term in relation to the economic life of the asset the present value of the minimum lease payments in relation to the assets fair value and whether the Group obtains ownership of the asset at the end of the lease term.
Operating leases All other leases are treated as operating leases.
Where the Group is a lessee payments on operating lease agreements are recognised as an expense on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Associated costs such as maintenance and insurance are expensed as incurred.
Benefits received and receivable as an incentive to enter into an operating lease are also spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 Summary of accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment property plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment. method.
25% per annum l easehold improvements  o ver the life of the lease term t he gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an item of property plant and equipment is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in profit or loss. t he assets residual value and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if required at each balance sheet date. greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Impairment of property plant and equipment At each balance sheet date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its property plant and equipment to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued amount in which case the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation decrease.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset cashgenerating unit in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss unless the relevant assets are carried at a revalued amount in which case the reversal of the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation increase.
Goodwill and other intangible assets An intangible asset which is an identifiable nonmonetary asset without physical substance is recognised to the extent that it is probable that the expected future economic benefits attributable to the asset will flow to the Group and that its cost can be measured reliably. arises from contractual or other legal rights.
Intangible assets acquired as part of a business combination are shown at fair value at the date of the acquisition less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is charged on a straightline basis through the profit or loss. c ustomer relationships  15 years. in 2013 software licences purchased since then are amortised over their term.
Brands  20 years.
Internal development costs expenditure on the research phase of projects to develop new projects is recognised as an expense as incurred.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 69 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview the Group has the ability to use or sell the software and the software will generate probable future economic benefits.
Goodwill and other intangible assets development costs not meeting these criteria for capitalisation are expensed as incurred. portion of relevant overheads and borrowing costs.
Impairment of intangible assets
Goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units and is not amortised but tested annually for impairment.
Impairment losses in respect of goodwill cannot be subsequently reversed.
At each balance sheet date the Group performs an annual impairment review of goodwill and any intangible assets with an indefinite useful economic life. extent of the impairment loss if any.
Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
An impairment loss is reversed if the assets or cashgenerating units recoverable amount exceeds its carrying amount.
Other intangible assets o ther intangible assets are not tested for impairment annually only when there is an objective indicator of impairment.
Where an impairment indicator is identified an impairment test is carried out by comparing the carrying of the assets with its recoverable amount.
If the recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
Taxation t ax expenses recognised in profit or loss comprise the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax not recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Current tax t he tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year. in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible. is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax deferred tax is recognised on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and are accounted for using the liability method. recognised. affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit. temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future. they are expected to reverse in the foreseeable future.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 t he carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered. substantively enacted by the balance sheet date. or settle the carrying amount of its assets and liabilities.
Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Summary of accounting policies continued Financial instruments Recognition initial measurement and derecognition Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the financial instrument and are measured initially at fair value adjusted for transaction costs except for those carried at fair value through profit or loss which are measured initially at fair value. measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities is described below.
Financial assets are derecognised when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire or when the financial asset and substantially all the risks and rewards are transferred.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligation specified in the contract is discharged cancelled or expires.
An exchange between an existing borrower and lender of debt instruments with substantially different terms shall be accounted for as an extinguishment of the original financial liability and the recognition of a new financial liability. for as an extinguishment of the original liability and the recognition of a financial liability.
A substantial modification of terms occurs when the discounted present value of the cash flows under the new terms is at least 10% different from the discounted present value of the remaining cash flows of the original facility. t he only types of financial assets held by the Group are loans receivables and derivative financial instruments.
Loans and receivables l oans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment. discounting is omitted where the effect of discounting is immaterial.
Groups cash and cash equivalents trade and most other receivables fall into this category of financial instruments.
Individually significant receivables are considered for impairment when they are past due or when other objective evidence is received that a specific counterparty will default.
Receivables that are not considered to be individually impaired are reviewed for impairment in groups which are determined by reference to the industry and region of the counterparty and other shared credit risk characteristics. historical counterparty default rates for each identified group.
Derivative financial instruments t he Group utilises interest rate swaps derivative financial instruments are recognised at fair value at the end of the year with changes in fair value recognised in the income statement.
Classification and subsequent measurement of financial liabilities t he Groups financial liabilities include borrowings trade and other payables and derivative financial instruments.
Financial liabilities are measured subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method except for derivatives. t he only derivatives held by the Group are interest rate swaps which have been included at fair value.
Financial liabilities designated at FVtpl  which are carried subsequently at fair value with gains or losses recognised in profit or loss. please see n ote 24 for the fair value hierarchy.
Equity reserves and dividend payments s hare capital represents the nominal value of shares that have been issued. s hare premium includes any premiums received on issue of share capital.
Any transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium net of any related income tax benefits.
Retained earnings include all current and prior period retained profits or losses.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 71 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview dividend distributions payable to equity shareholders are included in other liabilities when the dividends have been approved in a general meeting prior to the reporting date.
Exceptional items exceptional items are items that are unusual because of their size nature or incidence and which the directors consider should be disclosed separately to enable a full understanding of the Groups results.
Employee benefits s hortterm employee benefits and contributions to defined contribution plans are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Share based payments t he Group has applied the requirements of IFRs share based payments. t he Group issues share based payments to certain employees. eventually vest.
Fair value is measured by use of an appropriate valuation model.
Binomial model has been used to value the market based conditions part.
4 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty t he preparation of financial statements under IFRs requires the Group to make estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts. reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may differ from these estimates. discussed below.
Key judgements and sources of estimation uncertainty The useful life of acquired intangible assets t he Group recognises the intangible assets acquired as part of business combinations at fair value at the date of acquisition. future incremental cash flows generated by the assets and selection of an appropriate discount rate.
Furthermore management have estimated the expected useful lives of intangible assets and charged amortisation on these assets accordingly.
At the reporting date no impairments to other intangible assets were recognised in the period. of the purchase of Medica Reporting l imited. ownership. t he brand is expected to continue to be used for the foreseeable future.
In assessing the useful economic life of customer relationships the directors considered the importance of long term relationships given the limited number of n Hs t rusts and the fact that the majority of revenue came from long standing clients.
In assessing the useful economic life of the technology purchased the directors considered that the technology was core to the business and whilst requiring ongoing investment was not expected to fundamentally change for a considerable period.
5 Segment reporting Management prepare and monitor financial information for the Groups three primary service lines Routine c rosss ectional Routine plain Film and n ightHawk on a regular basis. operating activities of the Group.
IFRs 8 sets out certain thresholds in determining whether reportable operating segments exist and all of the three primary service lines exceed these thresholds.
However IFRs 8 permits the aggregation of operating segments where these services lines are similar in nature service delivery processes types or classes of customers and regulatory factors.
Management consider it is most appropriate to aggregate the three service lines into one t eleradiology operating segment due to the similarities in respect of these factors.
As a result all teleradiology activities are presented as one operating segment.
Medica Group plc has identified only one geographic area the u K.
As a result of this and there being only one operating segment as described above no analysis has been provided. of the Groups revenues.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 t he Group identified four revenue streams n ightHawk Routine c rosss ectional Routine plain Film and other. analysis of revenue by each stream is detailed below.
Routine c rosss ectional 12542 10508 Routine plain Film 3665 3876 Independent and specialist 710 602 33715 28522 6 Operating profit and profit before taxation t he operating profit and the profit before taxation are stated after Fees payable to the c ompanys auditor for the audit of the c ompanys annual accounts 46 53 t he audit of the c ompanys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 3 2 Total audit fees 49 55 t axation compliance services o ther assurance services 127 216 Total nonaudit fees 127 216 t otal fees paid to companys auditor 176 271 o perating lease rentals  land and buildings 52 52 depreciation property plant and equipment 775 883 Amortisation of intangible fixed assets on acquisition 870 870 Amortisation of intangible fixed assets on other assets 347 260 7 Exceptional items c osts incurred in respect of Initial public o ffering 1661 757 t he above costs were incurred in respect of the c ompanys refinancing and listing on the stock exchange in March 2017.
Although some of the costs are allowable for corporation tax purposes a large proportion of the costs are deemed capital in nature and therefore are not allowable for tax purposes the tax effect is not considered material by the directors.
Management identified a portion of the exceptional Ipo costs as relating to the issue of new shares and subsequently 203000 has been recognised in equity in 2017. exceptional finance costs are detailed in n ote 9.
8 Finance income Interest on cash and cash equivalents 12 10 Fair value movement on derivative financial instruments 38 9 Finance costs Bank interest 414 978 Amortisation of loan arrangement fees expense 68 291 exceptional loan arrangement fees expense 582 Interest on secured loan notes 179 882 Fair value movement on derivative financial instruments  30 1243 2181 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 73 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview As part of the listing process the debt owing to l loyds bank was partially settled and the preexisting debt agreement was amended so as to include Medica Group plc as the primary borrower.
512000 in respect of bank loan and 70000 in respect of loan notes which were initially incurred as a result of the previous borrowing arrangement were recognised as an exceptional finance cost in the income statement.
10 Tax expense Major components of tax expense Current tax u K current tax expense 1544 1214 prior year adjustment 45 6 t otal current tax 1499 1220 Deferred tax o riginations and reversal of temporary differences 168 189 effect of rate change  60 t otal deferred tax 168 249 Tax expense on ordinary activities 1331 971 Reconciliation of tax expense u K corporation tax is assessed on the profit on ordinary activities for the year and is higher than 2016 higher than the standard rate of corporation tax in the u K of 19.25% 2016 20%.
Reconciliation of effective tax rate profit on ordinary activities before tax 5662 4288 Income tax using the c ompanys domestic tax rate 19.25% 2016 20% 1090 858 effect of expenses not deductible for tax purposes 286 167 prior year adjustment  current tax 45 6 effect of tax rate change  deferred tax  60 t otal tax charge for period 1331 971 11 Earnings per share Both the basic and diluted profit per share have been calculated using the profit after tax attributable to shareholders of Medica Group plc as the numerator. the year.
Refinance costs  39 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 870 870 Adjusted profit for the period attributable to ordinary shareholders 7518 4983 Weighted average number of ordinary shares 108675802 100000002 dilutive effect of share options 746264 Weighted average number of ordinary shares 109422066 100000002 Basic profit per ordinary share pence 3.99p 3.32p diluted profit per ordinary share pence 3.96p 3.32p Adjusted basic profit per ordinary share pence 6.92p 4.98p Adjusted diluted profit per ordinary share pence 6.87p 4.98p 74 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 11 Earnings per share continued o n 15 March 2017 the subdivision of the 1455000 ordinary s hares of 0.10 each was approved so that each o rdinary s hare of 0.10 each was subdivided into 50 o rdinary s hares of 0.2p and by way of a bonus issue the c ompany allotted 27250002 o rdinary s hares of 0.2p each at nominal value to its existing shareholders pro rata to their existing shareholdings. to 100000002 and in accordance with IA s 33 the earnings per share calculation has been retrospectively adjusted.
All share options outstanding under the performance s hare plan were dilutive as at 31 december 2017. no further instruments that had a potentially dilutive effect.
12 Directors and employees t he average number of persons including directors employed by the Group during the years were
Business development and recruitment 9 10 s ervice delivery and n ightHawk 41 40 It  deployment and development 18 15 Finance 5 5 executive team 6 5 n onexecutive directors 3 t he aggregate cost of these employees was Wages and salaries 3015 2693 s ocial security costs 330 251 pension contributions 155 104 s hare based payments charge 74 3574 3048 directors emoluments paid during the period and included in the above figures were emoluments 741 573 t he highest paid director received emoluments totalling 191250 2016 165000.
13387 2016 11550. defined contribution pension schemes.
At the year end owing to director resignations during the year retirement benefits were accruing to three directors.
Key management of the Group are the executive members of Medica Group plcs Board of directors and two senior managers.
Key management personnel remuneration includes the following expenses s alaries including bonuses 793 573 s ocial security costs 100 85 pensions 47 28 s hare based payments charge 74 Key management personnel compensation 1014 686 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 75 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview 13 Goodwill
Cost
At 31 december 2015 and december 2016 15948 15948
At 31 december 2016 and december 2017 15948 15948 Goodwill is not amortised but tested annually for impairment. sheet date after allowing for an estimation of selling costs.
Groups revenue and operating activity other than finance charges relating to the bank loans and loan notes which are recorded in intermediate parent entities. goodwill and estimated selling costs.
14 Intangible assets customer relationships s oftware and technology
Cost
At 31 december 2015 6461 3922 2317 12700 Additions  438  438 At 31 december 2016 6461 4360 2317 13138 Additions  1033  1033 At 31 December 2017 6461 5393 2317 14171
At 31 december 2015 1150 1147 309 2606 c harge for the year 431 583 116 1130 At 31 december 2016 1581 1730 425 3736 c harge for the year 431 670 116 1217 At 31 December 2017 2012 2400 541 4953 Net book value At 31 December 2017 4449 2993 1776 9218 At 31 december 2016 4880 2630 1892 9402 At 31 december 2015 5311 2775 2008 10094 Amortisation has been included in administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and the estimated remaining useful life of each class of asset at 31 december 2017 was as follows c ustomer relationships 11 years s oftware and technology acquired in 2013 6 years s oftware and technology licences since 2013 o ver licence period Brand 16 years At the year ended 31 december 2017 70000 of development costs have been capitalised as internally generated software and technology intangibles. to the financial statements.
Included in software additions is an accrual of 421000 which will be paid in 2018 and is not recognised in the c ashflow statement on page 63.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 15 Property plant and equipment l easehold improvements c omputer equipment total
At 31 december 2015 97 3359 3456 Additions  789 789 At 31 december 2016 97 4148 4245 Additions  820 820 disposals  121 121 At 31 December 2017 97 4847 4944 Depreciation and impairment At 31 december 2015 26 1501 1527 c harge for the year 23 860 883 At 31 december 2016 49 2361 2410 c harge for the year 23 752 775 disposals  121 121 At 31 December 2017 72 2992 3064 Net book value At 31 December 2017 25 1855 1880 At 31 december 2016 48 1787 1835 At 31 december 2015 71 1858 1929 All depreciation charges are included within administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
As referred to in n ote 20 all assets have been pledged as security for the Groups borrowings and are subject to a fixed and floating charge.
16 Deferred taxation assets and liabilities deferred tax included in the statement of financial position is as follows Deferred tax liabilities Accelerated capital allowances 74 19 deferred tax on share based payments 38 deferred tax on intangible assets 1393 1577 1429 1596 Reconciliation of movement in deferred tax depreciation in excess of capital allowances total As at 1 January 2016 1846 1846 Recognised in the income statement 249 249 As at 31 December 2016 1597 1597 Recognised in the income statement 168 168 As at 31 December 2017 1429 1429 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 77 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview 17 Trade and other receivables t rade receivables 7840 5622 prepayments and accrued income 370 451 8210 6073 All trade receivable amounts are short term.
All of the Groups trade and other receivables have been reviewed for indicators of impairment. t he carrying value is considered a fair approximation of their fair value. management considers that all the above financial assets are of good credit quality.
In addition some of the unimpaired trade receivables of the Group are past due as at the reporting date.
More than three months but not more than six months 914 106 More than six months but not more than one year 8 More than one year 18 Trade and other payables t rade payables 1822 1567 c orporation tax 1212 617 o ther taxation and social security 103 81 Accruals 795 1018 3932 3283 All amounts are short term and the directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other payables are considered to be a reasonable approximation of fair value. one year of the balance sheet date. t he average credit period taken for trade purchases was 40 days 2016  40 days.
19 Borrowings due within one year Bank loans  1362 20 Borrowings due in more than one year Borrowings due in more than one year s ecured loan notes and accrued interest thereon net of debt issuance costs c Bpe loan notes  6686 Bank loans 11888 18683 11888 25369 78 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 20 Borrowings due in more than one year continued Maturity of the Groups nonderivative financial liabilities including interest payments where applicable Bank l oan Maturity of debt due within one year 286 due between 25 years 12930 t he above amounts reflect the contractual undiscounted cash flows which may differ from the carrying values of the liabilities at the reporting date.
31 december 2017. o n 21 March 2017 the Group was admitted to the Main Market of the london stock exchange. were used to repay the bank loan of 20m in a subsidiary c ompany.
A new bank loan was taken out by Medica Group plc of 12m which is repayable in five years. extinguishment of a financial liability as the terms of the loan agreement were substantially modified. statement as an exceptional finance cost. exceptional items as the refinancing was directly related to the Initial public o ffering in March 2017. t he bank loan is secured by way of a fixed and floating charge over all of the assets of the Group up to 12m. o n 21 March 2017 the full amount of loan notes and accrued interest from c Bpe c apital of 6.9m were repaid in full. liability was settled. the c onsolidated Income statement as an exceptional finance cost. consider these costs as exceptional items as the refinancing was directly related to the Initial public offering in March 2017.
21 Reconciliation of liabilities arising from financing activities s hort term l ong term
Bank borrowings l oan notes total 1st January 2017 1362 18683 6686 26731 Cash flows Interest  508 178 686 Repayment 1602 6900 6768 15270 Arrangement fees  130  130 1602 7538 6946 16086 Non Cash Interest  414 179 593 Amortisation of arrangement fees  Amortisation of exceptional arrangement fees 200 311 7tel260 1243 31st December 2017  11888  11888 22 Equity Ordinary share capital issued and fully paid At 31
At 31 december 111111114 ordinary shares of 0.02 222 1200000 A ordinary shares of 0.10  120 255000 ordinary shares of 0.10  26 Total ordinary share capital of the Company 222 146 o n 15 March 2017 the subdivision of the 1455000 A ordinary s hares and o rdinary s hares of 0.10 each was approved so that each o rdinary s hare of 0.10 each was subdivided into 50 o rdinary s hares of 0.2p and by way of a bonus issue the c ompany allotted 27250002 o rdinary s hares of 0.2p each at nominal value to its existing shareholders pro rata to their existing shareholdings.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 79 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview o n 16 March 2017 an offer prospectus was published in which the s elling s hareholders offered 78865979 existing s hares in aggregate for sale and the c ompany offered 11111112 n ew s hares for subscription. pari passu in all respects with the existing s hares and carry the right to receive all dividends and distributions. of bank debt that was outstanding prior to the listing. on the l ondon stock exchanges Main Market for listed securities. was 111111114 shares of 0.2p each.
Rights attributable to issued shares Any profits which the c ompany determines to distribute in any financial year shall be paid on the o rdinary s hares. every holder of an o rdinary s hare is entitled to one vote and has one vote for every share for which they are a holder. the o rdinary s hares.
Voting rights t he holders of o rdinary s hares are entitled to receive notice of and attend and vote at any general meeting of the company.
Share premium proceeds received in addition to the nominal value of the shares issued during the year have been included in share premium.
1309000 was cancelled and 1309000 was credited to the profit and loss account on the c ompanys statement of Financial position. l imited c ompany by ensuring that a minimum level of distributable reserves existed at the reregistration date.
Retained profit Retained earnings include current and prior period retained profit and losses.
23 Undertakings included in the financial statements t he consolidated financial statements include c lass of share held c ountry of incorporation proportion held n ature of business Medica Reporting s ervices l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% Holding company Medica Reporting Finance l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% Holding company Medica Reporting l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% t eleradiology reporting 24 Financial instruments Categories of financial instruments As at 31
As at 31 december Financial assets l oans and receivables 7840 5622 c ash and bank balances 6907 4713 14747 10335 Financial liabilities at amortised cost t rade and other payables trade payables and accruals 2617 2585 Borrowings within one year  1362 Borrowings due in more than one year 11888 25369 14505 29316 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss derivatives 14 52 A description of the Groups financial instrument risks including risk management objectives and policies is given in n ote 25.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 24 Financial instruments continued Fair value measurement of financial instruments t he methods used to measure financial assets and liabilities reported at fair value are described below.
Financial assets and financial liabilities measured at fair value in the statement of financial position are grouped into three levels of fair value hierarchy. l evel 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets and liabilities. directly i. as prices or indirectly i. derived from prices. l evel 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs. t he fair values of interest rate swaps are categorised within level 2 of the fair value hierarchy. rate swaps are not traded in active markets. corresponding to the maturity of the contract. appropriate format heading depending on the nature of the derivative.
25 Financial instruments risk Risk management objectives and policies t he Group is exposed to various risks in relation to financial instruments. by category are summarised in n ote 24. operations. t he main purpose of these financial instruments is to raise finance for the Groups operations. principal financial risks faced by the Group are liquidity credit and interest rate risks. transactional foreign currency risks as all of its activities are based in the u K. volatile financial markets. l ongterm financial investments are managed to generate lasting returns. options. t he most significant financial risks to which the Group is exposed are described below.
Credit risk t he Groups principal financial assets are cash and cash equivalents and trade and other receivables. has no significant credit risk. t he maximum exposure to credit risk is that shown within the balance sheet.
All amounts are short term and management consider the amounts to be of good credit quality.
For a summary of financial assets past due but not impaired please see n ote 17.
Liquidityfunding risk t he Groups funding strategy is to ensure a mix of funding sources offering flexibility and costeffectiveness to match the requirements of the Group. o perating subsidiaries are financed by retained profits. liquidity risk by maintaining adequate reserves and agreed committed banking facilities.
For a summary of non derivative financial liabilities that have contractual maturities including interest payment where applicable please see n ote 20.
Interest rate risk t he Group holds the majority of its cash and cash equivalents in corporate current accounts. a competitive interest rate with the advantage of quick access to the funds.
At the end of the year all of the Groups bank loans bore a variable rate of interest of l IBo R plus 1.75%.
However part of the interest rate risk was mitigated as 6.7m is subject to an interest rate swap effectively fixing the l IBo R at 0.7675% and the interest rate paid at approximately 2.5% for this part of the loan.
Capital risk management t he Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain a capital structure that optimises the cost of capital. maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of the debt and equity balance.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 81 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the consolidated statement of changes in equity. debt is defined as long and shortterm borrowings excluding derivatives. of the Group that are managed as capital.
Sensitivity analysis t he 12m in bank loans is at a variable interest rate of l IBo R plus 1.75% and therefore represents a potential risk that the fair value of the Groups future cash flows may fluctuate because of changes in market interest rates.
Interest rate swap arrangements were used throughout the year ending 31 december 2017 and as at that date which had the effect of fixing 6.7m of bank loans at an approximate fixed interest rate 2.5% per annum. themselves.
Accordingly the amount of debt outstanding as at 31 december 2017 considered to be exposed to interest rate risk was limited to 5.3m.
A sensitivity analysis based upon this amount has been prepared and is presented below.
At 31 december 2017 if l IBo R had been 100 basis points higher with all other variables held constant posttax profit for the year and total equity would have been reduced by 53000 arising as a result of higher interest expense on variable borrowings.
26 Share based payments u nder the Groups share based incentive scheme the following expense was charged.
All share based payment schemes related to equity settled awards only.
Performance share plan t he performance share plan is a free share award with an effective exercise price of nil.
For scheme participants half the award is based on earnings per share eps  and half is based on t otal s hareholder Return ts R. performance period is three years and there is an additional holding period of two years.
Accordingly the vesting period is deemed to be five years.
Further information is set out in the report of the Remuneration c ommittee on pages 35 to 53.
Awards
Number o utstanding at beginning of period Granted during period 866665 dividend equivalent in period 1820 exercised during period l apsed during period 122222 o utstanding at the end of period 746263 exercisable at end of period t he remaining weighted average contractual life is 4.25 years. the departure of a scheme participant from the c ompany.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 26 Share based payments continued t he Group engaged external consultants to calculate the fair value of the awards at the date of grant. and a binomial model for market based awards.
Awards s hare price at date of grant 1.35 exercise price nil expected volatility 26.2% expected life 5 years Risk free rate 0.5% expected dividend yield 0% Average fair value of award per share 1.19 SAYE scheme t he sAYe scheme is an allemployee HMRc approved taxadvantaged share scheme. employees saving a set amount from their salary for a period of three years.
At the end of the three years the employee is offered an opportunity to purchase shares based on the amount saved at an option price set at the start of the period. have saved a total of 40000 into the scheme.
In light of this the d irectors have concluded that any share based payments charge arising in 2017 are not material and therefore not accounted for it.
27 Financial commitments t he Group leases an office building under an operating lease. break clause at five years after the commencement of the lease.
At 31
At 31 december l ess than one year 78 78 Between 2 and 5 years 58 136 o ver 5 years t he present values of the future rental payments were not materially different to the amounts above.
28 Transactions with Directors and other related parties Included in administrative costs are 42600 2016 43500 in respect of fees payable to c Bpe n ominees l imited for services of the Investor director to the Group. controlling interest in the Group prior to 21 March 2017.
Key management personnel which the Group defines as the Board of directors and two senior managers remuneration is disclosed in n ote 12. o n 2 May 2013 Medica Group plc issued 18.4m in loan notes to cBpe n ominees l td.
In accordance with the terms of the loan note dated 2 May 2013 interest accrued quarterly on the principal amount of the loan notes outstanding and unpaid interest was rolled up and compounded at the end of each quarter. o n 21 March 2017 the outstanding loan notes and accrued interest of 6.9m were repaid in full.
Interest charges of 178000 31 december 2016 882000 have been recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
All transactions with related parties were on an arms length basis.
29 Controlling party t here is no overall controlling party of the Group following the admission of the c ompanys o rdinary s hares onto the premium listing segment of the o fficial l ist and to trading on the l ondon stock exchanges Main Market for listed securities on 21 March 2017.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED For the year ended 31 december 2017 83 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview 30 Post balance sheet events t here are no post balance sheet events.
31 Reconciliation of nonIFRS financial KPIs t he Group uses a number of key performance indicators to monitor the performance of its business. reconciles these key performance indicators to individual lines in the financial statements.
In the directors view it is important to consider the underlying performance of the business during the year. metrics. from the ApMs. annual report.
It is the directors intention to monitor and reassess the appropriateness of the ApMs in future years.
December december Reconciliation of adjusted operating profit o perating profit before exceptional items 8516 7216 Adjustments for Amortisation of acquired intangibles 870 870 s hare based payments 74 Refinance costs  39 Adjusted operating profit 9460 8125 Adjusted operating profit margin 28.1% 28.5% Reconciliation of adjusted profit before tax profit for the year 4331 3317 Adjustments for Amortisation of acquired intangibles 870 870 exceptional items 1661 757 exceptional finance costs 582 s hare based payments 74 Refinance costs  39 Adjusted profit after tax 7518 4983 Income tax charge 1331 971 Adjusted profit before tax 8849 5954 Reconciliation of EBITDA cash conversion percentage c ash inflow from operating activities 5514 6787 Adjustments for tax paid 904 924 exceptional items per income statement 1661 757 n on cash movement in exceptional items 612 750 o perating cashflow before tax and exceptional items 8691 7718 Adjusted eBItd A 10582 9229 eBItd A cash conversion rate 82.1% 83.6% Reconciliation of net debt c ash and equivalents 6907 4713 Borrowings due within one year  1362 Borrowings due after one year 11888 25369 n et debt 4981 22018 t he eBItd A cash conversion percentage calculation has been updated to take account of noncash movements in exceptional items to provide a more appropriate figure for o perating c ashflow before tax and exceptional items. consistency. t his reflects the calculations used in the day to day management of the business.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION COMPANY REGISTRATION As at 31 december 2017 n ote At 31
At 31 december Fixed asset investments Investments in subsidiaries 34 1455 1455 Current assets debtors 37 30318 deferred tax 38 Creditors amounts falling due within one year Accruals 208 Total assets less current liabilities 31603 1455 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 36 11888 Net assets 19715 1455 Capital and reserves c alled up share capital 35 222 146 s hare premium account 35 14721 1309 profit and loss account 4772 Total equity 19715 1455 parent c ompany profit for the year 4000 t he financial statements on pages 84 to 88 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of directors on 12 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by JOHN GRAHAM ANTHONY LEE
Director 85 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 31 december 2017 s hare capital s hare premium
At 1 January 2016 146 1309  1455 profit and total comprehensive income for the period At 1 January 2017 146 1309  1455 c ancellation of share premium  1309 1309 s hares issued during the year 76 14924  15000 s hare issue costs  203  203 dividends paid to ordinary shareholders   611 611 equity settled share based payments   74 74 Transactions with owner 76 13412 772 14260 profit and total comprehensive income for the period   4000 4000 At 31 December 2017 222 14721 4772 19715 86 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 32 Accounting policies t he financial statements have been prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards including Financial Reporting standard 101 the Financial Reporting standard Applicable in the u K and Republic of Ireland FRs 101 and the companies Act 2006. under the historical cost convention modified to include certain items at fair value. prepared in sterling which is the functional currency of the c ompany.
Exemptions t he directors have taken advantage of the exemption available under section 408 of the c ompanies Act 2006 and not presented a profit and loss account for the c ompany alone.
In addition the directors have taken exemption from providing a cash flow statement and financial instruments disclosures as these are provided within the Group accounts.
In preparing these financial statements the c ompany has taken advantage of all disclosure exemptions conferred by FRs 101.
A statement of cash flows and related notes t he requirements of IAs 24 related party disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered in to between two or more members of the group as they are wholly owned within the group t he effect of future accounting standards not adopted disclosure of key management personnel compensation disclosure in respect of financial instruments other than disclosures required as a result of recording financial instruments at fair value s hare based payment disclosures required under IFRs 2 Going concern t he directors of Medica Group plc have assessed the current financial position of the Group along with future cash flow requirements to determine if the Group has the financial resources to continue as a going concern for the foreseeable future. be considered a going concern.
For this reason they have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements. concern basis of preparation being inappropriate.
Investments
Investments are recognised initially at fair value which is normally the transaction price excluding transaction costs. s ubsequently they are measured at cost less impairment.
Financial instruments s ee n ote 3.11 of the Group accounts.
Share capital and reserves s hare capital represents the nominal value of shares that have been issued. s hare premium includes any premiums received on issue of share capital.
Any transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium net of any related income tax benefits.
Retained earnings include all current and prior period retained profits or losses. to share based employee remuneration. been approved in a general meeting prior to the reporting date.
Significant judgements and estimates t he directors review annually whether there have been any indicators of impairment of investments.
Where an impairment indicator is identified an impairment test is carried out by comparing the carrying of the assets with its recoverable amount.
If the recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
33 Directors and employees t he directors and other key management personnel were the only employees of the c ompany during the year. statements.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 87 Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 strategic Report Governance Financial Statements o verview 34 Investments in subsidiaries and associates
At 31 december 2016 1455
Impairment
At 31 december 2017 1455 Investments have been assessed for impairment and the Board has reviewed the funds successfully raised through the Initial public o ffering on 21 March 2017 and the fair value of the Group as indicated by the market value of its equity at the balance sheet date both of which valued the c ompany in excess of 150m.
Given the valuation the Board is comfortable that the investments are not impaired.
At 31 december 2017 the company had the following subsidiary undertakings.
Medica Reporting s ervices l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% Holding company Medica Reporting Finance l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% Holding company Medica Reporting l imited o rdinary england and Wales 100% t eleradiology reporting 35 Capital and reserves Ordinary Share capital issued and fully paid At 31
At 31 december 111111114 o rdinary s hares of 0.02 222 1200000 A o rdinary s hares of 0.10  120 255000 o rdinary s hares of 0.10  26 Total Ordinary Share capital of the Company 222 146 o n 15 March 2017 the subdivision of the 1455000 A ordinary s hares and o rdinary s hares of 0.10 each was approved so that each o rdinary s hare of 0.10 each was subdivided into 50 o rdinary s hares of 0.2 pence and by way of a bonus issue the c ompany allotted 27250002 o rdinary s hares of 0.2 pence each at nominal value to its existing shareholders pro rata to their existing shareholdings. s hares in aggregate for sale and the c ompany offered 11111112 n ew s hares for subscription. pari passu in all respects with the existing s hares and carry the right to receive all dividends and distributions. on the l ondon stock exchanges Main Market for listed securities. was 111111114 shares of 0.2 pence each.
Rights attributable to issued shares Any profits which the c ompany determines to distribute in any financial year shall be paid on the o rdinary s hares. holder. the ordinary shares.
Voting rights t he holders of o rdinary s hares are entitled to receive notice of and attend and vote at any general meeting of the company.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Share premium proceeds received in addition to the nominal value of the shares issued during the year have been included in share premium.
1309000 was cancelled and 1309000 was credited to the profit and loss account on the c ompanys statement of Financial position. reregistration date.
Retained profit Retained earnings include current and prior period retained profit and losses.
36 Borrowings o n 21 March 2017 the bank loan to Medica Reporting Finance limited was repaid and a new loan of 12m was taken out by Medica Group plc parent c ompany. s ee n ote 20 for details of the movement in borrowings during the year.
37 Debtors t he debtor balance of 30.3m relates to amounts owed from subsidiaries. on demand by the c ompany or repaid at any time at the option of the subsidiary.
In the directors view the entire outstanding balance could be settled by the relevant subsidiary within one year of the balance sheet date and as such the directors are satisfied that there is no indication of impairment.
38 Related parties s ee n ote 28 in the Group Financial statements for related parties information.
39 Post balance sheet events t here were no post balance sheet events.
Medica Group Plc Annu Al Repo Rt And Accounts 2018 strategic Report Governance financial Statements o verview COMPANY INFORMATION t he Board of directors R davis  appointed 1 March 2017 s Whittern  appointed 1 March 2017 professor M Bewick  appointed 1 March 2017 A Jain J Graham dr s davies A l ee c ompany s ecretary A l ee Registered office Medica Group plc Fifth Floor Havelock place Havelock Road
Independent auditors Grant t hornton u K llp c hartered Accountants and statutory Auditors 2nd Floor st Johns Housesite A Medica Group Plc Annu Al RepoR t And Accounts 2018 MEDICA GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 MEDICA REPORTING LIMITED Fifth Floor Havelock place Havelock Road
