SUSTAINING
THE FUTURE Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR VISION IS TO BE A
FERTILIZER
BUSINESS
WERE
ABOUT
DELIVERY 1 STRATEGIC REPORT 02 Highlights 04 Chairmans statement 08 Business overview 10 Sustainable development 14 Market context 16 POLY4 explained 18 Chief Executives review 22 Strategic priorities 24 Strategy in action 32 Our value proposition
34 Chief Financial Officers review
38 Responsible business 48 Risk management
56 Board of Directors 58 Chairmans introduction 60 Corporate governance 66 Audit Committee report 70 Nomination Committee report 73 Remuneration Committee report 76 Directors remuneration policy 86 Annual report on remuneration 99 Other statutory information 102 Directors responsibilities FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 104 Independent auditors report to the members of Sirius Minerals Plc 110 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 111 Consolidated statement of financial position 112 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 113 Consolidated statement of cash flows 114 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 135 Company statement of financial position 136 Company statement of changes in equity 137 Notes to the Company financial statements ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 140 Shareholder information 141 Glossary Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 HEAR FROM OUR CEO PAGES 1820 READ ABOUT CONSTRUCTION PAGES 1013 LEARN ABOUT POLY4 PAGES 1617 2017 was the year when construction of our world class fertilizer mine in the UK commenced.
CHRIS FRASER.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PLEASE VISIT OUR PRODUCT WEBSITE
OM
PLEASE VISIT OUR WEBSITE
OM 2 2
STRONG
PERFORMANCE
PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Worldclass resource Defined the worlds largest highgrade deposit of polyhalite.
2.66 billion tonnes of high grade polyhalite from only 7% of the Project area.
Approvals in place Have all the approvals required to construct and operate the largest mine of its type anywhere in the world in North Yorkshire UK.
Stage 1 financing complete US1.2 billion commitment Largest UK mining equity transaction since 2012.
L a r g e s t e v e r c o n v e r t i b l e note issue by an AIM listed company.
Largest ever UK royalty transaction.
Sales and marketing Global sales commitments for 4.4 Mtpa takeorpay supply agreements.
Extensive and ongoing global RandD programme.
US1.2 billion stage 1 financing complete 2.66 billion tonne resource 4.4 Mtpa global takeorpay supply agreements in place Commencement of construction Construction officially commenced May 2017.
Sirius has engaged world leading construction partners to deliver a worldclass operation.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Complete site preparation works at Woodsmith Mine and Lockwood
Site access works complete.
Haul road drainage concrete batch plant and general infrastructure complete.
Site welfare facilities installed and operational.
MTS and reinjection pads complete.
Substantially complete Dwall installation for production and service shafts Scope of Dwalling activities was substantially increased with the change to wider foreshafts.
Progress on production shaft has been deferred to allow for the SM14B drilling programme.
Progress design activities for MTS and frontend design for harbour and MHF MTS scope of work at advanced commercial discussion stage with multiple contractors.
Design scope for MHF and overland conveyor complete and out for commercial tender.
Port outsourcing opportunities are being negotiated in parallel with internal design and build process.
Execute incremental supply agreements Supply agreement signed with Wilmar International for South East Asia seven year term peaking at 0.75 Mtpa.
Commercial discussions in other key regions Europe Brazil China Africa progressing well.
On track for stage 2 financing requirements.
Expand breadth and depth of the agronomy programme Over 260 trials on 32 crops in 17 countries.
Over 80 new trials commenced during 2017.
Seek a Premium Listing and move to the Main Market Premium Listing obtained in Q2.
FTSE 250 inclusion obtained at halfyear index reweighting.
2017 total shareholder return of 24% vs 14% for the FTSE 250.
Preparation work for stage 2 financing execution in late 2018 Key advisors appointed and due diligence programme well advanced.
PERFORMANCE AGAINST MILESTONES IN 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 4 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chairmans statement
It is with considerable pride that I share with you the notable achievements that have been key to the continued success of our polyhalite Project in 2017.
First and foremost the commencement of construction in a safe and secure environment has seen us take major strides towards our goal of first production in 2021.
The impressive construction progress over the last 12 months sits alongside several other key achievements which are all contributing towards the successful fulfilment of our ultimate vision to become a worldclass fertilizer business.
Local
At full production over 1000 high skilled jobs will be created with an additional 1500 jobs created in the supply chain.
The highskilled jobs we will create will also be highly productive and wellpaid.
As the largest private sector capital investment in the North we are sending a clear message that the region is open for business and has the necessary skills and ability to deliver major infrastructure projects.
In addition to the employment opportunities created the Company expects that at full production it will make around 85 million in local payments each year and will deliver approximately 13 million in annual contributions to the Sirius Minerals Foundation as well as being a catalyst for regeneration with the potential to create new economic clusters in the region.
The impressive construction progress over the last 12 months sits alongside several other key achievements which are all contributing towards the successful fulfilment of our ultimate vision to become a worldclass fertilizer business.
RUSSELL SCRIMSHAW.
CHAIRMAN
PROGRESSING
TOWARDS
A BRIGHT FUTURE 5 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Beyond the North East our project will also bring major economic benefits to the UK as a whole.
At fullscale production we are forecast to generate significant tax revenues to the national exchequer strengthening the UKs fiscal position and supporting public services.
The
Woodsmith Mine and associated infrastructure will enable us to produce and sell up to 20 million tonnes per annum of our primary product POLY4.
Having been associated with significant mining projects for a large part of my career I take great comfort that this expected success of our business goes well beyond the investment proposition.
The efforts of our team and supporters are already creating positive tangible economic change in the UK and we look forward to doing so for many years to come.
Global
For me it is very important that POLY4 can contribute to easing the challenge of global food security.
Fertilizers are fundamental to improving agricultural yields and helping to address the forecasted imbalance between food supply and demand.
Global population is growing at a rapid rate and with it the requirement for more food.
Unless more effective more efficient and sustainable practices are adopted farmers and food producers will struggle to bridge the gap between supply and demand.
Our
POLY4 delivers greater nutrient uptake and improves both yield and quality on multiple crops in varying geographic conditions across the world.
Sirius team has already demonstrated their ability to deliver successful outcomes in the face of challenges others have considered overwhelming.
In order to achieve our vision and ensure the potential benefits for all stakeholders come to fruition the tenacity and determination which has defined our Company to date will continue to stand us in good stead as we progress further into this current phase of developing our worldclass mining operation.
2017 construction commences After five years of exploration preparation obtaining planning approval and having delivered many significant project milestones I am pleased to report that the construction of our North Yorkshire polyhalite Project is well underway.
At the Woodsmith Mine site all initial site works to enable the construction of the key infrastructure components are complete.
The working platforms for the main mine shaft and MTS shaft were completed early to ensure shaft related activities could commence as soon as possible.
At Lockwood Beck initial site works are now complete including the upgrade and repositioning of the existing road junction.
The new junction provides safe entry to the site and has also greatly improved the access to the existing road infrastructure.
The shaft sinking platform and associated drainage have been installed and the site is ready for shaft sinking activities to get underway in 2018.
Supply agreements Market acceptance of POLY4 in the form of longterm supply agreements as evidenced through our partnership with leading agribusiness Wilmar reinforces and validates that POLY4 will earn its place in the global fertilizer market.
Our
East Asia.
Wilmar is the latest addition to our existing group of industry leading customers with whom we expect to help drive further global demand for POLY4.
Our people People are critical to the success of our business and I am particularly pleased with the expanding team of highly motivated diverse and experienced individuals who have joined the business in 2017.
The last year has seen our team more than double in size and the successful move in late 2017 to Resolution House our new office headquarters in Scarborough has provided the space technology and environment to support our workforce.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 6 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 I am particularly pleased with the overall quality of people who have joined us from the local area.
To date the majority of our head office team in Yorkshire has been sourced from the local labour market.
I also take great satisfaction from the fact that many of our younger team members who joined us as apprentices are now integral members of the team.
Our strong values of responsibility ownership belief and urgency based on the solid foundations of safety and teamwork have propelled the team to achieve more than many people thought would ever be possible.
Move to the Main Market and Premium Listing Following the completion of stage 1 financing we announced our intention to apply for admission to listing on the premium listing segment of the Official List of the UK Listing Authority Premium Listing and admission to trading on the main market of the London Stock Exchange the Main Market.
While AIM had provided us with an excellent platform to progress the Company through the various approval phases of the Project the Company Directors believe that a Premium Listing better supports the longterm strategy and potential of the Company by providing us with a more appropriate platform for growth access to broader international investor audiences and deeper pools of investment capital that reflect the worldclass nature of the Project and Sirius longterm potential as a global supplier of multinutrient fertilizer.
This important milestone was accomplished in April 2017 and Sirius finished 2017 as a FTSE 250 constituent.
Executive Director and Senior NonExecutive Director appointments Early in 2017 we announced the appointment of Thomas Staley to the Board as Finance Director.
Thomas played an instrumental role in securing the stage 1 financing and he will play a pivotal role in a successful execution of the stage 2 debt raising.
Thomas appointment adds to an already very strong complement of Board members who have the credentials and experience required to lead the Company through the next phase of development.
We also announced the elevation of one of our very experienced Non Executive Board members Noel Harwerth to the role of Senior Independent Director.
Noel has a wide array of Board experiences across several industries including mining and finance.
Over the last few years she has provided us with wise counsel on a regular basis and I am very pleased she has agreed to add this expanded role to her duties.
Outlook
2018 will be a pivotal year for us as we seek the remaining financing required to complete this transformational Project.
The construction of the first new fertilizer mine in the UK for a generation is an opportunity to create thousands of jobs and bring significant economic benefits to both national and local economies.
In order to fully realise this transformational opportunity for the UK a partnership with the UK Government in the form of a Treasury Guarantee under the Infrastructure Project Authoritys scheme is essential.
Securing this guarantee and our stage 2 financing will be our core focus for the year ahead and I am comforted by our excellent progress made to date.
With preparations well underway to secure commitments for financing we are confident in our ability to deliver these goals and look forward to taking on the challenges which lie ahead.
The short medium and longterm benefits from our Project are significant and will not be diminished by Britains decision to leave the EU.
I believe that our ongoing success is a clear demonstration of the growing local and national public and political support for realising the full potential of the Woodsmith Mine.
I would like to thank all our shareholders supporters and suppliers for their ongoing support.
Kind regards RUSSELL SCRIMSHAW
Chairmans statement
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 85 million annually in local payments to mineral rights holders and to the Sirius Minerals Foundation 2.5 billion of exports annually representing a 7% reduction in the UK trade deficit 2.3 billion annual direct contribution to GDP
NATIONAL
GLOBAL
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 8 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business overview
WOODSMITH
TO THE WORLD Sirius Minerals North Yorkshire Polyhalite Project Credit Ebor images North York Moors National Park 9 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Situated between the River Tees and Scarborough in North Yorkshire UK Sirius Project covers an area of 750km onshore and offshore.
Sirius has secured all the required planning permissions and approvals along with the necessary mineral rights to develop its flagship North Yorkshire polyhalite Project which when constructed will have the capacity to deliver up to 20 Mtpa of its multinutrient low chloride fertilizer product POLY4.
POLY4 is derived from the naturally occurring mineral polyhalite K
MgSO
2CaSO 2H
Polyhalite is a relatively common mineral which occurs in marine evaporite systems and is usually found in accumulations several centimetres thick.
In Yorkshire Sirius has intersected highgrade seams of polyhalite up to 70 metres thick.
Sirius has defined a JORC compliant reserve of 280 million tonnes of polyhalite with a mean grade of 88.4% from a JORC compliant inferred and indicated resource of 2.66 billion tonnes of 85.7% polyhalite.
The polyhalite formed when an ancient sea the Zechstein Sea evaporated some 260 million years ago.
The polyhalite seams that are the focus of the Company are located approximately 1550 metres below surface level and have a mean reserve thickness of 25 metres.
The current extent of the mineral resource which has exploration potential in all directions is defined from an area of only 7% of the Companys total mineral rights holdings.
To access its worldclass mineral resource Sirius has designed its mine infrastructure to not only be sympathetic to the sensitive location of its Woodsmith Mine within the North York Moors National Park but to also allow the Company to efficiently mine and transport up to 20 Mtpa of polyhalite from the Woodsmith Mine site to the Materials Handling Facility MHF on Teesside causing minimal surface impact.
The low impact infrastructure ensures no mineral will come to surface until after it leaves the National Park and arrives at the
The scale and quality of the mineral resource combined with the relative proximity to a deepwater port present significant economic and operational advantages and give the Project all the hallmarks of a world class resource asset.
2.66 billion tonne resource 280 million tonne reserve 37 kilometres from a deepwater harbour facility The current extent of the mineral resource which has exploration potential in all directions is defined from an area of only 7% of the Companys total mineral rights holdings.
Polyhalite core sample ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 10 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainable development WHAT WE ARE
Industryleading design and construction techniques are being deployed to develop the largest mine of its type anywhere in the world.
The low impact design coupled with an innovative ore delivery system is setting a new standard for sustainable mine development.
Shafts
At the Woodsmith Mine site two deep shafts are being constructed to access the polyhalite in the centre of the mineral reserve the production shaft reaching a depth of 1594 metres and the service shaft reaching a depth of 1565 metres.
Once constructed the production shaft will be fitted out with two Blair multirope winders each capable of hoisting 6.7 Mtpa of polyhalite ore for a combined capacity of 13 Mtpa.
A third shaft the Mineral Transport System MTS access shaft will also be constructed.
The MTS access shaft is being constructed to facilitate construction of the MTS.
Shaft construction will utilise proven shaft sinking methodologies.
Woodsmith Mine site to characterise the nature of the geology which will be encountered during shaft construction.
The extensive ground investigation programme has also informed the design of the permanent shaft lining.
To achieve full 20 Mtpa capacity the MTS shaft at the Woodsmith Mine will require further deepening from the 360m level to the polyhalite mining horizon.
Construction underway at the Woodsmith Mine site Shaft construction will utilise proven shaft sinking methodologies.
Maintenance vehicle
Product conveyor Up to 70m thick
Salt
Sylvinite
Bunter Sandstone Redcar Mudstone 1050m 1300m 1500m Average depth Not to scale 1 Woodsmith Mine 2 Polyhalite 3 Mineral Transport System MTS 4 Lockwood Beck 5 Materials Handling Facility MHF 6 Bran Sands Harbour Facility Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The low impact design coupled with an innovative ore delivery system is setting a new standard for sustainable mine development.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 12 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sustainable development continued The MTS incorporates industry standard equipment providing a transport system that is reliable lowmaintenance and lowcost.
Mtpa capacity metre diameter kilometres long 13 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Mineral Transport System The MTS will carry mined polyhalite ore 37km underground from the Woodsmith Mine to the MHF at Wilton International.
A high capacity conveyor will transport mined ore within a 4.3 metre diameter concretelined tunnel.
The MTS incorporates industry standard equipment providing a transport system that is reliable lowmaintenance and lowcost.
The MTS is being constructed to operate at 20 Mtpa capacity.
The MTS will be constructed using three tunnel boring machines
TBMs are a widely used tunnel construction methodology designed for safe and efficient operation.
TBMs will be launched from the Woodsmith Mine site the MHF and from an intermediate site along the route of the tunnel at Lockwood Beck.
The MTS is being constructed within the Redcar Mudstone a geological formation which can be excavated efficiently but has the structural integrity to accommodate a tunnel.
Materials Handling Facility Located at Teesside on the Wilton International site the MHF will consist of the plant and equipment necessary for a simple and cost effective granulation process to produce bulk volumes of POLY4.
The polyhalite ore will undergo a simple process of crushing grinding granulation screening and drying to produce the finished POLY4 granular product.
The MHF will have an initial phase 1 production capacity of 10 Mtpa and a footprint that will enable an increase in capacity to 20 Mtpa.
The MHF is large enough to accommodate the necessary storage requirement for up to 20 Mtpa of POLY4 and sufficient operating capacity to transfer finished product from the MHF to the harbour facility for efficient ship loading.
Crushing
Run of mine ore is nominally crushed to below 50mm
Crushed ore ground to pass 0.2mm
Binder and water added to polyhalite powder and granulated to form POLY4 granules
POLY4 granules screened.
Oversize
Drying
POLY4 granules dried to final moisture content ready for storage and delivery Harbour Facility The Project benefits from being close to a port relative to other fertilizer producers.
The Bran Sands site on the River Tees is ideally located for the bulk export of POLY4.
Finished product will be transported approximately 3.5km from the MHF on a covered overland conveyor to a new quay which will be constructed on the River Tees.
Longtravel widespan ship loaders will transfer finished product into a ships hold at 5000 tonnes per hour.
Expansion to facilitate an increase in production to 13 Mtpa and then to 20 Mtpa will require the installation of a second berth and a second ship loader.
The Bran Sands site has the capacity to accommodate any future expansion.
STATEOFTHEART
UNLOCKING
MAXIMUM VALUE Sirius Minerals proposed Bran Sands harbour development ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 14
Sulphur
Phosphorus
Mg
Magnesium
Potassium
Ca
Calcium
Increases plant yield by promoting protein formation which is essential for growth and development in plants. and yield of the plant.
Key component of enzymes and vitamins in plants and necessary for formation of flowers seeds and chlorophyll.
Essential for the efficient fixation of nitrogen in plants.
Vital for root development and plays a key role in the photosynthesis process.
Plays a vital role in the photosynthesis process.
Involved in many enzyme reactions and participates in nutrient uptake and transportation.
Helps regulate the physiological functions of plants.
Helps efficient use of water and improves durability.
Essential part of cell wall formation and helps in the protection against diseases.
Calcium participates in the metabolic uptake processes of other nutrients.
Macronutrients necessary for effective plant growth Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Market context WELL POSITIONED TO MEET DEMAND Fertilizers are a fundamental requirement of modern agriculture and the global food supply chain.
Every growing season plants take up nutrients from the soil depleting those that are naturally available.
Unless the nutrients are replaced soil will become nutrient deficient and a plants ability to grow efficiently will be reduced.
There are six macronutrients all plants require nitrogen N phosphorus P potassium K magnesium Mg sulphur S and calcium Ca.
Each nutrient serves a different vital role in plant function structure and development.
A balance of nutrients is necessary to maximise nutrient use efficiency as a shortage of any single nutrient may compromise a plants overall health.
This is because most nutrients have a specific biochemical function.
According to the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs the worlds population numbered nearly 7.6 billion as of mid2017 implying the world has added approximately one billion inhabitants over the last 12 years.
Population growth rates of 1.1% per year mean 83 million people are added to global population annually.
This will result in a forecast global population of 9.8 billion by 2050.
In response to this growth food production will have to increase by 60% to keep pace with demand.
The increase in food demand could in part be achieved by devoting more land to agriculture.
However additional land is not readily available.
The more sustainable option is to make better use of the already available agricultural land and adopt more effective and efficient fertilizer practices.
Fertilizer use millions of tonnes Fertilizer use millions of tonnes World population billions World population growth and fertilizer use 19502010 1teltelteltel tel.0 World population Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 83 million people added to global population annually 9.8 billion forecast global population by 2050 60% food production will have to increase to keep pace with demand
1 World population CAGR 1.7% fertilizer use CAGR 4.3%.
Source Adapted from FAO and IFADATA data acquired by Earth Policy Institute.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 16
6% 14%
17% 19%
Se
Zn
Mo
Fe
Mn
Cu
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
EXPLAINED
WHAT IS POLY4 POLY4 is derived from the naturally occurring mineral polyhalite.
POLY4 is unique in that it provides a natural combination of four of the six key macronutrients plants require to grow effectively potassium K magnesium Mg sulphur S and calcium Ca.
In addition to its multinutrient content POLY4 is certified for organic use and has a number of other positive characteristics which make it suitable for widespread commercial use including suitability for chloride sensitive crops efficient nutrient release profile ability to reduce agricultural impact on the environment by improving fertilizer use efficiency reducing erosion and nutrient loss availability for use as a direct application fertilizer and compatibility for use with other fertilizer products.
Notes
POLY4 composition based on 90% polyhalite grade.
Macronutrients based on ww % and micronutrients based on mgkg micronutrients content B 169 Zn 1.9 Mn 3.1 Mo 0.3 Se0.5 FE0.5 Cu 1.1 Sr 1414.
2 POLY4 is the trademark name for polyhalite products from the Sirius Minerals polyhalite Project in North Yorkshire 48% SO B  boron Cu  copper Se  selenium Zn  zinc Fe  iron Sr  strontium Mo  molybdenum Mn  manganese 17 Global marketing regions and current supply agreements Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
THE GLOBAL MARKET FOR POLY4 A multichannel market adoption approach has been established to achieve awareness and market penetration of POLY4 into the established fertilizer industry.
Longterm partnerships have been developed with universities customers governments and food manufacturers to validate the efficacy of POLY4 and to ensure the Companys comprehensive research and development programme is appropriate for the global marketplace.
These partnerships combined with a targeted regional sales strategy have enabled Sirius to enter into a number of binding largevolume longterm supply agreements under which customers have agreed to buy a minimum amount of POLY4 once production begins and pay a given price.
To date the Company has entered into supply agreements totalling 4.4 Mtpa at their respective full volumes with the majority of pricing mechanisms linked to the underlying nutrient value and competing product benchmark pricing.
4.4 Mtpa Volume of supply agreements entered into by the Company to date.
More information relating to supply agreements can be found on the Company website.
PLEASE VISIT OUR WEBSITE
OM
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 18 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DELIVERING RESULTS A BRIGHT FUTURE
Chief Executives review
2017 was a milestone year for us with commencement of construction incremental supply agreements signed bringing the total to 4.4 million tonnes per annum a move to the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange and inclusion in the FTSE 250 among the highlights.
Our numerous successes along the development journey drive us to approach this next phase of development with the same ownership belief and urgency which are some of the key values which define who we are.
For those who have supported us over the years I hope the commencement of construction provides further validation of our commitment to succeed.
Safety
Safety is paramount to the success of our business.
Our culture places safety at the forefront of everything we do and we are continuously engaged with our contractors and consultants to ensure they adopt our safety culture and company values.
Two recordable incidents have occurred during the first year of construction and we are constantly working to improve our processes and find safer ways of working in order to ensure that we all return home to our families at the end of each day.
For those who have supported us over the years I hope the commencement of construction provides further validation of our commitment to succeed.
CHRIS FRASER.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 19
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4 May 2017 formal commencement of construction Expanding global research and development programme Our strategy The Company has a clear and robust strategy and is focused on executing this strategy successfully.
Our strategy is to build a worldclass longlife lowcost production facility develop an industry leading product penetrate existing markets and drive longterm value and execute a financing plan that delivers returns for shareholders.
Along our journey we have made strategic decisions within this framework whether it be switching to a more efficient low impact transport system or even the nature of our product.
Optimisation through evolution will always be at the heart of our strategic decisionmaking process.
Through this process we believe that the Sirius value proposition continues to grow and be further enhanced.
Build a worldclass longlife lowcost production facility It has always been our intention to construct a production facility which enables us to maximise the potential of our unique polyhalite resource.
The scale thickness and quality of the deposit means highly efficient bulk mining methods can be employed to maximise output over hundreds of years and these considerations are at the forefront of our approach to mine design and construction.
We believe the asset we are constructing will be among the most costcompetitive multinutrient fertilizer producers globally.
For those of you who have driven past the Woodsmith Mine site over the past 12 months you will be impressed with its transformation.
Formal commencement of construction started officially on 4 May 2017 and the work completed over the course of the year is the first step in executing on this part of our strategy.
Develop an industryleading product POLY4 is a natural low chloride multinutrient fertilizer the likes of which has never been widely available in the major growing regions of the world.
Our ever expanding global agronomy programme provides partners and potential customers with an independently validated dataset which demonstrates the efficacy of POLY4 on a wide range of different crops in varying geographic and climatic conditions.
Leading industry participants and potential customers are excited by the prospects of POLY4 and are enthusiastic about introducing it into their product portfolios.
During 2017 we articulated the four cornerstones of POLY4 Effectiveness Efficiency Flexibility and Sustainability.
The cornerstones describe POLY4s unique value proposition and are proving to be an effective marketing tool. about the product.
Penetrate existing markets and drive longterm value We have a threestep approach to our marketing strategy Substitution  utilising POLY4 as a substitute for other existing fertilizers which include one or more of the same primary nutrients contained in polyhalite.
This disruptive approach will ensure POLY4 is widely available in all markets.
Market growth  today there is an unmet demand for lower chloride potassium sources and making POLY4 widely available at a commercial price point will unlock new sources of demand and opportunities to adopt greener and more sustainable agricultural practices.
Performance  our successful extensive crop trial programme consistently demonstrates strong performance from POLY4 and we believe this performance will underpin premium pricing for the product over the long term.
COMPANY VALUES
Ownership
Belief
Urgency
Safety
Team
PLEASE VISIT OUR PRODUCT WEBSITE
OM
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 20 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executives review
The Company continues to work hard at building its customer base and I was pleased to welcome Wilmar International as a customer during 2017.
They are the leading agri business in South East Asia and will be a strong partner for the Company.
Execute a financing plan that delivers returns for shareholders The Company has taken a rigorous phased approach to executing the financing plan.
At each stage of development appropriate capital has been raised to deliver the next development milestone.
2016 saw the first successful completion of the stage 1 financing which provided the equity and equitylinked capital components of the construction financing plan.
In 2017 the Company obtained a Premium Listing on the Main Market and was included in the FTSE 250.
Behind the scenes work was underway to prepare for the execution of the Companys stage 2 financing in late 2018.
It is intended that this financing will be 100% debt in nature and ultimately provide all of the capital required to complete the construction component of the Companys strategy.
The year ahead 2017 has been a year of meaningful progress on the ground in North Yorkshire and in the global fertilizer markets.
2018 will be another year of significant progress on all fronts with that progress ultimately culminating in the successful completion of the stage 2 financing.
There is a lot more work to do in order to successfully execute on the Companys strategy but I am confident our team has the necessary expertise to deliver.
The culture we have throughout the organisation is reflected in our corporate values.
These values embody why we have succeeded in achieving a number of challenging milestones but also how we will continue to deliver on what we set out to achieve.
It is our shared belief in achieving our goals and our unwavering drive to succeed that will see us successfully through the next phase of development.
Thank you all for your ongoing support.
CHRIS FRASER Managing Director and CEO agronomy trials have been initiated countries different crops Sirius Minerals global RandD programme 21 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2018 DEVELOPMENT
Construction
Complete main service shaft foreshaft construction and excavation.
Complete the installation of the main production shaft foreshaft and commence foreshaft excavation.
Commence MTS access shaft construction at the Woodsmith Mine site.
Complete construction of the MTS portal at Wilton
Commence shaft sinking at Lockwood Beck intermediate shaft site.
Commence early works for the MHF.
Finalise harbour facility strategy and complete procurement.
RandD sales and marketing Expand global agronomic programme and establish 80 new trials.
Execute 2 Mtpa incremental supply agreements.
Corporate and commercial Substantially complete Project procurement.
Draw down the stage 1 financing royalty instrument.
Execute stage 2 financing.
It is our shared belief in achieving our goals and our unwavering drive to succeed that will see us successfully through the next phase of development.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 22 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DELIVERING RESULTS A CLEAR PLAN Strategic priorities A clear and robust strategy is important to achieve our vision of becoming a worldclass fertilizer business.
We have developed a strategy which is sufficiently robust to negotiate the necessary steps to operations but also flexible enough to allow for modification and optimisation during the construction phase of our North Yorkshire polyhalite Project.
STRATEGY 2017 ACHIEVEMENTS 2018 MILESTONES 2021 TARGET Build a worldclass longlife lowcost production facility FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2425 Commenced construction at the Woodsmith Mine site and Lockwood Beck.
Initiated process of Dwall installation.
Progressed design activities for MTS and frontend design for MHF and harbour facility.
Complete main service shaft foreshaft construction and excavation.
Complete the installation of the main production shaft foreshaft and commence foreshaft excavation.
Commence MTS access shaft construction at the Woodsmith Mine site.
Complete construction of the MTS portal at Wilton
Commence shaft sinking at Lockwood Beck intermediate shaft site.
Commence early works for the MHF.
Finalise harbour facility strategy and complete procurement.
First polyhalite.
Develop an industry leading product FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2627 Articulated POLY4 cornerstones
Effective
Flexible
Sustainable.
Continuation of growing global RandD programme.
Expand global agronomic programme and establish 80 new trials.
10 years of agronomic research validating POLY4.
Penetrate existing markets and drive longterm value FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2829 Executed incremental supply agreement with Wilmar for delivery of up to 0.75 Mtpa into South East Asia.
Increased total supply agreements to 4.4 Mtpa.
Execute 2 Mtpa incremental supply agreements.
First customer deliveries.
Execute a financing plan that delivers returns for shareholders FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 3031 Obtained a Premium Listing on the Main Market and FTSE 250 inclusion.
Substantially complete Project procurement.
Draw down the stage 1 financing royalty instrument.
Execute stage 2 financing.
First revenue.
Dwalling rig at the Woodsmith Mine site 23 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY 2017 ACHIEVEMENTS 2018 MILESTONES 2021 TARGET Build a worldclass longlife lowcost production facility FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2425 Commenced construction at the Woodsmith Mine site and Lockwood Beck.
Initiated process of Dwall installation.
Progressed design activities for MTS and frontend design for MHF and harbour facility.
Complete main service shaft foreshaft construction and excavation.
Complete the installation of the main production shaft foreshaft and commence foreshaft excavation.
Commence MTS access shaft construction at the Woodsmith Mine site.
Complete construction of the MTS portal at Wilton
Commence shaft sinking at Lockwood Beck intermediate shaft site.
Commence early works for the MHF.
Finalise harbour facility strategy and complete procurement.
First polyhalite.
Develop an industry leading product FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2627 Articulated POLY4 cornerstones
Effective
Flexible
Sustainable.
Continuation of growing global RandD programme.
Expand global agronomic programme and establish 80 new trials.
10 years of agronomic research validating POLY4.
Penetrate existing markets and drive longterm value FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 2829 Executed incremental supply agreement with Wilmar for delivery of up to 0.75 Mtpa into South East Asia.
Increased total supply agreements to 4.4 Mtpa.
Execute 2 Mtpa incremental supply agreements.
First customer deliveries.
Execute a financing plan that delivers returns for shareholders FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 3031 Obtained a Premium Listing on the Main Market and FTSE 250 inclusion.
Substantially complete Project procurement.
Draw down the stage 1 financing royalty instrument.
Execute stage 2 financing.
First revenue.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 24 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 BUILD A WORLDCLASS LONGLIFE LOWCOST PRODUCTION FACILITY Strategy in action We have engaged the services of world class construction partners to develop our innovative mine which is being constructed to extract large volumes of polyhalite at lowcost.
We are utilising proven well understood construction techniques to build what will be the largest mine of its type anywhere in the world.
From the outset it has been our intention to construct a lowimpact largescale operation with a long operating life.
The Woodsmith Mine is being constructed to handle an initial capacity of 10 Mtpa but is scalable to up to 20 Mtpa of polyhalite using largely existing infrastructure.
An increase in production capacity to 20 Mtpa would be achieved through expansion following ramp up and will be funded by operating cash flow.
Mining at the Woodsmith Mine will adopt simple and conventional bulk mining methods to enable maximum extraction and lowcost operations.
From the base of the shafts we can mine in all directions maximising our ability to optimise ramp up from initial production.
Using a combination of room and pillar and drill and blast mining methods we can excavate the thicker areas of the seam up to a height of 40 metres.
We are constructing a mine to realise the potential of our worldclass deposit.
The exceptional nature of our resource means that all mine development will be excavated entirely within the polyhalite seam.
This will result in a 11 mining ratio ensuring that every tonne of ore mined becomes a tonne of POLY4.
To efficiently move large volumes of polyhalite ore from the Woodsmith Mine to the MHF at Wilton International we are constructing a 37km long concretelined subterranean MTS.
The MTS construction employs proven industryleading tunnelling techniques to establish a high capacity transport system capable of transporting up to 20 Mtpa of polyhalite ore.
The MTS has been designed to be in place for the life of the mine with little ongoing maintenance requirement.
Our innovative approach to construction effectively moves the minehead from its location within the North York Moors National Park to the harbour facility on Teesside thus enabling the efficiencies which come with close proximity to an export facility.
Continuous mining machine
IMPACT
LARGE
SCALE
LONG
OPERATING
LIFE
Mining ratio  every tonne of ore we mine becomes a tonne of POLY4 25 25 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our innovative approach to construction effectively moves the minehead from its location within the North York Moors National Park to the harbour facility on Teesside thus enabling the efficiencies which come with close proximity to an export facility.
20 Mtpa capacity Kai Tai Transfer System HK STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 26 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DEVELOP AN INDUSTRY LEADING PRODUCT Strategy in action continued POLY4 is the trademark name of Sirius Minerals flagship granular polyhalite product.
In addition to nutritional benefits brought about by the chemical composition of POLY4 our product has a range of characteristics which distinguish it from existing products and make it an attractive option for end users.
POLY4 has four key attributes that benefit farmers by increasing their profits in a sustainable way through improved crop yields reduced costs or both.
Efficiency
POLY4 is an efficient multinutrient fertilizer Improves fertilizer use efficiency by delivering greater nutrient uptake High nutrient density  delivers four macronutrients in one easytouse costeffective granular delivery system.
Trial results show that POLY4 delivers better nutrient uptake for both macro and micronutrients.
This is a key profit driver as more nutrients are used by the crop for yield and quality improvements.
POLY4s multinutrient properties help farmers to control costs by decreasing fertilizer and farm inputs while reducing nutrient waste by delivering nutrients over a time frame which more closely aligns with the needs of a plant.
POLY4s nutrient release profile supports the crop from establishment through to harvest compared to conventional fertilizers which tend to be applied and deliver nutrients ahead of crop demand.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
POLY4 is an effective multinutrient fertilizer Improves both yield and quality Improves macro and micro nutrient uptake Minimises crop losses through disease resilience Has a desirable nutrient release profile Granular product that handles stores blends and spreads effectively.
By improving the availability of a broad spectrum of nutrients for plants POLY4 promotes yield quality and nutritional health which can minimise crop losses through disease.
These macro and micronutrients also become available over a longer time frame which more closely meets the nutrient uptake pattern of the plant.
Available in granulated powdered or standard form POLY4 is compatible with all major input sources for NPK blending demonstrating both chemical and physical compatibility.
In a small number of cases minor caking was observed after 17 months in storage which far exceeds the practical storage period of a blend.
POLY4 also spreads effectively up to 36 metres preventing uneven fertilizer distribution and subsequently reduction in crop yields.
Flexibility
POLY4 is a flexible multinutrient fertilizer Low chloride and pH neutral product that can be used on all plants and soils in all growing climates Successful as a straight fertilizer or as a component of blend formulations No negative interactions with other fertilizers Allows a farmer to choose the timing of application.
As a low chloride multinutrient fertilizer POLY4 avoids toxicity issues commonly associated with the application of potassium chloride MOP and other high chloride fertilizer sources.
Many crops benefit from a reduction of chlorides in the soil.
POLY4 also has no detrimental effect on a soils electrical conductivity or pH both of which can be harmful to crops.
POLY4 can be used directly or in an NPK blend to supply potassium sulphur magnesium calcium and a range of valuable micronutrients.
Farmers can rely on POLY4 to maintain its granular physical integrity until it reaches the field and as there are no negative interactions with other fertilizers POLY4 is a beneficial yet safe addition to a blend.
As a granular product POLY4s nutrients are readily available to the plant and its release profile gives farmers the flexibility to choose the timing of application.
Sustainability
POLY4 is a sustainable multinutrient fertilizer Improves soil strength structure and nutrient legacy Reduces agricultures impact on the environment by improving fertilizer use efficiency reducing erosion and nutrient loss Certified for organic use Excellent environmental profile.
The calcium within POLY4 helps to increase a soils resilience to compaction erosion and runoff which allows a plant to access the nutrients it needs to thrive and reduces nutrient waste into watercourses and beyond.
Application of the broad spectrum of nutrients that POLY4 delivers can make soilbound nutrients more available to the plant and prevent nutrient mining a common threat to sustainable crop production.
Polyhalite is a naturallyoccurring mineral which results in a low carbon footprint for POLY4 offering farmers an effective yet responsible fertilizer solution.
The organicallycertified POLY4 has no requirement for chemical processing has the lowest CO emissions and is more environmentallyfriendly compared to most fertilizer products.
POLY4 helps to rebalance and reconstruct the soil structure supporting sustainable land management.
POLY4 granules ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 28 Estimated potential substitute opportunity in 2025 Mtpa of polyhalite equivalent tel20 Kieserite SOPM SOP SSP AS MOP
MOP
Straight
Total POLY4 Sirius capacity
1 macronutrient Multinutrient substitution market opportunity represents more than 10 times Sirius core infrastructure capacity 2 macronutrients 3 macronutrients 4 macronutrients
1 Global demand forecast of primary substitute fertilizer products in 2025 by CRU expressed in polyhalite equivalent.
2 SOPM demand calculated on MgO equivalent basis which represents 3.4 Mtpa of low chloride K O on a polyhalite equivalent basis.
3 Fertecon estimates that 61% of the total K O market ends up as part of multinutrient fertilizer blends.
4 Expansion phase capacity.
5 Represents the theoretical POLY4 demand by multiplying the recommended K O rates per crop per hectare by the global amount of hectares harvested for corn soybean wheat and sugarcane.
Sources CRU Sirius Minerals.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PENETRATE EXISTING MARKETS AND DRIVE LONGTERM VALUE Strategy in action continued Market growth Multiple growth opportunities have been identified which build on POLY4s suitability for crops that are sensitive to chloride and also POLY4s potential to address the increasingly recognised problem of vast areas of farmland becoming deficient in sulphur.
These opportunities are compounded further by the growing demand for the adoption of more sustainable agricultural practices.
POLY4 is low in chlorides.
Currently 32% of global potassium is used on chloridesensitive crops.
Only 9% of this supply is chloridefree.
This represents an incremental opportunity of circa 70 Mtpa for chloridefree fertilizers such as POLY4.
The agronomic benefits of chloridefree potassium are widely known however due to limited supply and premium prices the market is restricted.
Substitution
There is a wellestablished market for the component nutrients contained in POLY4.
This market is currently supplied by a range of fertilizer products and POLY4 has the potential to be used as a substitute for other existing fertilizers which include one or more of the same primary nutrients contained in POLY4.
Independent market analysis suggests the total market for these potentially contestable fertilizers is expected to increase from 376 Mtpa in 2018 to 440 Mtpa in 2025 in polyhalite equivalent terms representing the amount of polyhalite which would be necessary to fulfil the current potassium sulphur and magnesium nutrient demand.
This opportunity is approximately 20 times the maximum output when the Woodsmith Mine is operating at 20 Mtpa capacity.
Our strategy is to penetrate and disrupt the existing market via a threephased approach of substitution market growth and performance.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 POLY4 has a sulphur content of 19%.
The Sulphur Institute estimates that the world plant nutrient sulphur deficit could require annual application of 60 Mtpa of polyhalite equivalent sulphur to address the imbalance.
Unless nutrient deficits are addressed nutrient mining will increase year on year.
Sustainable product characteristics are becoming more attractive to customers.
The worlds population is predicted to hit 9.8 billion by 2050.
Over the next 35 years more food needs to be produced than has been to date in human history.
The pressure this places on the agricultural industry will require farmers to use balanced fertilization to increase yields.
Application of fertilizers is identified as a significant source of greenhouse gases.
Increased fertilizer use requires an everincreasing need to improve fertilizer use efficiency.
The estimated value of global warming potential GWP of POLY4 is 0.051kg CO e per kg of product considerably lower than other potassium and sulphurbased fertilizers.
Performance
Application of lowchloride potassium fertilizers has been shown to improve crop yield quality and taste and also improve plant resistance to drought frost insects and diseases.
This combined with the multi nutrient composition of our product means POLY4 has universal application.
Our extensive RandD programme demonstrates POLY4 can be used on a multitude of crops in numerous geographies with varying climatic conditions.
The way POLY4 interacts in the soil and its interplay between chemical elements means crucial nutrients are readily available when plants need them throughout the growing cycle.
These benefits manifest in increased yields and stronger healthier crops.
Independently validated crop trial results demonstrate POLY4 works effectively and outperforms traditional products such as MOP on a range of high value and broadacre crops such as tomatoes corn soybean and wheat.
To date over 260 trials have been initiated on 32 different crops in 17 countries.
Highconcentration highvalue cropping Magnesium and sulphur deficiencies Sulphur deficiencies Magnesium deficiencies Highconcentration highvalue cropping Magnesium and sulphur deficiencies Sulphur deficiencies Magnesium deficiencies Highconcentration highvalue cropping Magnesium and sulphur deficiencies Sulphur deficiencies Magnesium deficiencies Sulphur deficiencies around the world
1 Sulphur deficiency in 2015 estimated to be 11.4 Mtpa in sulphur or 60 Mpta in POLY4 equivalent.
Sources TSI FAO CRU Roland Berger Sirius Minerals.
Minnesota corn trials 2015 Trial objective to compare the use of MOP and MOPPOLY4 at a ratio of 7525 K O as potassium and sulphur sources.
Partner University of Minnesota
US247 increase in return per hectare Up to 15% increase in yield Up to 9% increase in dry kernel weight Grain quality maintained or improved Increase in plant populations 45% decrease in weed presence For complete trial summary POLY4 on broadacre crops PLEASE VISIT OUR PRODUCT WEBSITE
OM
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 30 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategy in action continued Minerals and land acquisition Resource definition Planning and approvals Definitive feasibility study Site preparation
Shafts
EXECUTE A FINANCING PLAN THAT DELIVERS RETURNS FOR
Note
1 Five equity capital raises between 2011 and 2015 Sirius Minerals acquire North Yorkshire polyhalite Project Equity capital1 Stage 1 financing 2010 2016 DEVELOPMENT CONSTRUCTION Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Targeting at least US1 billion EBITDA at 10 Mtpa Highmargin business Potential for expansion
MHF
Harbour facility Pitbottom development During the development of the Company Sirius has strategically raised funds to enable progression between key Project milestones.
From the early stages of exploration through to the stage 1 financing to fund construction each funding package has been designed to derisk key elements of the Project and to maximise shareholder value.
Fund raises Stage 2 financing Operational capital structure 2018 2021 OPERATIONS CONSTRUCTION ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 32 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
HIGH VALUEINUSE BUSINESS MODEL Our value proposition Operational volume and margin The fundamental drivers which generate value for the Company are volume and margin.
In recognition of this our business has been designed to deliver high production capacity and low operating costs.
We believe the Company can deliver industryleading margins of between 7085% which will generate significant value across a range of volume and price scenarios and ensure our business can be robust and responsive to changing market conditions.
The matrix below illustrates this point and also indicates how the Company expects the business to evolve.
The volume axis shows the production ramp up from 10 Mtpa to 20 Mtpa and the margin axis shows the forecasted cash margins resulting from a range of POLY4 prices.
Low volume High margin
EBITDA
Low volume Low margin
EBITDA
High volume High margin
EBITDA
High volume Low margin
EBITDA
US70t 70% US170t 85% 10 Mtpa 20 Mtpa
MARGIN 33 US market capitalisation bubble size 0.5bn 5bn 15bn Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Industryleading business The potential EBITDA generated through our high volumehigh margin business puts Sirius in a commanding position in relation to our peers and has the potential to generate a market capitalisation well in excess of US15 billion.
Fertilizer industry benchmarking 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 EBITDA USm EBITDA Margin % Sirius Minerals 13 Mtpa
Mosaic
CF Industries
Uralkali
KS
ICL
PhosAgro
OCI SQM
Compass Minerals
Yara
Key
Notes
1 EBITDA values are FY18 estimates with the exception of Sirius which is projected steadystate EBITDA once construction for 13 Mtpa at Woodsmith Mine is complete.
Source Factset.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 34 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Chief Financial Officers review
2017 has seen a step change in the level of development activity on the Project as a result of the successful completion of the stage 1 financing in 2016.
This year has been the first in which the Group has not had funding constraints over its development activities and as a result the value of spend on the Project activities in 2017 has grown materially.
The Groups operating loss for 2017 was 24.0 million compared to 16.9 million in 2016 with the increased loss being driven by an increase in activity following the completion of the stage 1 financing.
The Group has historically made a loss which has been largely reflective of the Groups prudent approach to expensing all indirect and overhead costs through the development phase and this practice has continued since construction commenced.
Furthermore the Groups operating costs in 2017 have contained a number of oneoff corporate costs which are not reflective of the underlying level of overhead spend with the key items being as follows 2018 will be another transformational year for Sirius as construction advances and the development of key infrastructure gathers momentum.
THOMAS STALEY.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 35 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 During 2017 the Group made a total loss of 78.9 million compared to a loss of 23.0 million in 2016.
The following table sets out the main drivers of the Groups loss for the period.
As can be seen from the table the main driver of the loss is the fair value remeasurement of the derivatives associated with the convertible note and to a lesser extent the royalty financing.
These derivative liabilities increase in size as the share price of the Company increases.
With the share price increasing by more than 20% over the period the size of the loss attributable to the derivatives has increased materially.
As the convertible notes are converted and the royalty financing is drawn these derivative liabilities will be reclassified from liabilities to equity and require no cash settlement by the Group.
Reported operating costs 24.0 Sirius Minerals Foundation donation 2.0 AIMtoLSE and stage 2 adviser costs 3.6 Noncorporate labour costs 2.4 Underlying operating costs 16.0 m 2017 2016 Operating loss 24.0 16.9 Net interest expense 0.8 2.4 Fair value loss on derivative instruments 53.6 4.7 Attributable to convertible note 42.5 5.7 Attributable to royalty financing 11.1 1.0 Foreign exchange losses on net debt 0.9 0.5 Taxation 0.4 0.5 Loss for the financial period 78.9 23.0 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 36 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Financial Officers review
The Company has deployed 233.7 million during 2017 for the purposes of developing the Project.
The table below breaks out the key items Total capital expenditure incurred for the period was 138.1 million with a significant portion of that unpaid as at the balance sheet date.
In addition to this numerous financial commitments for items such as the permanent winders and Dwalling activities have been made and these items are not reflected in the financial statements.
The local authorities security requirements reflect a combination of providing reinstatement security for construction works and the security requirements of the Section 106 agreements.
Total funds at the end of December 2017 were 468.5 million comprising bank deposits and cash equivalents of 394.0 million and restricted cash of 74.5 million.
The table opposite provides a breakdown of movements through the period in total funds split between available cash comprising cash and cash equivalents and bank deposits and restricted cash.
A number of convertible bond conversion notices were received during the period resulting in 22% of the initial bonds being converted.
Because of these conversions 291 million shares were issued during the period.
1552 bonds remain outstanding with an aggregate face value of US310 million.
Opening balance 582.4 82.9 665.3 Operating costs 24.0  24.0 Capital expenditure paid only 118.2  118.2 Local authorities commitments 35.2 35.2 Net financing costs 0.3 32.9 32.6 Redemption of restricted cash 4.9 4.9 Working capital and other 1.5  1.5 FX revaluation 17.7 5.8 23.5 Closing balance 394.0 74.5 468.5 m 2017 Operating costs 24.0 Capital expenditure 118.2 Incurred but unpaid capital expenditure 19.9 Local authorities security requirements 35.2 Financing costs 36.4 Total project use of funds 233.7 37 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 197.3 million Total funds deployed in developing the Project during 2017 before financing costs 468.5 million Cash resources at the end of December 2017 comprising bank deposits and cash equivalents of 394.0 million and restricted cash of 74.5 million compared to 665.3 million at the end of December 2016 2018 will be another transformational year for Sirius as construction advances and the development of key infrastructure gathers momentum.
With so many key components underway simultaneously our disciplined approach to capital expenditure will be maintained.
The successful execution of stage 2 financing will be a significant milestone as it will secure the balance of the capital funding required to complete construction and will contribute to the ongoing derisking of our North Yorkshire polyhalite development.
Thank you for your ongoing support.
THOMAS STALEY Chief Financial Officer ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 38 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ACTING RESPONSIBLY COMMITTED TO
Responsible business RESPONSIBILITY PRIORITIES Food security FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 4041
FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 4243
FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 4445
FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE PAGES 4647 39 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 40 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CONTRIBUTION
TO GLOBAL FOOD SECURITY Responsible business continued The worlds population is set to increase by a third by 2050 and the demand for food production is forecasted to increase by 60%.
Global food security Over the next 35 years more food needs to be produced than has been to date in human history.
At the same time the land available for farming is decreasing and soils have widespread deficiencies in the nutrients that plants need to grow.
Food production rates are already struggling to keep up yet the global agricultural system is required to produce more in the future.
POLY4 has the lowest CO emissions compared to other fertilizer products.
The lower CO e emissions associated with POLY4 are due to its environmentally friendly and sustainable method of production.
Promoting sustainable agricultural practices The conventional wisdom that more fertilizer brings more yield has resulted in the overapplication of the wrong fertilizers in many regions resulting in soil erosion and degradation that has led to pollution increased land conversion and habitat loss.
What is required is for farmers and food producers to use balanced fertilization to increase yields and improve soil health.
CO equivalent emissions of common fertilizers kg t1 of fertilizer 766tel
POLY4 SSP TSP MOP MAP
Conventional chemical fertilizers High energy demanding N sources SOP DAP AS Urea CAN AN
1 SSP  Single Super Phosphate TSP  Triple Super Phosphate MOP  Muriate of Potash SOP  Sulphate of Potash MAP  Monoammonium Phosphate DAP  Diammonium Phosphate AS  Ammonium Sulphate CAN  Calcified Ammonium Nitrate AN  Ammonium Nitrate 2 10% mitigation from renewable energy sources and 10% from tree planting offset.
Sources Sirius Minerals RicardoAEA Ltd.
2014.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Company is committed to supporting the best and most sustainable fertilizer application practices through its ongoing research and development programme.
To date this has involved over 260 trials on 32 crops in 17 countries.
The programme consistently demonstrates that POLY4 improves crop yield and quality and has positive environmental characteristics.
POLY4 is certified for organic use and has no requirement for chemical processing.
As a result it has a lower carbon footprint compared to other fertilizers.
Furthermore POLY4 has also been shown to improve soil strength structure nutrient legacy and reduce agricultures impact by improving fertilizer use efficiency ensuring more fertilizer is taken up by the plant and not lost into the environment.
Good nutrient stewardship  ensuring nutrients are applied at the correct rate time and place  is a critical element of a more sustainable approach.
The Company is working with a range of stakeholders to promote these more sustainable practices in key agricultural markets.
Fertilizers are identified as a significant source of greenhouse gases GHG.
The estimated value of the global warming potential GWP of POLY4 is 0.051 kg CO e per kg of product.
This is low compared with other fertilizers and considerably lower than other potassium K source fertilizers such as MOP 0.130.265 kg CO ekg and common sulphur S source fertilizers such as ammonium sulphate 0.58 kg ekg.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 42 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR COMMITMENT
ENGAGEMENT
Responsible business continued The Group takes its responsibility to the local area very seriously and is committed to taking an active and positive role in the local community.
Education and skills Sirius believes in supporting young people to fulfil their potential from an early age and continues to deliver its extensive education outreach programme.
A key aspect of this is to broaden aspirations and raise awareness of science technology engineering and maths STEM related careers.
In 2017 alone the Company has taken part in 35 education events and activities with primary and secondary school students in North Yorkshire and Tees Valley.
People from across the Sirius team have been encouraged to get involved particularly younger team members to talk to students about their role at Sirius Minerals and how they got involved.
The Company is proud to have been the headline sponsor of Scarborough Engineering Week for the last six consecutive years.
Work also started on a 1 million programme in Tees Valley and North Yorkshire to support the STEM curriculum over the next ten years.
Sirius continues to provide opportunities for young people across the area including apprenticeships work placements and taking on new graduates.
Sirius Minerals Foundation The Sirius Minerals Foundation has been established as an independent charity to support community projects that benefit the local area.
During operations Sirius Minerals will contribute an annual royalty of 0.5% of revenue to the Foundation.
For the construction period Sirius has made an initial payment of 2 million to the Foundation.
Earlier this year the first funding round was opened to support community projects awarding grants of between 500 and 5000.
In December 80 projects were awarded a total of around 300000 across the local area.
The activities funded include improving community facilities and restoration works new equipment supporting families and vulnerable people environmental enhancements and education and training.
2 million initial payment made to the Sirius Minerals Foundation education events and activities that the Company took part in during 2017 PLEASE VISIT OUR WEBSITE
O.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Community engagement The Group continues to keep the community updated on the development of the Project.
Over the last year the Company has held four public dropin events attended 20 Parish and town council meetings and given presentations to a number of local interest groups.
Site visits have been held for elected representatives at the Woodsmith Mine site and the intermediate shaft location at Lockwood Beck.
In addition the Liaison Group Forum which was established to update local councillors and other local stakeholders about the Project met three times in 2017.
These meetings are open for the public to attend.
The Company also produces regular newsletters social media updates and has a 24hour community helpline.
The Sirius Minerals team building a footpath with the North York Moors National Park Volunteer Service ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 44 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
PRESERVATION
Responsible business continued From the outset the Company has been committed to limiting the environmental impact of the Project as much as possible.
This is reflected in the lowimpact design operational philosophy and approach to construction.
This section summarises the Companys approach to sustainable development which is covered in more detail in the 2017 Corporate Responsibility Report available on our Company website.
Sustainable design Sirius is proud of the design choices it has made throughout the Projects evolution to ensure that it has the lowest impact possible on the surrounding area.
Woodsmith Mine is located in North York Moors National Park and the Company has set a new standard in sustainable design in recognition of this.
The number and size of the buildings has been reduced to a minimum which together with extensive landscaping and planting will ensure the site is screened and blends with the surrounding area.
Mined ore will be transported underground in recognition of the sensitivity of the area to the MHF at Wilton International in Teesside.
To produce POLY4 involves a simple granulation process which does not require chemical processing and has no waste products.
Carbon emissions The Company is always looking at ways to be more energy efficient during the intensive construction period in order to minimise its carbon footprint.
In line with regulatory requirements the Companys Greenhouse Gas GHG performance is calculated using the latest Greenhouse Gas Protocol and set out in the table below.
This includes direct GHG emissions from the combustion of fuels Scope 1 and indirect GHG emissions from the consumption of purchased electricity steam or other sources of energy Scope 2.
As reporting procedures mature the Company will look to include other indirect GHG emissions Scope 3.
In 2017 emissions totalled 2063 tonnes of CO e.
Scope 1 emissions 1943 Scope 2 emissions 120 Gross carbon emissions 2063 In t e n si t y me t r i c per 10 million spend 129 Within the constraints of a large construction project the Company is working together with its contractors to proactively reduce carbon emissions.
Measures include using low emission fuels for site plant reducing the reliance on diesel generated power and implementing a travel plan to restrict the number of vehicle movements associated with the Project.
The Company is providing significant funding through its Section 106 agreements to safeguard and enhance the local landscape and to offset carbon emissions.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PLEASE VISIT OUR WEBSITE
OM
Construction
The Company is working closely with the relevant authorities statutory bodies and contractors to implement environmental and mitigation plans for each phase of construction.
These ensure that the stringent planning conditions are adhered to and that impacts are limited across a range of matters including lighting noise visual and landscape wildlife and ecology hydrology and air quality.
In addition the Company is providing significant funding through its Section 106 agreements to safeguard and enhance the local landscape and to offset carbon emissions.
This will amount to a total of 130 million over the lifetime of the
During 2017 first payments of 122500 for the landscape and ecology contribution and 85000 for tree planting were made to North York Moors National Park Authority.
Credit Ebor images North York Moors National Park ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 46 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR PEOPLE
Responsible business continued 201 7 was an exciting year of growth for the Sirius team which saw us double our headcount with 1 16 people now directly employed by the Group an impressive yearonyear increase of 1 1 1%.
We welcomed new members into the business predominantly in Scarborough but also into London and further afield strengthening our presence and key business relationships in North America Latin America and South East Asia.
Building a more diverse and inclusive workforce is critical to developing a sustainable and successful business.
Our ambition is to attract develop and retain talented individuals who reflect the communities where we do business supporting the local community to benefit from the opportunities that Sirius can provide.
We continue to be successful in hiring local people to join our expanding workforce 69% of total employees have been sourced from the Yorkshire region reinforcing our commitment to the community in which we operate.
Empowering our people Our people are critical to the success of this project and we strive to empower motivate and encourage everyone to contribute.
During 2017 we have been promoting the behaviours and values that have contributed to the many achievements to date.
We are one team focused on one clear goal and during the year we have introduced various development and performance management activities to encourage everyone to play their part in delivering the 2021 first production targets.
Recruitment of new colleagues now looks at the way people work as well as their technical capabilities.
Weve designed a new induction programme established a process for clear goal setting launched values alignment sessions and a monthly values recognition scheme.
We strive to promote an open and honest working environment in which everyone has a voice and feels confident to share their ideas.
In December a new independent disclosure line was introduced called the SpeakUp Line which allows the workforce to report matters of concern confidentially.
This further reinforces our commitment to safety and invites everyone to take responsibility to ensure that we can move forward at pace by respecting the safety and security of others ourselves and our environment.
Growing our people In addition to ongoing professional skills development staff regularly have the opportunity to engage in wider community events.
The Company has participated in education outreach events local careers fairs as well as presenting at national conferences all of which has supported the personal development of team members as well as promoting good relationships in the region and markets in which we operate.
During 2017 Sirius has supported various charity activities both on an individual and group basis raising over 9000.
69% of total employees have been sourced from the Yorkshire region.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Resolution House In September the Company was excited to move into Resolution House our new headquarters.
The open plan office boasts space technology and a fresh environment transforming the way that people collaborate and integrate.
Resolution
House is an inspirational workplace not only for our existing staff but for those that aspire to be part of the team.
The London office also completed a refurbishment in 2017 and both locations now have the facilities and technology that represents a workplace fit for the future.
Looking forward 2018 will be another year of steady hiring to expand our workforce and introduce key talent predominantly into the construction team.
We will continue to strengthen the building blocks required to lead and develop a growing workforce and ensure that everyone can contribute to the delivery of the business priorities.
Positive reinforcement of our unique culture and investment in development activities to drive our health and safety agenda is also a top priority for 2018.
Sirius team at Resolution House Credit Richard Ponter Scarborough News ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 48 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 IDENTIFYING AND MANAGING RISKS
Risk management
The Groups strategy exposes it to various risks.
The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the risks that the Group is willing to take in achieving its strategic objectives.
The Board has an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the principal risks faced by the Group.
The Board has performed a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group taking into account those that would threaten its business model see page 32 future performance solvency or liquidity as well as the Groups strategic objectives see page 22.
In addition the Board considered how risks evolve and potential emerging risks.
The most significant risks arising from this assessment including details of their management and mitigation are detailed in the Strategic Report on pages 49 to 52.
The Group has a system of internal controls which is designed to manage and mitigate these risks and which the Board is responsible for.
This system is in accordance with the
Guidance on Risk Management
Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting as issued by the Financial Reporting Council and its key features include a defined organisational structure with appropriate delegation of authority and clearly defined lines of reporting and responsibility whereby the incurring of expenditure and assumption of contractual commitment can only be approved by specified individuals and within predefined limits formal authorisation procedures for all banking transactions expenditure and investment decisions a comprehensive system for budgeting and planning whereby annual budgets are prepared and approved by the Board and subsequently monitored with variances reported to the Board at Board meetings and regular and comprehensive information provided to the Board from the Groups senior management team covering financial performance and key performance indicators including nonfinancial measures.
The Groups system of internal controls including each of those detailed above has been in place for the year under review and up to the date of the approval of this Annual Report.
This system is regularly reviewed by the Board and a review of the effectiveness of all material controls was carried out by the Audit Committee during the year.
This effectiveness review considered the design of controls associated with key risks and the evidence as to their proper operation throughout the year.
No significant failings or weaknesses were uncovered in the course of this review.
Brexit
The Group is aware that the referendum vote in June 2016 pursuant to which the United Kingdom has indicated its intent to withdraw from the European Union might present risks for companies including uncertainty about the process timings and consequences of the final withdrawal.
The Group does not currently trade with Europe.
It is also not in receipt of EU foreign direct investment FDI.
Most of the Groups future sales are likely to be in US Dollars.
Therefore the risk relating to Brexit is low for the Group and is not considered one of its principal risks.
The Group continues to monitor political regulatory and legislative aspects of the withdrawal from the European Union and is aware of the aspects of this potential risk.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key to risk management Risk increasing No change Risk decreasing PRINCIPAL RISKS MITIGATION TREND
LINK
STRATEGIC RISKS Exploration and development The Group is completely dependent on the ability of the Project and engineering team to successfully deliver operational mine and infrastructure facilities.
The geological mining processing and infrastructure challenges of the Project are inherent in a mining and infrastructure Project of this size and are not of an extraordinary level or nature.
Site investigation work through a programme of seismic surveys and investigative boreholes continues as part of the Project.
As engineering progresses this risk naturally reduces.
Development risks are assessed evaluated and reduced as far as reasonably possible as part of the Project management function performed by our experienced owners team.
FINANCIAL RISKS Liquidity risks The Groups current activities do not generate revenues and there is a risk that despite raising the initial funds to commence construction we will have insufficient funds to finalise development and construction of the Project to a point of production where the Group generates positive operating cash flows which will affect our ability to manage operating costs and capital expenditure.
There is no assurance that adequate funds will be available when they are required.
We have a strong Board and management team with extensive experience in financing large multibillion Dollar Projects.
We have been successful in raising funds in the recent past including in 2016 to commence construction of the Project and signing a nonbinding mandate letter with financial institutions in relation to a potential senior debt financing which would fund the majority of the remainder of the operating costs and capital expenditure required to finalise the development and construction of the Project and reach a point of production where the Project generates positive operating cash flows.
Commodity price There is a risk that fertilizer prices including potash and polyhalite could fall to levels at which it would not be economically viable to develop the
Such conditions would materially and adversely affect production earnings and the financial position and could result in the cessation of mining activities that become uneconomic or could result in the economics of the Project not being sufficient to enable the Group to raise the next stage of funding to take the Project to production halt or delay the development of new areas to mine and reduce funds available for proving reserves resulting in the depletion of reserves.
There is no assurance that even as commercial quantities of polyhalite ore are produced a profitable market will exist for it.
Our research team continues to analyse various fertilizer markets including NPK potash and polyhalite.
Current studies support the continued growth in world demand and a positive price outlook over the medium term.
Feasibility study work indicates that the anticipated cost of production for polyhalite is circa US30.
At this cost the Project would rank in the bottom quartile of potash producers and is therefore well positioned for significant price downturns.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 50 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS MITIGATION TREND
LINK
Currency
Sirius Minerals will have currency exposures arising from both its capital expenditure and operating costs and the sale of polyhalite ore.
Revenue from polyhalite sales and the majority of future financings for the Project are expected to be denominated in US Dollars providing a natural exchange rate hedge.
However a significant portion of the construction development and operating expenses for the Project will be incurred in nonUS Dollar currencies in particular Pounds
Accordingly appreciation of such nonUS Dollar currencies without offsetting improvement in US Dollar denominated polyhalite prices could adversely affect the Projects profitability and financial position.
The Group has mitigated the currency risk in the medium to longterm by planning a capital structure where it has raised funds in Pounds Sterling and US Dollars to broadly match the anticipated currency split of its expected capital expenditure and operating cost needs.
The Group monitors its exposure to currency risk based on the Project expenditure forecast and the stage of development.
The treasury policy sets out appropriate risk tolerances for currency exposure and the treasury team implement appropriate hedges to ensure the Group is compliant with the treasury policy.
This risk is increasing as the time frame for Brexit draws closer and drives increased volatility in the foreign exchange markets.
As the proceeds from the stage 1 financing are spent the Groups exposure to sterling is also increasing because the stage 2 financing is likely to be predominantly in US Dollars.
EXTERNAL RISKS Permits and licences The Project requires a range of permits and licences to operate.
As the Project progresses the details of the works will require changes to the planning permissions.
There is no guarantee that these will be forthcoming.
The Group is in possession of the planning permissions required to commence the construction of the minehead MTS MHF and has also received a development consent order for the construction of the harbour facility.
Any changes applied for do not affect these permissions but rather either modify or replace the existing permissions once approved.
Up to this point the minor nonmaterial changes sought have been approved.
A minor material change for the Woodsmith Mine site has also been approved by the NYMNPA.
Sirius Minerals has a broad range of consultant advisers that specialise in obtaining the remaining permits licences and secondary approvals and licences needed for the Project to operate.
Risk management
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS MITIGATION TREND
LINK
Competitors
There are high barriers for potential new entrants into the market.
The major competitors all have substantial existing infrastructure less leverage and substantially greater financial resources.
There can be no assurance that Sirius Minerals or its Project will be able to successfully respond to such competitive pressures or the competitive activities of the other major suppliers in its markets.
Our polyhalite product contains four of the six macronutrients potassium sulphur magnesium and calcium required for plant growth.
Polyhalite is an effective direct application multinutrient fertilizer and can also be combined with nitrogen and phosphorous to create highvalue NPK fertilizer products that contain all six macro nutrients.
As such we are less exposed to the existing potash supply structure with respect to product supply and demand dynamics.
The Group continues to develop its marketing and sales strategy to utilise the unique characteristics of polyhalite.
OPERATIONAL RISKS Construction delays The Project may experience construction and schedule delays due to unforeseen technical issues.
Detailed assessment and planning will be carried out continuously by the management team and external consultants as part of the Projects continued development to mitigate and derisk the Project during construction.
The Group also continues to pursue all acceleration options available to reduce the time required to reach first production.
Contractors are incentivised to bring their scopes forward.
Contractors and suppliers The performance of our contractors and suppliers is critical to the success of the
Performance issues or a lack of alignment could introduce cost and schedule risks to the Project.
This risk would manifest itself in cost delay andor quality issues.
An active and experienced management team is in place with a focus on being clear about expectations verifying performance and doing everything possible within the contracts to ensure the success of our contractors and suppliers.
Performance is actively monitored and managed with mitigating change instigated should performance not meet expectations.
In working with our contractors we are focused on ensuring that they are working within their area of specialisation that their senior management are engaged in our Project that regular communication and progress updates are maintained and that major construction contractors are incentivised around the success of the
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 52 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS MITIGATION TREND
LINK
Construction cost overruns The Project may experience construction cost overruns due to unforeseen technical issues or scope change.
The owners team has a strong focus on cost.
Confidence in the final cost will increase as detailed engineering progresses and contracts are put in place for the works.
Prices received from contractors and suppliers so far have been in line with the DFS and budget.
In addition the Project was costed with significant contingency and escalation provisions in case of cost pressures.
The fall in the value of the pound also provides comfort in this area.
Safety and environmental performance A significant safety or environmental incident would affect the delivery of the Project and the Groups reputation.
We continuously assess the risk and ensure that we have the right people in the right place.
Nonetheless the Group is not complacent about the risks in this area.
The owners team is set up to manage safety and the environment effectively.
A key part of our work in this area is in ensuring that we engage contractors who have the right attitude and systems and that we welcome expertise and improvement from employees contractors and external parties.
Ongoing focus areas include leadership activities work with our contractors including onboarding processes and auditing developing the culture of the Project team and the identification and control of major hazards.
Risk management
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Company over a fiveyear period taking account of the Companys current position and principal risks.
Time frame The Board believes that five years is the most appropriate time frame over which the Board should assess the long term viability of the Company.
The Companys current activities do not generate any revenues or positive operating cash flow and construction of the Project and the development necessary to commence production and generate revenues will require significant capital expenditures.
The Project is not expected to generate positive net cash flow until approximately 2022 some four years from now.
Assessing viability The main assumptions are that the stage 2 financing of up to US3 billion is completed in the second half of 2018 and that the U300 million royalty financing due from Hancock British Holdings Limited is paid on or around the same time.
If these transactions are not concluded in this time frame the Company may not be able to ensure that the Project will become operational nor that commercial production will commence on schedule or at all.
Principal risks In addition in making their assessment the Board has taken into account the principal risks as described in detail on pages 49 to 52 and also the scenario modelling and sensitivity analysis undertaken by the Company and various consultants which has been conducted as part of the development of the Project.
The modelling demonstrates profitability over a range of negative assumptions both individually and in aggregate.
The scenarios considered took into account the impacts of a Project capital cost overrun a delay in Project completion lower realised polyhalite sales prices lower longrun polyhalite sales volumes higher longrun operating costs and a reasonable downside scenario taking into account a combination of the above.
Based on the financial impact of the analysis outlined above and the associated risk management actions and controls that are either in place or could be implemented the Board has been able to conclude that the Group will be able to deliver the construction of the Project provided the stage 2 financing is completed as described.
Confirmation of viability Taking account of these matters the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period to December 2022 assuming that the stage 2 financing referred to above is completed as described.
The Groups going concern statement is detailed in note 1 on page 114.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 54 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE
56 Board of Directors 58 Chairmans introduction 60 Corporate governance 66 Audit Committee report 70 Nominations Committee report 73 Remuneration Committee report 76 Directors remuneration policy 86 Annual report on remuneration 99 Other statutory information 102 Directors responsibilities 55 Credit Ebor images North York Moors National Park ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 56 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
RUSSELL SCRIMSHAW NONEXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN Age 68 Date of appointment November 2011 Skills and experience Russell was formerly an executive director and deputy CEO of Fortescue Metals Group Ltd and was a founding member of the board.
He was also formerly chairman of Cleveland Mining Co Ltd and a non executive board member of Commonwealth Properties Ltd EDS Australia Mobilesoft Ltd Telecom New Zealand Australia Pty Ltd The Garvan Institute Foundation Genome.
Ltd and Athletics Australia.
Russell has also held senior executive positions within the Commonwealth Bank of Australia Optus Communications Pty Ltd Alcatel IBM and Amdahl USA and an Adjunct Professorship of Mining Economics at China Central South University in Changsha China.
He is an associate member of the Australian Society of Certified Practicing Accountants.
Current external appointments Chairman of the Garvan Institute of Medical Research Foundation NonExecutive Director of the Garvan Institute for Medical Research NonExecutive Director of Waterford Retirement Village Pty Ltd Executive Chairman of Torrus Capital Pty Limited Chairman of Scrimshaw Nominees Pty Ltd and Chairman of an Australian Philanthropic Fund The Scrimshaw Foundation.
Committees
R N CHRIS FRASER MANAGING DIRECTOR AND CEO Age 43 Date of appointment January 2011 Skills and experience Chris Fraser has almost 20 years experience in the mining industry with a particular focus on financing and strategic developments.
He is the founder of the Project has led its development since 2010 and has been Managing Director and CEO of the Company since January 2011.
During his finance career he worked for KPMG Rothschild and Citigroup the latter culminated in him being appointed head of metals and mining investment banking for Australia in 2006 and managing director in 2008.
Upon leaving Citigroup in 2009 he founded Sigiriya Capital a boutique advisory and investment firm.
Chris founded York Potash in 2010 and subsequently joined Sirius Minerals Plc in 2011.
He is a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Australia senior associate of the Financial Services Institute of Australia FINSIA and a member of the Institute of Company Directors in Australia.
Current external appointments Director of Sigiriya Capital Pty Ltd and CandJ Fraser Investments Pty Ltd member of the UKChina CEO Council Director of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership and member of the Coventry University Advisory Board.
Committees
None
THOMAS STALEY FINANCE DIRECTOR AND CFO Age 37 Date of appointment February 2017 Skills and experience Thomas has over 10 years experience in the energy infrastructure and resources industries with a focus on financing and financial governance for development projects.
Thomas has spent a significant part of his career January 2009June 2012 working for the Mubadala Development Company Mubadala in Abu Dhabi where he was involved in several financings including a US600 million project finance facility for a power station development project a A300 million government agency financing of a European development project and a US2200 million leveraged buy out financing of a US company.
Prior to working at Mubadala Thomas was working in Australia with Babcock and Brown from 2006 to 2008 where he was involved in numerous energy and infrastructure transactions.
Most recently Thomas was the head of commercial and risk in the international development team of Origin Energy from September 2012 to September 2014.
He was the interim chief executive officer of a geothermal exploration project where he was appointed by the main shareholders Origin Energy and Tata Power to implement a turnaround plan and put the development project back on track.
Thomas has a Bachelor of Engineering Electrical and Arts and is a charter holder of the CFA Institute.
Thomas joined the Company in October 2014.
Current external appointments Alternate Director of the Northern Powerhouse Partnership.
Committees
None
KEITH CLARKE CBE NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Age 65 Date of appointment December 2013 Skills and experience Keith was Chief Executive Officer of WS Atkins plc the UKs largest design and engineering consultancy for eight years to July 2011 and previously held chief executive officer roles with Skanska UK and Kvaerner Construction Group.
He also acted as director of sustainability and chairman of Atkins Middle East business until April 2012.
From
September 2011 to December 2015 he was NonExecutive Director of The Engineering and Technology Board its trading name being Engineering UK and from August 2011 to March 2014 he was NonExecutive Director of The British Standards
He is a fellow of the Institute of Civil Engineering Hon Fellow RA Eng and MRIBA.
Current external appointments Chair of Tidal Lagoon Swansea Bay Plc and Tidal Lagoon plc Chair of the Trustees for Forum for the Future Chair of Future Cities Catapult NonExecutive Director of Constructionarium and Women in Property and Director of Keith Clarke Consulting Limited.
Committees
N A BOARD OF DIRECTORS 57 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 JANE LODGE NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Age 62 Date of appointment July 2015 Skills and experience After an academic background in geology Janes executive career was primarily in accountancy where she became a partner at Deloitte.
Her roles included Deloittes Midlands Practice senior partner and lead partner for the National Manufacturing
As Manufacturing Industry Leader she represented the UK on the Deloitte Global Manufacturing Industry Executive and was a member of the CBI Manufacturing Council.
During her 35year career with the firm she advised multinational businesses in the construction financial services manufacturing and property sectors.
Current external appointments NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee Devro PLC NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of DCC PLC NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of Costain Group Plc NonExecutive Director of the Bromsgrove School Foundation NonExecutive Director of Ives Ventures Limited and NonExecutive Director of Ives Estates Limited.
Committees
R A JOHN HUTTON BARON HUTTON OF FURNESS NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Age 62 Date of appointment January 2012 Skills and experience John was a member of the Government for 13 years including 11 years as a minister and four years serving in the
He also served as a Parliamentary Private Secretary in the Department of Trade and Industry before moving to the Department of Health where he became Minister of State for Health in 1999.
He was a chairman of the Independent Public Service Pensions Commission.
Lord
Hutton was a legal adviser to the Confederation of Business Industry and a senior law lecturer at Newcastle Polytechnic.
He was Member of Parliament for Barrow and Furness for 18 years from April 1992 to May 2010.
In 2005 Lord Hutton was made Secretary of State for Work and Pensions.
In 2007 he was appointed Secretary of State for Business Enterprise and Regulatory Reform.
In 2008 he became Secretary of State for Defence until he stepped down from the Cabinet in 2009.
In
2010 he was created a life peer as Baron Hutton of Furness and now sits in the House of Lords.
Current external appointments NonExecutive Director of ARIX Bioscience Limited Circle Holdings UK plc Simple Space Limited Byhiras Group Limited Chairman and Director of Apartments for London Ltd Chairman of Energy
Director of Arthurian Life Sciences Limited Chairman of the Nuclear Industries Association and a partner of Cartesius Advisory Network.
Committees
NOEL HARWERTH SENIOR INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR Age 70 Date of appointment July 2015 Skills and experience Noel whose executive background was in international banking was formerly Chief Operating Officer and chief tax officer of Citibank International.
Noel is a highly experienced nonexecutive director who has sat on a number of boards in a variety of different sectors including mining and finance industry companies.
She brings with her a wealth of background and understanding in mining finance and governance issues.
Current external appointments Chair of the UK Export Finance Agency NonExecutive Director of Charter Court Financial Services NonExecutive Director of Standard Life Assurance Ltd Non Executive Director of The London Metal Exchange and Non Executive Director of the British Horseracing Authority Limited.
Committees
N A LOUISE HARDY NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Age 51 Date of appointment May 2016 Skills and experience Louise has over 25 years experience in the engineering sector.
Previously she was European project excellence director at Aecom and had a parttime executive role at Skanska UK from September 2015 to June 2016 as well as being a director at Laing ORourke working as infrastructure director within CLM which was the consortium delivery partner for the Olympic Delivery Authority for the London 2012 Olympics and a nonexecutive director at the Defence Infrastructure Organisation Ministry of Defence from May 2015 to June 2017.
Louise is a fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers and a fellow of the Chartered Management Institute.
Current external appointments NonExecutive Director of Ebbsfleet Development Corporation NonExecutive Director of the Department for Communities and Local Government NonExecutive Director of North West Cambridge Developments NonExecutive Director and member of the Nomination Remuneration and Technical Committees of Crest Nicholson plc.
Committees
R Remuneration Committee N Nominations Committee A Audit Committee Chair of Committee ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 58 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHAIRMANS
INTRODUCTION
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the corporate governance report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Last year was a year of many significant achievements for Sirius.
One of our key achievements occurred on 28 April 2017 when the Companys ordinary share capital was admitted to trading on the Main Market.
As the Company is now on the Main Market we are subject to the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
The Code encourages me as Chairman to report personally on how the principles relating to the Boards role and effectiveness of them have been applied and I am pleased to do so.
This section of the Annual Report sets out our approach to corporate governance using the five main principles of the Code and explains how the Board and its Committees are structured and their areas of focus during 2017.
The Board is committed to the highest standards of corporate governance and the Board supports the principles of the
The Directors believe that the Company has complied during the year with the principles and provisions of the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code with the exception of provision D.2.1 of the Code with respect to the composition of the Remuneration Committee as described on page The Sirius Board recognises the importance of sound corporate governance.
Its role is to provide leadership of the Company and its executives with myself as Chairman being responsible for leading the Board and ensuring its effectiveness.
It is therefore important that the Board has the correct balance of skills and experience and that its members work together effectively in pursuit of our corporate goals and objectives.
The Board is committed to the highest standards of corporate governance.
RUSSELL SCRIMSHAW.
CHAIRMAN 59 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board activity in 2017
Received comprehensive management reports at each meeting covering progress with the Project health and safety matters sales and marketing developments and finance and corporate development activities.
Approved the 2017 and 2018 budgets.
Approved changes to the Groups treasury policy.
Considered and approved updates to the statement of authority matrix.
Approved the full year and half year results following recommendations from the Audit Committee.
Approved the 2016 Annual
Leadership
Approved the appointment of Thomas Staley to the Board and Noel Harwerth as Senior Independent Director following recommendations from the Nominations Committee.
Following recommendations from the Nominations Committee approved the Chairmans role profile the CEOs role profile division of responsibility scheduled for the Chairman and CEO and the Senior Independent Director role profile.
In preparation for the move from AIM to Main Market reconstituted the membership of the Disclosure Committee.
Strategy
Held an offsite strategy meeting.
Reviewed and approved the takeorpay supply agreement with Wilmar International for the use and resale of POLY4 exclusively in South East Asia.
Internal controls and risk management Received regular updates on risk and reviewed the principal risks and mitigation plans.
Received a health and safety presentation from the Groups HandS manager.
Governance and stakeholders Received regular meeting reports from each of the Committee
Reviewed and approved increase to the annual fees of the NonExecutive Directors and Board Chairman following recommendations from a benchmarking exercise undertaken by the Remuneration
Considered and approved the process for the annual performance evaluation of the Board.
Reviewed annual schedule of Board agenda items.
Undertook an annual evaluation of the Boards performance and reviewed the results.
Approved changes to the Groups antibribery and corruption policy and the Groups new Speak Up policy.
Reviewed the 2017 Annual Report planning process.
In preparation for the move from AIM to the Main Market received briefing memoranda on Directors duties and responsibilities for a premium listed company AIM to Main update papers update from PwC on accounting and workstreams together with a Step Up training paper and presentation from Allen and Overy and J.
Morgan Cazenove.
Received and considered an antibribery and corruption memorandum updating the Board on the current legislative position and planned actions to ensure compliance with best practice.
Approved updated Terms of Reference for the Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nominations Committee and Disclosure
Approved changes to the Disclosure and Inside Information Policy and adopted a schedule of matters reserved to the Board.
Reviewed developments in corporate governance legal and regulatory updates.
Received investor relations reports.
During the year Thomas Staley was appointed to the Board as Finance Director further strengthening the Boards set of critical skills especially with regard to financing.
Additionally
Noel Harwerth a very experienced and longstanding NonExecutive Director of several major companies was appointed as our Senior Independent Director.
The Board now comprises two Executive Directors six NonExecutive Directors one of whom is the Senior Independent Director providing I believe an appropriate balance of executive and nonexecutive positions on the
The Directors have a broad range of relevant capabilities including strategic construction mining financial governance and other experience to support the Company in pursuit of our key objective of becoming one of the worlds most important producers of multinutrient fertilizer.
In 2017 a review of the performance of the Board and its Committees was carried out internally via a questionnaire circulated to all
The review confirmed that the Board and all of its Committees are operating effectively.
More details can be found on page 62 and in each of the Board Committee reports in this section on pages 66 to 98.
With our move to the Main Market during 2017 we are now pleased to provide an increased level of detailed reporting in our Annual Report.
Included in this increased reporting you will find the Remuneration Report on pages 73 to 98 which details our threeyear Remuneration Policy that will be put to a binding shareholder vote at our Annual General Meeting AGM in May 2018.
The Annual Report on Remuneration 2017 also sets out the details of Directors remuneration throughout 2017 and this will be subject to an advisory vote by shareholders at the upcoming AGM.
This year our AGM will be held at 1pm on Thursday 31 May 2018 at The Events Centre The Principal York Station Road York YO24 1AA and I look forward to welcoming you.
Russell Scrimshaw
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 60 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Role of the Board The Board provides leadership of the Company and direction for management.
It is responsible for the longterm success of the Company and for ensuring the appropriate management and operation of the Company in pursuit of its objectives.
The Board is responsible for setting the Companys strategy values and standards and ensuring the necessary controls and resources are in place for the Company to deliver it.
The Board has regular scheduled meetings and has a formal schedule of matters requiring its approval and specifically reserved for its decision which form the core of the Boards agenda.
These include approving the Groups long term objectives approval of the annual operating and capital expenditure budgets approving contracts for more than a certain monetary amount extension of the Groups activities into new business or geographic areas approval of major capital projects and approval of key policies and procedures.
Board meetings During 2017 the Board met eight times during the year excluding Board Committee meetings to approve the financial results and matters in connection with the move to the Main Market.
Individual Director attendance at each Board meeting is set out in the table opposite.
Directors are expected where possible to attend all Board meetings relevant Committee meetings the AGM and any General meetings.
If a Director is unable to attend a specific Board or Committee meeting he or she still receives all the papers for discussion at the meeting and can advise the Board Chairman or Committee Chairman of their comments in advance of the meeting.
Board meetings are normally attended by the Chief Development Officer and the Chief Marketing
Other senior members of the management team and external advisers will attend at the invitation of the Board and as appropriate to the matters under discussion.
During the year the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors also met on several occasions without the Executive Directors present to allow informal discussions on a variety of issues.
The NonExecutives met once during the year without the Chairman to evaluate the Chairmans performance.
The core activities of the Board are documented and planned on an annual basis and a list of matters arising from each meeting is maintained and followed up at subsequent meetings.
Full minutes of each Board and Committee meeting are kept by the Secretary detailing the matters considered and decisions taken.
The Chairman and Chief Executive The roles of the Chairman and Chief Executive are held separately and their responsibilities are clearly documented and established.
Russell
Scrimshaw is the Chairman and is responsible for the leadership and effective running of the Board.
Chris
Fraser is the Chief Executive and is responsible for the running of the Groups business and implementation of the strategy and policies adopted by the Board.
NonExecutive Directors NonExecutive Directors constructively challenge and scrutinise the performance of management and help develop proposals on strategy.
The terms and conditions of appointment of the NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at each AGM and at its registered office during normal business hours.
Senior Independent Director Noel Harwerth is the Senior Independent Director SID of the Company having been appointed on 25 April 2017.
As well as being available to shareholders whose concerns have not been resolved through normal channels or when such channels would be inappropriate the SID provides a sounding board for the Chairman and serves as an intermediary for the other Directors where necessary.
The
SID also has responsibility for leading the annual appraisal of the Chairmans performance.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE LEADERSHIP 61 Although Thomas Staley was appointed to the Board on 2 February 2017 he attended the January 2017 board meeting.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board attendance in 2017 BOARD MEMBERS Russell Scrimshaw Chairman 88 100% Chris Fraser Managing Director and CEO 88 100% Thomas Staley Finance Director and CFO 88 100% Noel Harwerth Senior Independent Director 88 100% Keith Clarke Independent NonExecutive Director 88 100% Louise Hardy Independent NonExecutive Director 88 100% Lord Hutton Independent NonExecutive Director 88 100% Jane Lodge Independent NonExecutive Director 88 100% Executive Directors The Executive Directors are responsible for the daytoday management of the Groups businesses implementation of its strategy policies and budgets and its financial performance.
Executive management meetings comprise the Executive Directors and senior management and are held bi monthly to discuss current issues.
Principal Committees of the Board The Board has delegated certain aspects of its responsibilities to four Committees as shown on page 65 the Audit Committee the Nominations Committee the Remuneration Committee and the Disclosure Committee.
Each Committee operates within defined terms of reference which are reviewed and updated as appropriate on an annual basis and are available on the Companysite Each Committee reports its proceedings to the Board verbally and through the submission of reports and minutes as appropriate.
Reports of the Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees are provided on pages 66 to 98 and include information on each Committees membership duties attendance at meetings and work throughout the year.
The Disclosure Committee comprises Chris Fraser Managing Director and CEO Thomas Staley Finance Director and CFO Nicholas King General Counsel and Company Secretary and Gareth Edmunds External Affairs Director.
Chris Fraser is the Chair of the Committee.
The Committee ensures that the Company is able to make timely and accurate disclosure of all information that is required to be disclosed to the market in accordance with its legal and regulatory obligations as a company with Officially Listed securities which have been admitted to trading on the Main Market.
The creation of the Disclosure Committee is not required by the Code but in ensuring that the Company has in place systems and procedures to enable it to discharge its obligations was considered an appropriate response and one which has been widely adopted by other companies.
The Disclosure Committee met a number of times during the year as was necessary and appropriate to fulfil its responsibilities.
The Terms of Reference for the Committee are set out in detail on the Companysite
PLEASE VISIT
OM
For a copy of the Code ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 62 Board tenure no.
03 years 36 years 69 years
A u s tr a li a n B r iti sh Dual British
Dual British American Board composition Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
E x e c u tiv e
N o n  E x e c u tiv e
I n d ep en d en t
Directors
Composition of the Board The Board is comprised of eight Directors which includes the Non Executive Chairman two Executive Directors and five other independent NonExecutive Directors.
A list of individual Directors their biographies and Committee memberships as at the date of this report are on pages 56 and 57.
The Board believes that there is an appropriate balance of skills experience independence and knowledge on the Board.
The Board also believes that there is an appropriate balance of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers all of its NonExecutive Directors to be independent.
The NonExecutive Directors disclose to the Board their other significant commitments and the procedure adopted by the Company in relation to Directors conflicts of interest is detailed on page 100.
Louise Hardy Jane Lodge and Noel Harwerth are independent in character and independent in judgement and are therefore independent NonExecutive Directors in accordance with the Code.
Lord
Hutton and Keith Clarke hold share options in the Company as detailed on page 93.
These outstanding share options were granted in 2012 and 2013 respectively when the Company was listed on AIM.
No further grants have been made to the Companys current NonExecutive Directors since 2013 and the Company does not intend to include share options or other performancerelated elements in the remuneration of the Non Executive Directors in the future.
Notwithstanding these share options the Board considers Lord Hutton and Keith Clarke to be independent in character and independent in judgement and therefore deemed to be independent NonExecutive
Prior to taking on the role as Chairman Russell Scrimshaw was viewed as independent in character and independent in judgement.
The Chairmans other significant commitments are detailed on page 56.
Performance evaluation In October 2017 the Board undertook an internal evaluation of its performance in accordance with the Code through the completion of a comprehensive questionnaire using the electronic board portal.
The results of the evaluation were presented to the Board at its meeting in December 2017 and confirmed that overall the Board was operating effectively.
The review confirmed that there were a small number of areas for action for 2018 including the design and implementation of a formal training and development programme for Board members and more opportunities for the Board to meet informally ahead of scheduled Board meetings.
It is the intention that in accordance with the Code an annual review of the effectiveness of the Board will be undertaken with input from an independent external adviser in 2020 and every three years thereafter.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED EFFECTIVENESS 63 Board diversity Women 3 Men 5 37% female 63% male Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 57 years average age of the Board Training development and induction of new Directors Ongoing professional development is provided to all Directors.
In 2017 the Boards professional development consisted of various updates presentations and memoranda from the Companys external advisers focused primarily on the responsibilities and duties of a director of a Premium Listed company given the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market as well as a health and safety presentation and updates on regulatory and legislative developments.
A number of the 2017 Board meetings were held in Scarborough to enable the Directors to attend site visits to see the development of the Project.
As there have been no new external appointments to the Board during the year a formal induction programme was not delivered during the year.
Thomas Staley was appointed to the Board during the year but had been with the Company since 2012 as Corporate Development Director and more recently Chief Financial Officer.
Thomas attended the Board meetings in his previous roles before being appointed as an Executive Director in February 2017 and as such was familiar with the workings of the Board and the Company so a formal induction process was not deemed necessary.
Information and support All Directors have access to the Company Secretary.
It is the responsibility of the Company Secretary to ensure that there are good information flows to the Board and its Committees and between the Executive team and the NonExecutive Directors.
The
Company Secretary advises the Board on all legal and corporate governance matters and assists the Chairman in ensuring that the Directors have suitably tailored and detailed induction and ongoing professional development programmes.
The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is a matter for the Board as a whole.
The Board uses an electronic board portal which provides quick easy and secure access to board papers and materials in advance of each meeting and in sufficient time to allow proper consideration of their contents.
There is a process by which Directors may obtain independent legal advice at the Companys expense if they believe it may be required in the furtherance of their duties.
EFFECTIVENESS
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 64 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
ACCOUNTABILITY
RELATIONS WITH
Risk management and internal control Details of the Groups internal controls and risk management framework are more fully set out on page 48 of the Strategic Report.
The Audit Committee on behalf of the Board carried out a review of the effectiveness of the systems of risk management and internal controls during the year.
This effectiveness review considered the design of controls associated with key risks and the evidence as to their proper operation throughout the year.
The review did not identify any significant failing or weaknesses in the system of internal control and risk management.
REMUNERATION
The Directors Remuneration Report
Policy and service contracts is set out on pages 73 to 98.
The Board recognises the importance of maintaining good communications with the Companys shareholders to ensure mutual understanding of the Groups strategy objectives governance and performance.
During the year shareholders are kept informed of the progress of the Group through regular corporate communications the Preliminary Results Announcement the Annual Report and Accounts the Half Year Results Announcement the Notice of Annual General Meeting quarterly trading updates and press releases regarding any other significant developments as well as the dissemination of regulated information.
Such communications are made available to the London Stock Exchange and are simultaneously available on the Companys websitesite The Companys website houses a wide range of information about the Group and the Project including the Annual Report and Accounts press releases and share price data.
From time to time the Company invites research analysts and institutional investors to presentations and site visits that are designed to provide more understanding of the strengths and capabilities of its business operations and strategy.
Shareholders can receive documentation such as the Annual Report and Accounts electronically and are also able to cast their votes by proxy.
The Company also has an electronic proxy appointment service for CREST members.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CONTINUED Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE The Board Responsible for the longterm success of the Company Audit Committee Jane Lodge Committee Chair Keith Clarke CBE Noel Harwerth Key objectives Review effectiveness of internal controls
Risk management
Annual and interim reporting review Overseeing the relationship with the external auditor Disclosure Committee Chris Fraser Committee Chair Thomas Staley Nicholas King Gareth Edmunds Key objective Ensuring the Company is able to make timely and accurate disclosure of required information Remuneration Committee Lord Hutton Committee Chair Jane Lodge Louise Hardy Russell Scrimshaw Key objectives Review remuneration and service contracts of Executive Directors Review of all share incentive plans Nominations Committee Keith Clarke Committee Chair Russell Scrimshaw Noel Harwerth Key objective Ensuring the Board comprises of individuals with the necessary skills knowledge and experience Chief Executive Chris Fraser Key objective Overall performance of the Company NonExecutive Chairman Russell Scrimshaw Key objective Leadership of the
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 66 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
AUDIT
COMMITTEE REPORT The Committee provides crucial oversight of the Groups financial affairs.
JANE LODGE.
CHAIR
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present our Audit Committee Report for 2017 which describes our activities and areas of focus during the year ended 31 December 2017.
Composition
The Audit Committee is made up of three members Jane Lodge Committee Chair Keith Clarke and Noel Harwerth who are all independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Board is satisfied that the members of the Audit Committee bring a wide range of skills expertise experience and competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
The Board is also satisfied that Jane Lodge possesses the necessary recent and relevant financial experience as set out in the Code to effectively chair the
Responsibilities
The main role of the Audit Committee includes monitoring the integrity of the Companys financial statements including reviewing its annual and halfyear financial statements and accounting policies reviewing the effectiveness of the external audit internal controls risk management whistleblowing and fraud systems in place across the Group and overseeing the relationship with the Companys auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Terms of Reference for the Committee are set out in detail on the Companys websitesite These terms were updated in March 2017 to reflect current best practice for a Premium Listed company ahead of the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market and are reviewed on at least an annual basis.
Meetings
The Committee has regular scheduled meetings and holds additional meetings as and when required.
Members are expected where possible to attend all Committee meetings.
The Committee had four meetings in 2017 and individual attendance is set out in the table opposite.
The Committee meets with the external auditor at least once a year without management present.
Meetings are normally attended by the Board Chairman Executive Directors Deputy Chief Financial Officer Financial Controller and the External Auditor.
Other senior members of the management team will attend at the invitation of the Committee and as appropriate to the matters under discussion.
Agendas briefing notes and reports for each Committee meeting are distributed via a secure electronic Board portal in advance of each meeting and in sufficient time to allow proper consideration of their contents.
The core activities of the Committee are documented and planned on an annual basis and a list of matters arising from each meeting is maintained and followed up at subsequent meetings.
Full minutes of each meeting are kept by the Company Secretary detailing the matters considered and decisions taken by the Committee.
The Audit Committee has access to the Company Secretary and external auditor for assistance as required and can obtain outside legal or other professional advice at the Companys expense if required.
Committee attendance in 2017 COMMITTEE MEMBERS Jane Lodge 44 100% Noel Harwerth 44 100% Keith Clarke 44 100% Committee activity in 2017 During the year the Committee reviewed the proposed accounting treatment of the Groups US400 million convertible loans and Royalty Financing Agreement received an update on accounting treatment for agronomic studies oversaw the rotation of the lead audit partner and reappointed PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP reviewed the Groups risk register reviewed and recommended to the Board the approval of the 2016 Annual Report the 2017 halfyear results announcement and the significant financial reporting judgements considered and recommended to the Board the approval of letters of representation issued to the external auditor received updates from management on the Directors commitments set out in the Groups Financial Position and Prospects Procedures FPPP report performed by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in April 2017 to support the Groups move from AIM to the Main Market of the LSE reviewed and approved the process for the review of the effectiveness of internal controls considered the schedule of nonaudit services provided by the external auditor considered and approved the audit approach and scope of the audit work to be undertaken by the external auditor and associated fees approved the process for the Committees 2017 annual performance evaluation reviewed the annual schedule of agenda items for the
2017 Annual Report including consideration of the skeleton financial statements and draft going concern and viability statements and conducted and reviewed the results of the 2017 performance evaluation of the Committee and agreed actions for 2018.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 68 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Committee evaluation During the year the Committee undertook an internal evaluation of its performance in accordance with the provisions of the Code and its Terms of Reference.
The Company Secretary on behalf of the Chairman circulated a comprehensive questionnaire to members and attendees of the Committee using the electronic Board portal covering all issues related to the functioning of the Committee.
The responses were consolidated and anonymised and common themes identified in order for the Committee to determine key actions and next steps for improving Committee effectiveness and performance.
The results of the 2017 internal evaluation show that overall the Committee is operating effectively.
Areas identified for action for 2018 include the incorporation of a programme of training and presentations into the Committee meeting schedule at appropriate times including updates on corporate governance and accounting developments by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP and subject matter deep dives PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP to carry out a benchmarking exercise of the Companys 2017 Annual Report the length of Committee meetings to be increased to allow sufficient time for the agenda and papers to be considered and more Committee meetings held in person rather than conference call.
Significant issues in 2017 The Committee considered a number of matters during the year as described above the most significant of which was in relation to the valuation of the royalty financing agreement and the Groups US400 million convertible loans.
As a result of the stage 1 financing undertaken in 2016 a number of complex financial instruments US250 million royalty agreement with Hancock British Holdings Limited Hancock a US50 million equity arrangement with Hancock and US400 million convertible loans were entered into by the Group with a number of third parties.
Due to the complexity of the accounting for each of these financial instruments the Committee received and considered comprehensive reports from management throughout the year to explain the proposed accounting treatment for the US50 million equity arrangement and initial drawdown of the US250 million royalty agreement together with detailed summaries of the subsequent accounting considerations for the royalty host instrument and the royalty embedded derivative.
The Committee also took into account the views of the external auditor.
The Committee concluded that the proposed accounting treatment of the financial instruments in the Companys 2017 financial statement was appropriate.
Risk management and internal control Details of the Groups internal controls and risk management framework are more fully set out on page 48 of the Strategic Report.
The Committee on behalf of the Board carried out a review of the effectiveness of the systems of risk management and internal controls during the year.
This effectiveness review considered the design of controls associated with key risks and the evidence as to their proper operation throughout the year.
The review did not identify any significant failing or weaknesses in the system of internal control and risk management.
Internal audit Due to the Groups current size and complexity the Audit Committee did not deem it necessary to operate an internal audit function during the year.
The Audit Committee was able to satisfy itself as to the proper implementation and operation of controls during the year through the review of the Groups FPPP report as well as regular reporting from senior management as to the operation of the Groups controls in the year.
As the level of construction activity increases on the Project in the coming year it is the Audit Committees view that an internal audit function will become necessary.
Therefore the Committee has begun to plan for the implementation of this in 2018 in order to support its ongoing monitoring of the Groups system of controls.
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Committee is responsible for managing the relationship with the companys auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have been the Companys auditor since October 2012.
The Committee confirms its compliance for the financial year ending 31 December 2017 with the provisions of the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
The Company last put its external audit contract out to tender in 2012 following which PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP was appointed as the Companys auditor.
Under current regulations the Company will be required to retender the audit no later than in respect of the year ending 31 December 2022.
The Committee recognises that audit tenders and transitions to new auditors require significant resource.
Given that the Company is new to the Main Market the Committee considers that it is in the best interests of the Company to retain PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP until 2022 to provide stability and continuity.
It is therefore the Companys intention to tender the audit no later than for the year ending 31 December 2022.
In accordance with best practice and professional standards the Company requires its External Auditor to adhere to a rotation policy whereby the audit engagement partner is rotated after five years.
During the year the Committee oversaw the rotation of the Senior Statutory Auditor with Randal Casson replacing Ian Morrison as the audit engagement partner.
The External Auditor is also required to periodically assess whether in its professional opinion it is independent and to share those views with the Committee.
In order to ensure the independence and objectivity of the External Auditor the Committee has a policy regarding the provision of nonaudit services by its External Auditor to ensure that such services do not impair the independence or objectivity of the External Auditor.
Any nonaudit services provided must be preapproved by the Committee unless the activity will have a total value of less than 5000.
Control over total nonaudit fees is monitored on a regular basis by the Committee with the intention to remain below an audit fee to nonaudit fee ratio of 11 and within the FRC guidance of the 70% cap that will be required from 2019.
However the Committee recognises that there may be times where it is appropriate to engage the external auditor for additional services which may result in the 11 ratio being exceeded.
2017 was an exceptional year for the Company with its move from AIM to the Main Market and this resulted in the nonaudit fees being higher than the audit fees due to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPs work in connection with the prospectus for the Premium Listing.
This was the one nonaudit service that PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP provided to the Company during the year and no other nonaudit fees were incurred in 2017.
An analysis of fees paid in respect of audit and nonaudit services provided by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for 2017 is set out in note 22 on page 134.
Having reviewed such nonaudit services the Committee is satisfied that they did not prejudice PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPs independence or objectivity.
The Committee assesses the quality of the external audit annually and considered the performance of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP taking into account the Committees own assessment feedback from senior finance personnel and views from PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP on their performance as detailed in a report of their audit findings at the year end which they took the Committee through at the meeting in February 2018.
Based on this review the Committee was satisfied with the effectiveness of the audit for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Speak Up policy Due to the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market the Groups whistleblowing arrangements were reviewed for best practice and as a result the Group implemented an externally managed independent phone and web reporting Speak Up service and a new Speak Up policy during the year to allow employees to raise concerns in confidence.
Prior to this the Group had a whistleblowing policy in place whereby an employee could raise any concerns direct with management.
Updates on any matters raised are provided to the Committee at each meeting.
Jane Lodge
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 70 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
NOMINATIONS
COMMITTEE REPORT A diverse Board of skills experience background and gender is an essential part of good governance.
KEITH CLARKE.
CHAIR
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present our Nominations Committee Report for 2017 which describes our activities and areas of focus during the year.
Composition
The Nominations Committee comprises Keith Clarke Committee Chair and Noel Harwerth who are both independent NonExecutive Directors and Russell Scrimshaw the Board Chairman.
Responsibilities
The main role of the Committee is to review the structure size and composition of the Board and to identify and propose to the Board suitable candidates to fill Board vacancies keep under review the leadership needs of the Company both executive and nonexecutive and assist with the annual performance evaluation process for the Board and its Committees.
The Terms of Reference for the Committee are set out in detail on the Companys websitesite These terms were updated in March 2017 to reflect current best practice for a Premium Listed company ahead of the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market and are reviewed on at least an annual basis.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Committee attendance in 2017 COMMITTEE MEMBERS Keith Clarke 22 100% Noel Harwerth 22 100% Russell Scrimshaw 22 100% Committee activity in 2017 During the year the Committee reviewed the composition size and structure of the Board ahead of the Companys move to the Premium List of the London Stock Exchange having carried out this review considered and recommended to the Board the appointment of Thomas Staley the CFO as an additional Executive Director reviewed and recommended to the Board the approval of the role profiles for Senior Independent Director Chairman of the Board and CEO in preparation for the Companys move to the Main
Senior Independent Director ahead of the Companys move to the Main Market and recommended to the Board the appointment of Noel Harwerth as Senior Independent Director reviewed and recommended to the Board for approval updated Terms of Reference for the Committee and undertook an evaluation of its own performance.
Meetings
The Committee has regular scheduled meetings and holds additional meetings as and when required.
Members are expected where possible to attend all Committee meetings.
The Committee met twice in 2017 and individual attendance is set out in the corresponding table.
At the invitation of the Committee and as appropriate to the matters under discussion meetings may be attended by the Executive Directors and external advisers.
Agendas briefing notes and reports for each Committee meeting are distributed via a secure electronic Board portal in advance of each meeting and in sufficient time to allow proper consideration of their contents.
The core activities of the Committee are documented and planned on an annual basis and a list of matters arising from each meeting is maintained and followed up at subsequent meetings.
Full minutes of each meeting are kept by the Company Secretary detailing the matters considered and decisions taken by the Committee.
The Nominations Committee has access to the Company Secretary for assistance as required and can obtain other professional advice at the Companys expense if required.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 72 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED and export credit backed debt mezzanine debt and equity.
Given his experience and the fact that he had demonstrated his strong capabilities as CFO since joining the Company in 2014 especially in the delivery of the Companys stage 1 financing the Committee was of the view that Thomas would bring the necessary required skills to the Board and was the most suitable candidate.
Female representation on the Board is currently 37% with the Audit Committee at 66% the Remuneration Committee having 50% and the Nominations Committee at 33%.
Further details on the Companys diversity and talent management can be found in the Our People section on page 46 of the Strategic Report.
Keith Clarke
Committee evaluation During the year the Committee undertook an internal evaluation of its performance in accordance with the provisions of the Code and its Terms of Reference.
The Company Secretary on behalf of the Chairman circulated a comprehensive questionnaire to members and attendees of the Committee using the electronic Board portal covering all issues related to the functioning of the Committee.
The responses were consolidated and anonymised and common themes identified in order for the Committee to determine key actions and next steps for improving Committee effectiveness and performance.
The results of the 2017 internal evaluation showed that overall the Committee is operating effectively.
The main recommendation for action for 2018 was for the Committee to have an increased focus on succession planning for the Board and senior management team to ensure that the business is prepared for the future while also assisting in the design of a programme of training for the Board.
The length of Committee meetings would also be increased to allow sufficient time for the agenda and papers to be considered and more Committee meetings held in person rather than conference call.
Diversity
Over the last 12 months there have been a number of diversity reviews including The HamptonAlexander Review on gender balance in FTSE leadership the McGregorSmith review on race in the workplace and The Parker Review on ethnic diversity on UK boards.
The Committee continues to review and monitor the balance and composition of the Board and makes recommendations to the Board as appropriate as evidenced by the Committees activity during the year under review.
It is the Committees intention to have a continued focus on diversity in 2018.
All Board appointments are made on merit in the context of the skills and experience that the Board as a whole requires in order to maintain and enhance its effectiveness.
The appointment of Thomas Staley to the Board in February 2017 followed an assessment by the Committee that an additional Executive Director with financial expertise was necessary ahead of the Companys move to the Premium List of the London Stock Exchange and the associated enhanced governance requirements and also in preparation for the Companys stage 2 debt financing.
Thomas has over ten years of experience developing and financing energy resource and infrastructure projects across a range of international markets.
His core competency was structuring commercial arrangements and financing projects utilising a wide range of capital including project Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
COMMITTEE REPORT CHAIRMANS ANNUAL
Our aim is to create a remuneration framework that is appropriate whilst supporting our strategic goal to develop and implement our world class North Yorkshire polyhalite Project within budget and schedule.
LORD HUTTON.
CHAIR
Dear Shareholder As Chairman of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present
our Directors Remuneration Report
2017 our first report following our admission to the Main Market.
In line with the applicable regulations this report is presented in two sections firstly our Directors Remuneration Policy the Policy containing our forward looking policy in relation to Directors remuneration and then our Annual Report on Remuneration which provides details of the amounts earned in respect of the 2017 financial year and how our Policy will be implemented in the 2018 financial year.
Our Policy is subject to a binding shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM and subject to approval by shareholders will become effective from that date.
Our Annual Report on Remuneration will be subject to an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
How we link executive remuneration to our strategy Given the unique nature of our business we designed our Policy to ensure that it will be appropriate for the UK Premium Listed company environment whilst continuing to support our strategic goal to develop and implement our worldclass North Yorkshire polyhalite Project within budget and schedule.
We will emerge as a disruptive worldleading fertilizer operation and the opportunity to create value for our shareholders is sizeable.
The nature of this opportunity and the focus required to deliver transformational milestones within a clear time frame during a lossmaking period were the basis for the Policy for which we are seeking shareholder approval.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 74 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Reflecting the development stage of our Project and that the Company is still some years from becoming a cash flowgenerating company the fixed pay for our Managing Director
and Chief Executive Officer CEO
Financial Officer CFO are positioned at the lower end of the market for FTSE 250 companies.
Instead our package is geared towards variable pay based on the delivery of our strategic milestones towards first production.
Our Policy provides for a maximum annual bonus opportunity of up to 175% of salary for our CEO and up to 150% for our CFO.
In exceptional circumstances linked to the achievement of a transformational strategic milestone the maximum bonus awarded may be increased up to 200% of salary.
We have introduced individual limits in our Policy on the level of longterm incentive awards that can be granted each year to our Executive Directors.
Ordinarily LTIP awards of up to 200% of salary may be granted to our CEO and up to 175% of salary may be granted to our CFO.
Vesting of LTIP awards are linked to the delivery of our strategic milestones.
We have included the ability to grant exceptional LTIP awards i.
CEO and up to 475% of salary for the
Any exceptional LTIP awards will be subject to aspirational stretch targets.
For the avoidance of doubt there is no intention to grant such exceptional awards on an ongoing basis.
The ability to grant exceptional awards reflects that we are a unique business at a critical point in our development.
Recognising the importance of our strong team culture and the contribution of the wider team the principle of awarding exceptional LTIP awards for the delivery of transformational strategic milestones significantly ahead of plan will also apply to the wider team eligible to participate in the LTIP.
Achieving our transformational milestones significantly ahead of plan would require outstanding Company performance through consistent innovation constant drive and successful execution.
This would also result in significant increased value being delivered to shareholders.
The Remuneration Committee recognises that this exceptionally strong performance of the Company should also result in a substantial rise in our share price as a consequence of this performance.
Although this provides a strong alignment between executive reward Company performance and shareholder value creation the Remuneration Committee is mindful that there may be scenarios where the level of reward is materially greater than envisaged at the time that the awards are granted.
Taking into account the current executive remuneration environment to mitigate the risk that the overall maximum remuneration payable may have the potential of being simply too high irrespective of outstanding Company performance the Remuneration Committee has decided to include an overall total annual remuneration cap of 20 million.
It should be noted that this cap is intended to mitigate the risk of the overall remuneration policy having unintended consequences and is only likely to be in point due to exceptional share price accretion and if more than one LTIP award vested in respect of a milestone being achieved and the Companys market capitalisation increased from circa 1 billion to over 7 billion.
Reflecting best practice our Policy also includes a shareholding guideline which requires Executive Directors to build up a shareholding with a value equal to 200% of salary.
Alignment with shareholders is further enhanced by the following which will apply to bonus and longterm incentive awards from 2018 the deferral into shares for two years of any bonus earned in excess of 100% of salary and an additional holding period for longterm incentive awards such that vested LTIP awards will only be released to an Executive Director prior to the fifth anniversary of the date of grant so they can dispose of the shares acquired if the shareholding guideline has been achieved although sales to cover tax would be permitted.
As at 31 December 2017 Chris Frasers shareholding equated to 50 times salary and Thomas Staleys shareholding equated to 0.7 times his salary.
Our performance and incentive outturns in 2017 As outlined in the Chairmans statement on pages 4 to 6 2017 has been a year of significant progress for our business.
We accomplished a number of significant Project milestones and successfully executed a number of key activities that are pivotal to the success of this exciting
Following a robust assessment of the Executive Directors contribution to the achievement of these strategic goals and measured against the pre set objectives for the Executives the Remuneration Committee awarded cash bonuses of 332500 and 250000 to Chris Fraser and Thomas Staley respectively.
Further detail in relation to the performance achieved
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
CHAIRMANS ANNUAL STATEMENT 75
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 and the associated bonuses earned in respect of 2017 is set out on page 89 to 90.
Shareholders will recognise that the nature and stage of our business means that setting conventional financial targets is not appropriate our bonuses for 2017 and for 2018 are based on the delivery of specific elements of the Project and substantive progress towards transformational milestones on time and within budget which are all lead indicators to the success of the business.
No longterm incentives vested in respect of performance in 2017.
Implementation of our Policy in 2018 Fixed pay No base salary increases are proposed for the Executive Directors for 2018.
Pension contributions for our Executive Directors will continue to be in line with auto enrolment minimum contribution requirements at the level of circa.
1% of salary 2% with effect from April 2018 in line with the wider workforce and autoenrolment requirements.
2018 maximum bonus opportunity Maximum bonus opportunity of up to 175% of salary for Chris Fraser and up to 150% of salary for Thomas
However the maximum bonus earned for 2018 may be increased up to 200% of salary if a successful stage 2 financing is achieved.
This recognises the critical importance and transformational impact of a successful stage 2 financing.
Further details in relation to the annual bonus performance measures for 2018 are set out on page 96.
2018 longterm incentive grants Subject to shareholder approval of the Policy we intend to grant LTIP awards of up to 500% of salary to Chris Fraser and up to 475% of salary for Thomas Staley following the 2018 AGM.
This reflects the significant changes brought about by commencement of construction during 2017 our ambitious goals for the Project through the next phase of development and the prospective construction over the next several years of a complex and large scale project and first mining of polyhalite.
This event is expected to be a seminal and unique achievement for the Company in its lifecycle.
The 2018 LTIP grant consists of two elements ordinary grants of 200% of salary for Chris Fraser and 175% for Thomas Staley and an exceptional stretch award of 300% of salary to encourage rapid and early construction which we believe will result in significant additional benefits to shareholders potentially of many hundreds of millions of pounds.
As set out in further detail on page 97 the vesting of the 2018 LTIP awards will be based on the critical milestone of first polyhalite being extracted from the ore body.
Remuneration at a glance 2017 annual bonuses earned of approximately 70% and 76% of salary based on Chris Frasers and Thomas Staleys contribution to the achievement of significant strategic milestones during the year that are pivotal to the success of the Project see page 89 to 90.
Salaries for 2018 will not be increased.
Pension contributions for our Executive Directors will continue to be line with the wider workforce at circa 1%.
Maximum bonus opportunity for 2018 will be up to 175% of salary for Chris Fraser and up to 150% of salary for Thomas Staley.
However the maximum bonus earned for 2018 may be increased up to 200% of salary if a successful stage 2 financing is achieved.
From 2018 bonus awards above 100% of salary will be deferred into shares for two years.
Exceptional LTIP awards of up to 500% of salary for Chris Fraser and up to 475% of salary for Thomas Staley to be granted in 2018 based on the critical milestone of first polyhalite being extracted from the ore body see page 97.
Reflecting best practice a 200% of salary shareholding guideline applies.
LTIP awards granted from 2018 will only be released to an Executive Director prior to the fifth anniversary of the date of grant if the shareholding guideline has been achieved.
To mitigate the risk that the overall maximum remuneration payable may have the potential of being simply too high irrespective of outstanding Company performance an overall total remuneration cap of 20 million has been incorporated into the Policy.
Maximum vesting of the ordinary award requires this milestone to be achieved by 31 March 2022.
The exceptional element of the awards is subject to the delivery of this transformational milestone significantly ahead of plan with maximum vesting requiring this milestone to be achieved by 15 March 2021.
We are committed to a responsible approach to executive pay that reflects appropriately the unique nature of our business and is aligned with the next phase of development into what will be a disruptive worldleading fertilizer operation.
We have consulted with shareholders on the design and implementation of our Policy and have taken into consideration the feedback received which resulted in some changes including to our approach to bonus deferral the inclusion of time frames on LTIP milestones and reduction in the proposed total annual remuneration cap.
We will continue to engage with our shareholders and trust that you will support the resolutions to be proposed at the 2018 AGM in relation to the Directors
Remuneration Report.
Lord Hutton Chair of the Remuneration
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 76 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS
REMUNERATION POLICY This part of the Directors Remuneration Report sets out Sirius Minerals Directors Remuneration Policy the Policy which subject to shareholder approval at the 2018 Annual General Meeting shall take binding effect from the close of that meeting.
Remuneration arrangements entered into with Directors before the move from AIM to the Main Market do not form part of the forward looking Policy but may be satisfied in accordance with their terms as referred to on page 85.
The principal aim of the Policy which has been determined by the Remuneration Committee is to align the interests of Executive Directors with the Companys strategic vision and the longterm creation of shareholder value.
The Policy is intended to remunerate our Executive Directors competitively and appropriately for effective delivery of this and allows them to share in this success and the value delivered to shareholders.
Policy for Executive Directors COMPONENT PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY PERFORMANCE
Base salary Core element of fixed remuneration reflecting the individuals role and experience.
The Remuneration Committee ordinarily reviews base salaries annually taking into account a number of factors including but not limited to the value of the individual and their experience and performance.
The Remuneration Committee also takes into consideration pay increases within the Group more generally and Group organisation affordability and prevailing market conditions.
Whilst there is no maximum salary increases will normally be within the range of salary increases awarded in percentage of salary terms to other employees in the Group.
However higher increases may be awarded in appropriate circumstances including but not limited to an increase in scope of the role or the individuals responsibilities where an individual has been appointed at a lower than typical market salary to allow for growth in the role in which case larger increases may be awarded to move salary positioning to a typical market level as the individual gains experience change in size and complexity of the Group andor significant market movement.
Such increases may be implemented over such time periods as the Remuneration Committee deems appropriate.
While no formal performance conditions apply an individuals performance in the role is taken into account in determining any salary increase.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPONENT PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY PERFORMANCE
Benefits To provide broadly market competitive benefits.
The Company provides benefits in line with market practice and includes private medical insurance and travel insurance for the Executive Director and hisher family life insurance provision of a mobile phone or reimbursement of mobile phone costs and laptop.
Other benefits may be provided based on individual circumstances which may include relocation costs.
Whilst the Remuneration Committee has not set an absolute maximum on the level of benefits Executive Directors may receive the value of benefits is set at a level which the Remuneration Committee considers to be appropriately positioned taking into account relevant market levels based on the nature and location of the role and individual circumstances.
Not applicable.
Retirement benefits To provide a means of saving to deliver income in retirement.
The Company may make a contribution to a defined contribution pension arrangement personal pension or pay a salary supplement.
Up to 10% of salary.
At the date of the approval of this Policy the Company makes a contribution in line with autoenrolment requirements 2% with effect from April 2018.
Not applicable.
Bonus The Remuneration Committee may award Executive Directors a bonus opportunity which will be earned for performance against targets andor objectives linked to the delivery of the Companys strategy.
Targets and objectives will be reviewed annually.
Performance will typically be assessed over a period of one year.
The Remuneration Committee has discretion to amend the payout should any formulaic output not reflect the
Committees assessment of overall business performance.
Any bonus earned in excess of 100% of base salary will be deferred into shares typically for a period of two years.
Recovery provisions apply as referred to on page 79.
The overall maximum annual bonus opportunity is up to 200% of base salary.
However in normal circumstances the maximum annual opportunity will be up to 175% of base salary for the Companys CEO and up to 150% of base salary for the Companys CFO.
The additional opportunity up to the overall maximum will only be used in exceptional circumstances linked to the achievement of a transformational strategic milestone.
Targets which may be based on financial or strategic measures and individual objectives are determined to reflect the Companys strategy.
Where more than one measure applies the Remuneration Committee will determine the weighting.
Bonuses will vest to the extent determined by the Remuneration Committee between 0% and 100% of the opportunity based on its assessment of the extent to which the measure or objective is achieved.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 78 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
COMPONENT PURPOSE AND LINK TO STRATEGY OPERATION MAXIMUM OPPORTUNITY PERFORMANCE
Longterm incentives the Sirius Minerals Plc Long Term
Plan or LTIP Longterm incentive awards will be granted under the LTIP which provides a clear link between the remuneration of the Executive Directors and the creation of value for shareholders by rewarding the Executive Directors for the achievement of objectives aligned to shareholders interests.
Awards may be granted in the form of conditional shares nilcost options or Jointly Owned Equity awards or as cashbased equivalents.
The vesting of awards will be subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions.
Recognising the Companys strategy and the stage of its development performance conditions may be achieved so that awards vest before the third anniversary of the date of grant.
However vested shares will ordinarily only be released to the Executive Director so that he can dispose of them other than sales to cover tax liabilities arising in relation to the award before the fifth anniversary of the date of grant of the award if the Executive Director satisfies the shareholding guideline.
Recovery provisions apply as referred to below.
The overall maximum value of shares over which a participant may be granted an award in respect of any financial year of the Company is up to 500% of base salary.
However in normal circumstances the maximum annual award will be up to 200% of base salary for the Companys CEO and up to 175% of base salary for the Companys CFO.
Any additional award up to the overall maximum will only be granted where awards are subject to exceptional aspirational stretch targets.
Performance conditions will be determined by the
Committee in advance of each grant and aligned with the Companys strategy.
These conditions may be based on operational strategic milestones or financial measures.
Vesting will be determined in accordance with a vesting schedule set by the Remuneration Committee as at the date of grant.
A Jointly Owned Equity award JOE gives the participant an interest in the future growth in value of shares owned jointly with a trustee.
A JOE award may also include the right to acquire the trustees interest in the shares for nil cost so that the participant is entitled to the full value of the vested shares.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED 79 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Recovery provisions malus and clawback Bonus and LTIP awards are subject to the following recovery provisions Malus The bonus opportunity may be cancelled or reduced before payment and an LTIP award may be cancelled or reduced before vesting in the event of material error or misstatement of results material failure of risk management material misconduct by the Executive Director material health and safety failure.
Clawback For up to two years following the vesting of a bonus or an LTIP award the bonus paid may be recovered and any deferred bonus award may be cancelled or reduced and the LTIP award may be cancelled or reduced if it has not been realised or may be recovered in the event of material error or misstatement of results material misconduct by the Executive Director material health and safety failure.
Explanation of performance measures chosen In order that incentive remuneration is appropriately linked to the delivery of the Companys strategy and taking into account the stage of the Companys development LTIP awards will typically be subject to performance conditions based on the delivery of operational milestones linked to the delivery of the Companys North Yorkshire polyhalite
The Remuneration Committee may vary or substitute any performance measure if an event occurs which causes it to determine that it would be appropriate to do so including to take account of acquisitions or divestments a material change in strategy or a change in prevailing market conditions provided that any such variation or substitution is fair and reasonable and in the option of the Remuneration Committee the change would not make the measure less demanding than the original measure would have been but for the event in question.
If the Remuneration Committee were to make such a variation an explanation would be given in the next Directors Remuneration Report.
Shareholding guidelines To align the interests of Executive Directors with those of shareholders the Remuneration Committee has adopted formal shareholding guidelines in accordance with which each Executive Director is required to build a shareholding equal to 200% of his or her annual base salary.
In accordance with the Policy table set out above a postvesting holding period applies to the LTIP awards until the holding is achieved.
Shares subject to awards which have vested but have not been realised and shares subject to any deferred bonus award count towards the guidelines on a net of assumed tax basis.
Operation of share plans The Remuneration Committee may amend the terms of awards and options under its share plans in accordance with the plan rules in the event of a variation of the Companys share capital or a demerger special dividend or other similar event or otherwise in accordance with the rules of those plans.
The Remuneration Committee may operate any such plan in accordance with its rules.
Share awards granted under any such plan may be settled in cash although the Remuneration Committee would only do so where the particular circumstances made this the appropriate course of action for example where a regulatory reason prevented the delivery of shares.
Total remuneration  annual cap For the reasons referred to in the statement from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee there is an overall annual total remuneration cap of 20 million for each Executive Director.
If the remuneration otherwise disclosable in the single figure table in the Directors Remuneration Report for a year would exceed this limit the Remuneration Committee shall reduce variable pay as it considers appropriate.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 80 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Policy for NonExecutive Directors ELEMENT PURPOSE AND LINK TO
OPERATION OPPORTUNITY Fees and benefits To provide fees within a marketcompetitive range reflecting the experience of the individual responsibilities of the role and the expected time commitment.
To provide benefits where appropriate which are relevant to the requirements of the role.
The fees of the Chairman are determined by the Remuneration Committee and the fees of the NonExecutive Directors are determined by the Board following a recommendation from both the
Chief Executive Officer and the
Chairman.
NonExecutive Directors may be eligible to receive benefits such as travel and other reasonable expenses.
Fees are set taking into account the responsibilities of the role and expected time commitment.
NonExecutive Directors are paid a basic fee with additional fees paid for the membership and chairing of Board Committees.
An additional fee may also be paid for the role of Senior Independent Director.
NonExecutive Directors may be paid additional fees on a daily rate basis where the time required to fulfil their duties is significantly more than anticipated.
Where benefits are provided to NonExecutive Directors they will be provided at a level considered to be appropriate taking into account the individual circumstances.
NonExecutive Directors are not eligible to participate in any of the Companys share schemes incentive schemes or pension schemes.
However certain NonExecutive Directors participate in share option arrangements established by the Company prior to Admission as disclosed in the Prospectus those options shall continue and may be exercised in accordance with their terms however no options have been granted to NonExecutive Directors since 2013 and no further options will be granted to NonExecutive Directors.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED 81 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Policy for the remuneration of employees more generally The Group aims to provide a competitive remuneration package which is appropriate to promote the longterm success of the Company.
The Company intends to apply this policy fairly and consistently and does not intend to pay more than is necessary to attract and motivate staff.
In respect of the Executive Directors a greater proportion of the remuneration package is at risk and determined by reference to performance conditions.
A significant number of the Companys employees participate in LTIP awards in line with the Companys ethos of ensuring that incentives for the wider employee population remain aligned to the interests of shareholders.
Illustrations of application of the remuneration policy The following charts provide an illustration for each of the Executive Directors of the application for the 2018 financial year of the remuneration policy.
The charts show the split of remuneration between fixed pay i. and employer pension contributionssalary supplement annual bonus and long term incentive pay.
The regulations require us to show remuneration on the basis of minimum remuneration remuneration receivable for performance in line with Sirius Minerals expectations and maximum remuneration.
Reflecting our approach to LTIP awards and the intention to grant awards at the level of 500% of salary in 2018 subject to the exceptional performance target for delivering the first polyhalite significantly ahead of plan we have shown both an ordinary maximum and a super stretch maximum which assumes the vesting of a 500% LTIP award.
The charts do not take into account any share price appreciation.
Minimum performance
Super stretch performance
Total remuneration 000 2295k 3839k 100% 46% 22% 13% 36% 25% 42% 62% 37% Chris Fraser 1119k 17% Fixed pay Bonus LTIP
Maximum performance
Performance in line with expectations Total remuneration 000 1416k 2571k 100% 49% 24% 13% 35% 26% 41% 61% 35% Thomas Staley Fixed pay Bonus 16%
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 82 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
In illustrating the potential in reward the following assumptions have been made FIXED PAY ANNUAL BONUS LTIP
Base salary being the latest known salary as at 1 January 2018 employer pension contributions at an assumed rate of 2% on the latest known salary and benefits disclosed in the single figure table on page 88 for the 2017 financial year.
No bonus No LTIP vesting
Bonus equal to 50% of the ordinary opportunity is earned i.
87.5% of salary for Chris Fraser and 75% of salary for Thomas Staley.
LTIP vests as to 20% of the ordinary maximum award i.
40% of salary for Chris Fraser and 35% of salary for Thomas Staley.
Ordinary
Bonus equal to 175% of salary is earned by Chris Fraser and 150% of salary by Thomas Staley.
LTIP vests in respect of the maximum ordinary award i.
200% of salary for Chris Fraser and 175% of salary for Thomas Staley.
Super stretch performance Bonus equal to 200% of salary is earned by Chris Fraser and Thomas Staley.
LTIP vests in respect of the maximum exceptional stretch targets award i.
500% of salary for Chris Fraser and 475% of salary for Thomas Staley.
Recruitment remuneration policy When hiring a new Executive Director the Remuneration Committee will typically align the remuneration package with the above Policy.
When determining appropriate remuneration arrangements the Remuneration Committee may include other elements of pay which it considers are appropriate.
However this discretion is capped and is subject to the principles and the limits referred to below.
Base salary will be set at a level appropriate to the role and the experience of the Executive Director being appointed.
This may include agreement on future increases up to a market rate in line with increased experience andor responsibilities subject to good performance where it is considered appropriate.
Retirement benefits will be provided in line with the above Policy.
The Remuneration Committee will not offer nonperformance related incentive payments for example a guaranteed signon bonus.
Other elements may be included in the following circumstances an interim appointment being made to fill an Executive Director role on a shortterm basis if exceptional circumstances require that the Chairman or a NonExecutive Director takes on an executive function on a shortterm basis if an Executive Director is recruited at a time in the year when it would be inappropriate to provide a bonus or longterm incentive award for that year as there would not be sufficient time to assess performance.
Subject to the limit on variable remuneration set out below the quantum in respect of the months employed during the year may be transferred to the subsequent year so that reward is provided on a fair and appropriate basis and if the Director will be required to relocate in order to take up the position it is the Companys policy to allow reasonable relocation travel and subsistence payments.
Any such payments will be at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee may also alter the performance measures performance period and vesting period deferral period and holding period of the bonus or LTIP if the Remuneration Committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such alteration.
The rationale will be clearly explained in the next Directors Remuneration Report.
The maximum level of variable remuneration which may be granted excluding buyout awards as referred to below is 700% of salary reflecting an annual bonus opportunity of up to 200% of salary and an LTIP grant of up to 500% of salary.
However awards at these levels would only be made in the event of exceptional performance targets applying.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED 83 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Remuneration Committee may make payments or awards in respect of hiring an employee to buyout remuneration arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
In doing so the Remuneration Committee will take account of relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to the forfeited arrangements and the time over which they would have vested.
The Remuneration Committee will generally seek to structure buyout awards or payments on a comparable basis to the remuneration arrangements forfeited.
Any such payments or awards are excluded from the maximum level of variable remuneration referred to above.
Buyout awards will ordinarily be granted on the basis that they are subject to forfeiture or clawback in the event of departure within 12 months of joining Sirius Minerals although the Remuneration Committee will retain discretion not to apply forfeiture or clawback in appropriate circumstances.
Any share awards referred to in this section will be granted as far as possible under Sirius Minerals existing share plans.
If necessary and subject to the limits referred to above recruitment awards may be granted outside of these plans as permitted under the Listing Rules which allow for the grant of awards to facilitate in unusual circumstances the recruitment of an Executive Director.
Where a position is filled internally any ongoing remuneration obligations or outstanding variable pay elements shall be allowed to continue in accordance with their terms.
Fees payable to a newly appointed Chairman or NonExecutive Director will be in line with the policy in place at the time of appointment.
Executive Directors service agreements and NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment The Companys policy is for Executive Directors to be employed on service agreements which ordinarily may be terminated on not more than six months notice by the Executive Director or the Company.
However the Company reserves the right to offer a notice period of up to 12 months for any Executive Director appointed after the date on which this Policy becomes effective.
NonExecutive Directors do not have service agreements but serve under letters of appointment which may be terminated on three months notice by the NonExecutive Director or the Company.
Details of the service contracts letters of appointment and notice periods for the current Directors are set out below.
NAME COMMENCEMENT NOTICE PERIOD BY COMPANYDIRECTOR Executive Directors Chris Fraser 17 January 2011 Six months Thomas Staley 20 October 2014 Six months NonExecutive Directors Russell Scrimshaw 19 December 2010 Three months Noel Harweth 27 July 2015 Three months Keith Clarke CBE 23 December 2013 Three months Louise Hardy 12 May 2016 Three months Lord Hutton 18 January 2012 Three months Jane Lodge 27 July 2015 Three months In the event of a change of control of the Company or certain similar events the notice required to be given by the Company including in relation to any notice of termination given before the relevant event shall increase to 12 months.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 84 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Payment for loss of office Eligibility for the various elements of remuneration is set out below Executive Directors PROVISION TREATMENT Fixed remuneration Salary benefits and pension contributions or salary supplement will paid to the date of termination.
Payments in lieu of notice Where a payment in lieu of notice is made this will include salary benefits and pension contributions or a salary supplement until the end of the notice period that would otherwise have applied.
Alternatively the Company may continue to provide the relevant benefits.
Bonus This will be reviewed on an individual basis and the decision whether or not to award a bonus in full or in part will be dependent upon a number of factors including the circumstances of the Executive Directors departure and his or her contribution to the business during the bonus period in question.
Any bonus payment would typically be prorated for time in service to termination and paid at the usual time although the Remuneration Committee retains discretion to pay the bonus earlier in appropriate circumstances.
If bonus deferral would otherwise apply to any bonus for the year of termination or previous year the Remuneration Committee may pay the full bonus earned in cash.
Any outstanding deferred bonus awards would typically continue other than in the event of summary dismissal where the entitlement would lapse and vest at the originally anticipated date although the Remuneration Committee retains discretion to release any such award at the date of cessation or some other date.
LTIP LTIP awards will vest if the participant is a good leaver to the extent determined by the Remuneration Committee taking into account their assessment of performance relative to the performance condition and such other factors as they consider relevant which may include the length of time from grant to cessation.
The Remuneration Committee shall determine whether awards vest at cessation or continue and can vest following satisfaction of the milestone or on some other date.
For these purposes good leaver reasons are death injury redundancy agreed retirement and any other reason at the Remuneration Committees discretion.
If an Executive Director ceases employment with the Group after an award under the LTIP has vested but during a postvesting holding period the realised shares will ordinarily remain subject to the original holding period.
Other payments The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make additional exit payments where such payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of a Directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance andor the Directors legal andor professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment andor in respect of accrued holiday entitlement.
Where a buyout or other award is made in connection with recruitment the leaver provisions would be determined at the time of the award.
In accordance with his service agreement entered into in January 2011 Chris Fraser is also entitled on termination by the Company to a minimum of one months base salary for every year of employment by the Company prorated for any part year of service.
Change of control LTIP awards will vest on a change of control to the extent determined by the Remuneration Committee.
In determining the extent of vesting the Remuneration Committee would have regard to the extent to which the performance measures had been satisfied and other factors the Remuneration Committee considers relevant.
Any deferred bonus shares will vest on a change of control or other relevant event.
As described on page 83 the notice to which Chris Fraser is entitled to increases to 12 months in certain change of control situations.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION POLICY CONTINUED 85 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to compensation on termination of their appointment in excess of their fees for the notice period.
Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company The Remuneration Committee does not formally consult with employees as part of its process when determining Executive Director pay.
However as noted in the Policy table on page 76 the level of salary increases of employees within the wider Group is considered when setting base salary for Executive Directors.
The Remuneration Committee is also kept informed of general decisions made in relation to employee pay and related issues.
Statement of consideration of shareholder views The Remuneration Committee believes that ongoing dialogue with major shareholders is of key importance.
During the financial year the Remuneration Committee consulted with shareholders in relation to the Policy and our proposals have been finalised having regard to feedback received.
Legacy remuneration arrangements The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments andor payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the Policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the Policy came into effect or ii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the
For these purposes payments includes the Remuneration Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
These legacy remuneration arrangements include an entitlement on the part of each Executive Director to one business class return flight per year for him and his family to Australia and in certain termination scenarios to the reasonable costs incurred in the Executive Director and his family relocating to Australia an entitlement on the part of Thomas Staley to be awarded 1000000 shares on completion of agreed milestones under the Milestone Award granted to him and referred to in the Prospectus and share options held by the Directors disclosed in the Prospectus and referred to on page 92 to 93.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 86 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION This report provides details on remuneration in the period and some other information required by the applicable regulations.
It will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
The relevant sections of this report have been audited as required.
Composition
The Remuneration Committee is made up of four members the Chairman of the Board Russell Scrimshaw and three independent NonExecutive Directors Lord Hutton Louise Hardy and Jane Lodge.
The Chairman of the Remuneration Committee is Lord Hutton.
Louise Hardy was appointed to the Committee on 15 December 2017 and until her appointment the composition of the Committee did not meet the requirement under provision D.2.1 of the Code.
Responsibilities
The main role of the Committee is to review the ongoing appropriateness and relevance of the remuneration policy review and approve the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors recommend and monitor the level and structure of remuneration of senior management and produce the Annual Report on the Directors remuneration.
The Terms of Reference for the Committee are set out in detail on the Companys websitesite These terms were updated in March 2017 to reflect current best practice for a Premium Listed company ahead of the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market and are reviewed on at least an annual basis.
Meetings
The Committee has regular scheduled meetings and holds additional meetings as and when required.
Members are expected where possible to attend all Committee meetings.
Three meetings were held in 2017 and individual attendance is set out in the table below.
At the invitation of the Committee and as appropriate to the matters under discussion meetings may be attended by the Executive Directors.
Agendas briefing notes and reports for each Committee meeting are distributed via a secure electronic Board portal in advance of each meeting and in sufficient time to allow proper consideration of their contents.
The core activities of the Committee are documented and planned on an annual basis and a list of matters arising from each meeting is maintained and followed up at subsequent meetings.
Full minutes of each meeting are kept by the Company Secretary detailing the matters considered and decisions taken by the Committee.
The Remuneration Committee has access to the Company Secretary for assistance as required and can obtain other professional advice at the Companys expense if required.
Deloitte LLP Deloitte has provided advice to the Committee during the year in relation to its consideration of matters relating to Directors remuneration.
Deloitte is retained to provide independent advice to the Committee as required.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operated under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
Deloittes fees for providing remuneration advice to the Committee were 30000 for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Committee assesses from time to time whether this appointment remains appropriate or should be put out to tender and takes into account the Remuneration Consultants Group Code of Conduct when considering this.
Deloitte was appointed by the Committee and has provided share scheme advice other tax advice and general remuneration advice to the Company.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Committee attendance in 2017 COMMITTEE MEMBERS Lord Hutton 33 100% Jane Lodge 33 100% Russell Scrimshaw 33 100% Louise Hardy 00 0% Louise Hardy was appointed to the Committee on 15 December 2017.
The three Committee meetings held in 2017 took place before she was appointed to the Committee.
Committee evaluation During the year the Committee undertook an internal evaluation of its performance in accordance with the provisions of the Code and its Terms of Reference.
The General Counsel and Company Secretary on behalf of the Chairman circulated a comprehensive questionnaire to members and attendees of the Committee using the electronic board portal covering all issues related to the functioning of the
The responses were consolidated and anonymised and common themes identified in order for the Committee to determine key actions and next steps for improving Committee effectiveness and performance.
The results of the 2017 internal evaluation show that overall the Committee is operating effectively.
Areas identified for action for 2018 include incorporation of a programme of training and presentations into the Committee meeting schedule at appropriate times including updates from Deloitte on topical issues such as key trends and issues in UK executive remuneration the development of an enhanced induction programme for new Remuneration Committee members and more Committee meetings held in person rather than conference call.
Committee activity in 2017 During the year the Committee engaged Deloitte to undertake a benchmarking exercise of Executive Directors salaries and NonExecutive Directors fees ahead of the Companys move from AIM to the Main Market the Deloitte Benchmarking Exercise considered and recommended to the Board changes to the remuneration packages of the CEO and senior management team and the annual fees of the NonExecutive Directors and Board Chairman having considered the Deloitte Benchmarking Exercise considered and recommended to the Board 2017 share awards in preparation for the move from AIM to the Main Market received a briefing memorandum from Deloitte on future expectations and obligations regarding remuneration and a gap analysis of the Companys current position reviewed the design of the
2017 Remuneration Report
Committees 2017 annual performance evaluation reviewed the annual schedule of agenda items for the
UK executive remuneration and the implications for the
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 88 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Single figure table The following table sets out total remuneration for each Director in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 and the prior year.
Salary and fees
Annual bonus
Pension
Total remuneration teltelteltel 2016
Directors
C Fraser   T Staley
Directors
R Scrimshaw N Harweth K Clarke L Hardy J Hutton J Lodge  Thomas Staley was appointed a Director on 2 February 2017 and the salary disclosed in respect of 2017 is for the period from his appointment date until 31 December 2017.
2 Louise Hardy was appointed to the Board on 12 May 2016.
The figures in the single figure tables above are derived from the following SALARY AND FEES THE AMOUNT OF SALARYFEES RECEIVED IN THE YEAR Benefits The taxable value of benefits received in the year in respect of qualifying services as an Executive Director.
Annual bonus 2017 Cash bonus approved and payable in 2018 based on the Committees assessment of performance achieved during the year ended 31 December 2017 see further details below.
2016 In respect of Chris Fraser a cash bonus of 540000 was approved and paid in April 2017.
This bonus was based principally on the Committees assessment of performance achieved during the year ended 31 December 2016.
In respect of Thomas Staley a cash bonus of 220000 was approved and paid in April 2017.
Although this bonus was paid when Thomas Staley was an Executive Director this bonus was based principally on the Committees assessment of performance achieved during the year ended 31 December 2016 prior to his appointment as an Executive Director.
This bonus has therefore not been shown in the Directors remuneration table above.
LTIP 2017 No longterm incentive awards held by Executive Directors vested by reference to performance in 2017.
2016 No longterm incentive awards held by Executive Directors vested by reference to performance in 2016.
Pension Value of the employer contribution to the defined contribution pension scheme on behalf of the Executive Director.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 89 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Additional disclosures in respect of the single figure table Base salary and fees Details of annual base salaries for Executive Directors are set out below.
C Fraser 475000 360000 32% T Staley 330000 Thomas Staley was not a Director of the Company in 2016.
Salaries for the Executive Directors were disclosed in the Prospectus published in April 2017.
Reflecting the development stage of our Project and that the Company is still some years from becoming cash flowgenerating the base salaries are positioned at the lower end of the market for FTSE 250 companies.
The Committee set them with a focus on the balance between fixed and variable pay so that the overall package was appropriate where stretch performance is delivered.
Annual Shortterm Incentive Plan For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 the Executive Directors earned cash bonuses of 332500 in the case of Chris Fraser and 250000 in the case of Thomas Staley.
These bonuses were approved in 2018 based on the Committees assessment of performance achieved during the year ended 31 December 2017 as set out below.
For
2017 it was also agreed that whilst the Executive Directors performance was at or above targets set in all areas the Company should continue to be conservative in its cash bonus awards assessment given that stage 2 financing has not yet been achieved.
Bonuses were approved by the Remuneration Committee following a robust assessment of the Executive Directors contribution to the delivery of the following specific strategic objectives linked to Project stage progress safety financing leadership and regulatory approvals.
C Fraser Weighting % Deliverable Assessment Bonus earned % of salary Project progressing safely and satisfactorily 20% Project progress to plan health and safety objectives met good risk management Met targets 15% Supply agreements for stage 2 financing progressing satisfactorily 20% Plans will be delivered although slightly behind timescales Met targets 10% Move to Main Listing and FTSE 250 10% Achieved within time frame budget and with positive outcomes
10% Project approval changes agreed by NYMNPA 10% Delivered Met target 5% Senior Leadership Team established and desired culture defined and progressing 20% Strong team embedded and ROBUST culture defining decision making and behaviours Above target 16% Preparation for 2018 stage 2 financing progressing to plan 20% Delivered to the satisfaction of the
Above target 14% Overall assessment Above target 70% Bonus earned 332500 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 90 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
T Staley Weighting % Deliverable Assessment Bonus earned % of salary Preparation for 2018 stage 2 financing progressing to plan 30% Delivered to the satisfaction of the
Above target 20% Move to Main Listing and FTSE 250 20% Achieved within time frame budget and with positive outcomes
20% Develop and build investor relations to attract more analyst coverage and institutional investment 10% Delivered broader institutional investor base increased profile for the Company Above target 6% Delivery of new finance system 20% SAP implemented to time and cost Above target 14% Human resources team and infrastructure 20% Improvements to efficient recruitment processes and design and implementation of HR plan Above target 16% Overall assessment Above target 76% Bonus earned 250000 Longterm incentives Awards vesting in respect of financial year No longterm incentive awards held by Executive Directors vested by reference to performance in 2017.
Awards granted during the financial year LTIP awards were granted to the Executive Directors on 26 June 2017 as set out below.
In line with our strategy and remuneration policy the awards vest on the achievement of Project milestones.
There is no specified performance period over which the milestones must be achieved.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 91 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The milestones and weightings are as follows MILESTONE WEIGHTING Commence main sinking 10% of the award will vest Stage 2 financing commitments 45% of the award will vest First production of polyhalite 45% of the award will vest Type of award Number of shares Face value at grant C Fraser LTIP Award 1479452 479342 T Staley LTIP Award 602740 195288 The LTIP Awards are granted in the form of Jointly Owned Equity awards JOE which give the participant an interest in the future growth in value of shares owned jointly with a trustee along with the right to acquire the trustees interest in the shares for nil cost so that the participant is entitled to the full value of the shares.
Based on the closing middle market share price on 26 June 2017 of 32.4 pence.
Payments made to former Directors during the year No payments were made in the year to any former Director of the Company.
Payments for loss of office made during the year No payments for loss of office were made in the year to any Director of the Company.
Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests The interests of the Directors and their connected persons in the Companys ordinary shares as at 31 December 2017 are set out below.
There have been no changes to those interests between 31 December 2017 and the date of signing of these financial statements.
Share ownership
Shares owned as at 31 December Executive Directors C Fraser 123747368 T Staley 1135525 NonExecutive Directors R Scrimshaw 43523979 N Harweth 86482 K Clarke 852207 L Hutton 30856 J Lodge 386953 L Hardy Includes shares held by members of the Directors immediate family shares held by trusts where the Director or members of the Directors family are beneficiaries and related companies.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 92 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Directors  share plan interests Director Award
Number of shares at 1 January
Lapsed during the year
Exercise price Number of shares at 31 December 2017 Status
Executive Directors C Fraser IOS
26 September 10289814  10289814  29.2p 0 Lapsed 26 September 2014 to 26 September 2017
Option1
26 September 10289814    43.7p 10289814 Vested 26 September 2015 to 26 September 2018 2016 LTIP
JOE
Award
13 May 826004     826004 Unvested subject to performance conditions na Awards vest on achievement of the relevant milestone with a backstop date of 30 November 2018 in relation to the first milestone and 30 November 2021 in relation to the second milestone.
Awards can be realised between vesting and the tenth anniversary of grant.
2017 LTIP
JOE
Award
26 June 1479452    1479452 Unvested subject to performance conditions Awards vest on achievement of the relevant milestone.
Awards can be realised between vesting and the tenth anniversary of grant.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 93 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Director Award
Number of shares at 1 January
Lapsed during the year
Exercise price Number of shares at 31 December 2017 Status
T Staley IOS
27 January 1543472    29.2p 1543472 Lapsed 27 January 2016 to 27 January 2018
Option
27 January 1233555    29.2p 1233555 Vested 27 January 2018 to 27 January 2025
Option
27 January 309917    29.2p 309917 Vested 27 January 2018 to 27 January 2025
Award
27 January 1000000     1000000 Unvested subject to performance condition na Award vests on achievement of the relevant milestone.
2017 LTIP
JOE
Award
26 June 602470    602470 Unvested subject to performance condition Awards vest on achievement of the relevant milestone.
Awards can be realised between vesting and the tenth anniversary of grant.
NonExecutive Directors K Clarke USOP
23 December 1852167    29.2p 1852167 Vested 22 December L Hutton USOP
30 January 1852167    29.2p 1852167 Vested 29 January
1 IOS Options are granted under the Companys Incentive Option Scheme described in the Prospectus.
Awards granted as Jointly Owned Equity Awards as referred to on page 91 under the Companys Longterm Incentive Plan.
USOP Options are granted under the Companys Unapproved Share Option Plan described in the Prospectus.
CSOP Options are granted under the Companys Company Share Option Plan described in the Prospectus.
The Milestone Award is the remaining part of the award referred to in paragraph 6.1.2 of the Prospectus.
The vesting of the 2016 LTIP Award is subject to the satisfaction of the following milestones financial close of the financing to reach commercial production by November 2018 as regards 50% of the award and first commercial ore sales by ship by November 2021 as regards 50% of the award.
The vesting of the 2017 LTIP Awards is subject to the performance milestones referred to on page 91.
The vesting of the Milestone Award is subject to completion of the subsequent major debt financing to complete the Project.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 94 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Performance graph and historical Chief Executive Officer Remuneration outcomes The graph below shows the total shareholder return TSR performance for the Companys shares in comparison to the FTSE 250 for the period from 1 January 2013 to 31 December 2017.
The Company is a constituent of this Index and as such it has been selected as an appropriate comparator group.
For the purposes of the graph TSR has been calculated as the percentage change during the period in the market price of the shares assuming that dividends are reinvested.
The graph shows the value by 31 December 2017 of 100 invested in the Group over the period compared with 100 invested in the FTSE 250.
5tel31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December
Sirius Minerals FTSE 250 Source Thomson Reuters Datastream The table below shows details of the total remuneration and annual bonus and LTIP vesting as a percentage of the maximum opportunity for the Chief Executive Officer over the last five financial years.
Total remuneration Annual bonus as a % of maximum opportunity LTIP as a % of maximum opportunity na 2016 922 86 na 2015 597 36 na 2014 381 na na 2013 640 na 100%
1 The Company has not previously operated an annual bonus scheme on the basis of a maximum annual bonus opportunity.
For the purposes of this disclosure the maximum opportunity for each year is assumed to be 175% of the salary for the year in line with the normal maximum annual bonus opportunity under the Companys proposed Directors Remuneration Policy.
2 LTIP awards of 857143 shares which vested in three tranches in 2014 and 2015 and 2016 were granted on 21 May 2013.
These awards were subject to continued employment only.
Therefore this LTIP has been included in the single figure table at grant based on the closing middle market share price on 21 May 2013 of 25.25 pence.
There were no other awards which vested in respect of a performance period ending in the five years to 31 December 2017.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 95 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CEO pay increase in relation to all employees The table below sets out the percentage change in base salary value of taxable benefits and bonus for the Chief Executive Officer compared with the average percentage change for employees representing the wider workforce.
Percentage change Chief Executive
Wider workforce
32% 1 3 .
5 % Taxable benefits 1% 11% Annual bonus 139% 28% 1 In order for the comparisons to be meaningful the group of employees selected for the wider workforce comprised 1 in relation to salary those employees who were with the business in both 2016 and 2017 and accordingly were eligible for a salary review in 2017 2 in relation to taxable benefits those employees who were received taxable benefits in 2016 and those employees who received taxable benefits in 2017 other than benefits related to JOE awards as described below and 3 in relation to bonuses those employees who were eligible for a bonus in both 2016 and 2017.
These groups have been selected in order to provide a meaningful comparison and so that remuneration between 2016 and 2017 can be viewed on a likeforlike basis.
2 Salary increase for the CEO is a consequence of the resetting of base salaries when the Company was admitted to the Main Market as explained in the salary and fees note to the single figure table on page 89.
3 Benefits provided to the CEO and to other employees who receive JOE awards include the payment by the Company of the income tax and employee National Insurance contributions due in respect of the award of JOE awards under the LTIP.
Because these benefits relate to the value of the longterm incentive awards granted to the CEO and other employees they are excluded for the purposes of this analysis as in the opinion of the Committee their inclusion would not result in meaningful disclosure of the increase in the benefits.
Spend on pay The following table sets out the percentage change in dividends and the overall expenditure on pay as a whole across the organisation.
Percentage change Dividends and share buybacks 0 0 NA Overall expenditure on pay 16056 8319 93.0% Implementation of Directors Remuneration Policy for the financial year commencing 1 January 2018 Information on how Sirius Minerals intends to implement the Directors Remuneration Policy for the financial year commencing on 1 January 2018 is set out below.
Salaryfees and benefits Base salaries for the Executive Directors are unchanged from 2017 for 2018 and will be as follows 2018 base salary C Fraser T Staley Pension will continue to be provided in line with auto enrolment minimum contribution requirements at the level of 2% with effect from April 2018.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 96 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Fees for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are unchanged from 2017 for 2018 will be as follows Chairman fee NonExecutive fee Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committee Chair fee Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committee membership fee Senior Independent Director fee 180000 45000 8000 4000 8000 2018 annual Shortterm Incentive Plan bonus disclosure For 2018 the Executive Directors maximum bonus opportunity will be 175% of salary for Chris Fraser and 150% of salary for Thomas Staley.
However the maximum bonus earned for 2018 may be increased up to 200% of salary if a successful stage 2 financing is achieved.
This recognises the critical importance and transformational impact of a successful stage 2 financing.
Details of the bonus measures and targets for 2018 to the extent that they can be shared prospectively and the weightings which apply to each element are provided below.
The Company will disclose further detail to explain how performance is assessed against each of these strategic goals on a retrospective basis in the 2018 Annual Report.
Any bonus earned in excess of 100% of salary will be deferred into shares for a period of two years.
OBJECTIVES FOR CHRIS FRASER HAVE BEEN SET AROUND THE FOLLOWING KEY AREAS WEIGHTINGS Stage 2 financing completed successfully by the end of 2018 30% Project procurement required for stage 2 financing in place 15% Bankable Supply Agreements in place 15% Project safety objectives met 15% Construction progress against Project timeline and budget 15% People culture and staff engagement 5% Quality of senior leadership team and succession planning 5% OBJECTIVES FOR THOMAS STALEY HAVE BEEN SET AROUND THE FOLLOWING KEY AREAS WEIGHTINGS Stage 2 financing completed successfully by the end of 2018 65% Increase the percentage of share register held by institutional investors 15% Effective management of Company controls reporting processes and corporate infrastructure as reinforced by internal and external audit reports 10% Implement and expand the market intelligence capability of the Company 10% ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 97 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Longterm Incentive Plan Subject to shareholder approval of the Policy we intend to grant LTIP awards of up to 500% of salary to Chris Fraser and up to 475% of salary for Thomas Staley following the 2018 AGM.
This reflects the significant changes brought about by commencement of construction during 2017 our ambitious goals for the Project through the next phase of development and the prospective construction over the next several years of a complex and large scale project and first mining of polyhalite.
This event is expected to be a seminal and unique achievement for the Company in its lifecycle.
The 2018 LTIP share grant consists of two elements ordinary grants of 200% of salary for Chris Fraser and 175% for Thomas Staley and an exceptional stretch award to encourage rapid and early construction which we believe will result in significant additional benefits to shareholders potentially of many hundreds of millions of pounds.
This exceptional stretch award would be up to 300% of salary.
As set out in further detail below the vesting of the 2018 LTIP awards will be based on the critical milestone of first polyhalite being extracted from the ore body.
Ordinary award up to 200% of salary for Chris Fraser and up to 175% of salary for Thomas Staley.
Vesting of the ordinary award is linked to the delivery of the first polyhalite by 31 March 2022 for maximum vesting of the ordinary award.
Given the scale and complexities and nature of the Project a threshold award would vest regardless of when first polyhalite is delivered.
However the amount that would vest in this case would be modest 20% of the ordinary award.
31 March 2022 100% 30 June 2022 75% 31 October 2022 60% 31 December 2022 50% 30 June 2023 35% First polyhalite achieved 20% Exceptional Stretch Award up to an additional 300% of salary.
Vesting of the exceptional stretch award is linked to the delivery of the first polyhalite significantly ahead of schedule.
If polyhalite is not delivered by 30 September 2021 then none of the exceptional stretch award will vest.
Maximum vesting of the exceptional stretch award requires this milestone to be delivered by 15 March 2021.
15 March 2021 100% 31 May 2021 70% 31 July 2021 30% 30 September 2021 10% ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 98 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
In terms of the combined value of the award as a % of salary at the date of grant this means that the following will vest depending upon the date the first polyhalite is achieved Chris Fraser Thomas Staley Ordinary Exceptional Total Ordinary Exceptional Total 15 March 2021 200% 300% 500% 175% 300% 475% 31 May 2021 200% 210% 410% 175% 210% 385% 31 July 2021 200% 90% 290% 175% 90% 265% 30 September 2021 200% 30% 230% 175% 30% 205% 31 March 2022 200% 0 200% 175% 0 175% 30 June 2022 150% 0 150% 131% 0 131% 31 October 2022 120% 0 120% 105% 0 105% 31 December 2022 100% 0 100% 88% 0 88% 30 June 2023 70% 0 70% 61% 0 61% First polyhalite achieved 40% 0 40% 35% 0 35% In addition the Committee will apply a general performance underpin either up or down which means that any formulaic amount which would vest will be considered against the overall performance of the business in determining the appropriateness of that level of vesting.
Vested shares will only be released to the Executive Director so that he can dispose of them other than sales to cover tax liabilities arising in relation to the award before the fifth anniversary of the date of grant of the award if the Executive Director satisfies the shareholding guideline.
Approval
This Report was approved by the Board on 5 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by Lord Hutton Chairman of the Remuneration Committee ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED 99 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OTHER STATUTORY
The Directors Report of the Group for the nancial year ended 31 December 2017 is set out on pages 99 to 101 inclusive.
Additional information which is incorporated by reference into this Directors Report including information required in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and Listing Rule 9.8.4R of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules can be located as follows Disclosure Location Strategic Report Page 2 Business model Page 32 Strategy Page 22 Results Page 34 Research and development Page 26 Principal risks Page 48 Corporate responsibility Page 38 Greenhouse gas emissions Page 44 Employees Page 46 Governance Page 54 Viability statement Page 53 Going concern statement Note 1 page 114 Directors interests in shares Page 91 Financial instruments Page 132 Statement of Directors responsibilities Page 102 Statement of Auditors responsibilities Page 108 Post balance sheet events Page 129 Interest capitalised Page 117 Details of longterm incentive schemes Page 90 Contracts of significance Page 101 Shareholder waiver of dividends Page 101 Shareholder waiver of future dividends Page 101 Both the Directors Report and the Strategic Report have been drawn up and presented in accordance with and in reliance upon applicable English company law and the liabilities of the Directors in connection with that report shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
Strategic Report The Company is required by the Companies Act to include a Strategic Report in this Annual Report which provides an overview of the development and performance of the Companys business in the year ended 31 December 2017 and its position at the end of that year and which covers likely future developments in the business of the Company and the Group.
The information that fulfils the requirements of the Strategic Report can be found on pages 2 to 53 which are incorporated by reference.
For the purposes of compliance with DTR 4.1.5 R2 and DTR 4.1.8 R the required content of the management report can found in the Strategic Report and this Other Statutory Information section including the sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference.
Branches outside the UK The Company has no branches.
Directors
The Directors of the Company as at the date of approval of this Annual Report including their biographical details are set out on pages 56 to 57 .
Thomas Staley was appointed to the Board on 2 February 2017.
All other Directors served throughout the financial year ended 31 December 2017 .
Copies of Executive Directors service contracts are available to shareholders for inspection at the Companys registered office and at the Annual General Meeting
Details of the Directors remuneration and service contracts and their interests in the shares of the Company are included in the
Directors Remuneration Report
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 100 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Owner Date notified Shares issued % The Capital Group Companies Inc 01.09.2017 446399118 10.002 Jupiter Asset Management Limited 13.03.2014 111173507 5.966 OTHER STATUTORY INFORMATION CONTINUED Appointment and replacement of
The appointment and replacement of Directors is governed by the Companys Articles of Association Articles the UK Corporate Governance Code Code the Companies Act 2006 Act and related legislation.
The Board may appoint a Director either to fill a casual vacancy or as an addition to the Board so long as the total number of Directors does not exceed the limit prescribed in the Articles.
An appointed Director must retire and seek election to office at the next AGM of the Company.
In addition to any power of removal conferred by the Act the Company may by ordinary resolution remove any Director before the expiry of their period of office and may subject to the Articles by ordinary resolution appoint another person who is willing to act as a Director in their place.
In line with the Code and the Boards policy all Directors are required to stand for reelection at each AGM.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all the Directors will retire at the 2018 AGM and offer themselves for reelection.
The Board is satisfied that each Director is qualified for reelection by virtue of their skills experience and contribution to the Board.
In addition the Board considers that all Directors have the necessary skills and experience as set out in their biographies on pages 56 and 57.
Powers of the Directors Subject to the provisions of the Articles of Association the Directors may exercise all the powers of the
A shareholders authority for the purchase by the Company of a maximum of 10% of its own shares was in existence during the year.
However the Company did not purchase any of its shares during that time.
The authority expires at the forthcoming AGM and it is proposed that a similar authority be approved.
Conflicts of interest Under the Companies Act 2006 and the provisions of the Companys Articles of Association the Board is required to consider potential conflicts of interest.
The Company has established formal procedures for the disclosure and review of any conflicts or potential conflicts of interest which the Directors may have and for the authorisation of such matters of conflict by the Board.
To this end the Board considers and if appropriate authorises any conflicts or potential conflicts of interest as they arise and reviews any such authorisation regularly.
The Board believes that the procedures established to deal with conflicts of interest are operating effectively.
Directors indemnities and insurance The Company has provided each Director with an indemnity to the extent permitted by law in respect of the liabilities incurred as a result of their holding office as a Director of the Company.
The Company has in place appropriate Directors and Officers Liability insurance cover in respect of potential legal action against its
Directors interests in contracts Except as stated in note 18 on page 128 no contract existed during the year in relation to the Companys business in which any Director was materially interested.
Major shareholdings The table on the opposite page shows the holdings in the Companys issued share capital which had been notified to the Company pursuant to the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules as at 5 March 2018.
The information in this table was correct at the date of notification.
It should be noted that these holdings are likely to have changed since the Company was notified.
However notification of any change is not required until the next notifiable threshold is crossed.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Political contributions During the year the Company sponsored the Northern reception at the 2017 Conservative Party Conference and attended the ScarboroughWhitby constituency annual dinner which totalled 11100.
Share capital As at 31 December 2017 the Companys issued share capital was made up of 4463105303 Ordinary shares of 0.25 pence each which each carry one vote at general meetings of the Company.
No shares are held in treasury.
Details of shares issued during the year are set out in note 10 on page 122.
Except as stated in the Articles of Association or in applicable legislation there are no restrictions on the transfer of the shares in the Company and there are no restrictions on the voting rights in the Companys shares.
The Company is not aware of any agreements entered into between any shareholders in the Company which restrict the transfer of shares or the exercise of any voting rights attached to the shares.
Share schemes As at 31 December 2017 Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited Sanne as trustee of the Sirius Minerals Plc Employee Benet Trust Trustee held 10950012 Shares which are held jointly by Sanne as Trustee and employees as JOE Award holders under the JOE Awards.
The Trustee has agreed to waive rights to vote or receive dividends in respect of the JOE Shares.
The JOE Award holders have agreed to waive rights to vote or receive dividends until the exercise of the JOE Awards.
More information on the JOE Awards can be found in the
Directors Remuneration Report on
Articles of Association Amendments to the Companys Articles of Association can only be made by means of special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders of the Company.
Significant agreements The Company is not a party to any significant agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
There are provisions in the Executive Directors service agreements in relation to change of control which are described in detail in the
Directors Remuneration Report on
Auditors
The Companys auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed at the AGM.
Disclosure of information to auditors As far as each director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware.
Each Director has taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
Annual General Meeting The 2018 AGM will be held at 1pm on Thursday 31 May 2018 at The Events Centre The Principal York Station Road York YO24 1AA.
The Notice of 2018 AGM is available on our website and sent to shareholders in the format selected by them.
Forwardlooking statements This Annual Report contains forwardlooking statements.
These forwardlooking statements are made in good faith based on a number of assumptions concerning future events and information available to the Directors at the time of their approval of this report.
These forwardlooking statements should be treated with caution due to the inherent uncertainties underlying any such forwardlooking information.
The user of this document should not rely unduly on these forwardlooking statements which are not a guarantee of performance and which are subject to a number of uncertainties and other events many of which are outside of the Companys control and could cause actual events to differ materially from those in these statements.
No guarantee can be given of future results levels of activity performance or achievements.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 102 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DIRECTORS
RESPONSIBILITIES
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board Chris Fraser Managing Director and CEO Thomas Staley Finance Director and CFO 103 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
STATEMENTS
104 Independent auditors report to the members of Sirius Minerals Plc 110 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 111 Consolidated statement of financial position 112 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 113 Consolidated statement of cash flows 114 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 135 Company statement of financial position 136 Company statement of changes in equity 137 Notes to the Company financial statements Additional information 140 Shareholder information 141 Glossary Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Credit Ebor images North York Moors National Park ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 104 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF SIRIUS MINERALS PLC REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE GROUP FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
In our opinion Sirius Minerals Plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups loss and cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European
Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated and Parent Company statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the consolidated income statements and statement of comprehensive income the consolidated statements of cash flows and the consolidated and Parent Company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Company.
Other than those disclosed in the Directors Report we have provided no nonaudit services to the Group or the Company in the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017.
OUR AUDIT APPROACH
Key audit matters Audit scope
Overall Group materiality 4.0 million 2016 4.0 million based on 0.5% of total assets.
Overall Company materiality 3.6 million 2016 3.9 million based on 0.5% of total assets.
We as the Group engagement team audited Sirius Minerals Plc York Potash Limited and Sirius Minerals Finance Limited.
Each is considered to be a financially significant component of the Group due to the quantum of their asset base.
Taken together these three entities represent 97% of the Groups total assets and 100% of its loss before tax.
Valuation of complex financing arrangements Group and Parent.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the Group and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the Group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at group and significant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the Group and Company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rulesfinancial conduct and UK tax legislation.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the financial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with tax authorities review of correspondence with legal advisors and enquiries of management.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed non compliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Valuation of complex financing arrangements The Groups stage 1 financing activities during the 2016 financial year has resulted in a number of complex financing arrangements being entered into with third parties specifically US250 million royalty agreement with Hancock British Holdings Limited US50 million equity arrangement with Hancock British Holdings Limited US400 million of Group issued Dollar denominated convertible bonds.
Accounting for each of these financing instruments under IFRS is complex and where valuation models are required the eventual accounting treatment is sensitive to key management judgements.
The accounting framework for each of these financing instruments and the respective valuation models employed by management remain consistent with those adopted in 2016.
However the valuations recognised in the 2017 financial statements remain sensitive to current year inputs in the valuations models.
Given the material nature of these instruments and the judgemental nature of these inputs we consider this to be a key audit matter.
Group and Parent We obtained managements valuation model for each of the financing instruments listed.
To assess application we read the underlying contract and assessed whether the contract terms supported the accounting treatment adopted assessed whether the valuation model adopted was consistent with the model applied during the period ended December 2016 evaluated discount rate assumptions made by management engaging our PwC valuation experts to assist with this evaluation confirmed convertible bond conversion rates to source documentation read the disclosure made in the financial statements.
We found based on the results of our testing that the valuation recognition and disclosures made in the financial statements in respect of these financial instruments were consistent with the supporting evidence we obtained.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 106 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group headed by Sirius Minerals Plc comprises 13 wholly owned statutory entities nine of which are registered and domiciled in England and Wales.
The remaining entities are registered and domiciled in each of Jersey Canada Singapore and the USA.
The Groups activities are fully centred on its UK operations in particular the development of the Woodsmith Mine an asset held by York Potash Limited.
The Group is financed via equity and external debt instruments held principally by Sirius Minerals Plc and Sirius Minerals Finance Limited.
Each of these three entities is considered to be a financially significant component due to the quantum of their asset base.
Taken together these three entities represent 97% of the Groups total assets and 100% of its loss before tax.
The Group audit team has performed statutory audits on each of the financially significant components.
In addition the Group audit team has performed statutory audit on York Potash Processing and Ports Limited York Potash Holdings Limited SACH 1 Limited SACH 2 Limited and Sirius Minerals Holdings Limited.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall Group materiality 4.0 million 2016 4.0 million.
3.6 million 2016 3.9 million.
How we determined it 0.5% of total assets.
0.5% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied The Group is in a pretrading phase and is focused on developing the Woodsmith Mine asset.
Accordingly total assets is the primary measure used by shareholders in assessing the performance of the Group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
The Company holds investments in wholly owned subsidiary entities focused on developing the Woodsmith Mine asset.
Accordingly total assets is the primary measure used by shareholders in assessing the performance of the Company and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 1.4 million and 3.6 million.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 0.1 million Group audit 2016 0.1 million and 0.1 million Company audit 2016 0.1 million as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF SIRIUS MINERALS PLC CONTINUED 107 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the Directors statement in the financial statements about whether the Directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the Directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
REPORTING ON OTHER INFORMATION The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 108 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The Directors confirmation on page 48 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The Directors explanation on page 53 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the Directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our
Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the Directors on page 102 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 66 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The Directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE AUDIT Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on page 102 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF SIRIUS MINERALS PLC CONTINUED 109 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
OTHER REQUIRED REPORTING COMPANIES ACT 2006 EXCEPTION REPORTING Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
APPOINTMENT
Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the members on 10 October 2012 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 2013 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is six years covering the years ended 31 March 2013 to 31 December 2017.
Randal Casson Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
5 March 2018 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 110 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Restated
Revenue
Operating costs 23981 16858 Operating loss 2 23981 16858 Finance costs 4 55268 6564 Loss before taxation 79249 23422 Taxation 5 362 468 Loss for the year 78887 22954 Other comprehensive expenseincome Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange differences on translating foreign operations 43 18 Cash flow hedging movement 910 Other comprehensive expenseincome for the year 953 18 Total comprehensive loss for the year attributable to the owners of the Company 79840 22936 Loss per share Basic and diluted pence 6 1.82 0.93 Operating costs and finance costs have been restated following the change in accounting policy described in note 1 on page 115.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 111 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ASSETS Note Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 7 14710 150204 Property plant and equipment 8 306631 6138 Restricted cash 9 54261 55283 Total noncurrent assets 375602 211625 Current assets Derivative financial instrument 14  1041 Restricted cash 9 20228 27641 Other receivables 7113 840 Bank deposits 158450 322188 Cash and cash equivalents 235532 260157 Total current assets 421323 611867 TOTAL ASSETS 796925 823492 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Share capital 10 11158 10412 Share premium account 695356 590723 Sharebased payment reserve 11 6053 6114 Accumulated losses 207860 112261 Other reserves 423 1284 Total equity 505130 496272 Noncurrent liabilities Provisions 12 2753 Total noncurrent liabilities 2753 Current liabilities Convertible loans 13 249325 321366 Derivative financial instrument 14 10033 Trade and other payables 15 29684 5854 Total current liabilities 289042 327220 TOTAL LIABILITIES 291795 327220 TOTAL EQUITY AND LIABILITIES 796925 823492 The financial statements on pages 110 to 134 were issued and approved by the Board of Directors on 5 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by TJ Staley Finance Director Company registration number CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 112 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share capital
Sharebased payment reserve
Accumulated losses
At 1 January 2016 5737 240874 7624 1266 90339 165162 Loss for the year     22954 22954 Other comprehensive income    18  18 Transactions with owners Share issue 10 4629 347281    351910 Sharebased payments 11 32 1418 1510  1032 972 Exercised options 10 14 1150    1164 At 31 December 2016 10412 590723 6114 1284 112261 496272 Loss for the year     78887 78887 Other comprehensive expense    953  953 Transferred to noncurrent assets    119  119 Transactions with owners Shares issued on conversion of convertible loans 10 728 104484   18670 86542 Sharebased payments 11 18 149 61 27 1958 2037 At 31 December 2017 11158 695356 6053 423 207860 505130 The share premium account is used to record the excess proceeds over nominal values on the issue of shares.
The sharebased payment reserve is used to record the fair value of sharebased payments relating to the Companys shares which are outstanding.
Other reserves comprise the foreign exchange reserve which arises on translation of foreign operations with a functional currency other than Sterling of a surplus of 1241000 31 December 2016 1284000 the cash flow hedge reserve which accumulates unrecognised gains or losses of instruments designated in cash flow hedge relationships of a deficit of 791000 31 December 2016 nil and treasury shares which comprise the par value of all shares issued to the Groups employee benefit trust but not yet awarded to employees of a deficit of 27000 31 December 2016 nil.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Cash flow from operating activities Operating loss 23981 16858 Adjustments for Depreciation and amortisation 299 57 Sharebased payments 822 844 Changes in working capital 353 407 Cash used in continuing operations 22507 16364 Tax credit received  468 Net cash used in operating activities 22507 15896 Cash flow from investing activities Purchase of intangible assets 6676 12108 Purchase of property plant and equipment 111484 4346 Redemption of bank deposits 241183 Purchase of bank deposits 87647 320187 Interest received 3607 441 Net cash generated fromused in investing activities 38983 336200 Cash flow from financing activities Repayment of borrowings  748 Proceeds from convertible loans  319923 Purchase of restricted cash 36381 81580 Redemption of restricted cash 39070 Interest paid 33034 19 Proceeds from issue of shares  371445 Share issue costs 925 18370 Convertible loans issue costs 2419 9158 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 33689 581493 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 17213 229397 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 260157 29093 Lossgain from foreign exchange 7412 1667 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the period 235532 260157 Operating loss has been restated following the change in accounting policy described in note 1 on page 115.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 114 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS REFERENCE INFORMATION Sirius Minerals Plc the Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act 2006 Registration number .
The Company is registered in England and its registered address is Third Floor Greener House 68 Haymarket London SW1Y 4RF.
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
BASIS OF PREPARATION These consolidated financial statements of the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The standards used are those published by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB and endorsed by the EU as at 31 December 2017.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by financial assets and financial liabilities principally derivatives stated at fair value through profit or loss.
The principal accounting policies set out both below and throughout the subsequent notes have been consistently applied to all periods presented.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling rounded to the nearest thousand which is the functional currency of the Company and its principal subsidiaries.
GOING CONCERN The Group continues to incur losses and cash outflows due to the significant level of development activity that it is undertaking in supporting the construction of its polyhalite project in North Yorkshire the Project.
The Group does not currently anticipate generating any revenues from the Project until late 2021.
Therefore its ability to continue as a going concern for the time being is dependent upon it attracting sufficient financial investments from external parties to enable it to complete commercial development of the Project.
The stage 1 financing conducted in November 2016 generated sufficient funds to allow the Group to commence construction of the Project.
As a result the Group continues to hold total cash and cash equivalents and bank deposits of 393982000 at 31 December 2017 2016 582345000.
In addition the Group currently anticipates that a further US300 million of cash will be received in the second half of 2018 in relation to its royalty financing arrangements with Hancock British Holdings Limited subject to the satisfaction of certain contractual conditions precedent.
The Group is in the process of negotiating its stage 2 financing and has mandated a group of six financial institutions on the basis of a nonbinding but mutually agreed term sheet.
The UK Governments Infrastructure and Projects Authority formally IUK has also confirmed its interest in supporting the stage 2 financing for the Project.
The Group expects to complete its stage 2 financing during the second half of 2018 which will provide it with sufficient funding to complete the construction of the Project and result in the ongoing generation of revenues and profits.
The Groups latest cash flow forecasts indicate that it will have sufficient liquidity to continue development of the Project on its current schedule for at least the next 12 months.
Should there be any delay in securing the stage 2 financing the Group would be able to curtail certain expenditures until further financing was secured.
Having assessed the principal risks and having regard for the above based on the current likelihood of the success of the stage 2 financing and the technical completion of construction of the Project the Directors consider it appropriate to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
Therefore these financial statements do not include any adjustments that would result if the going concern basis of preparation was inappropriate.
BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The Groups consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries made up to 31 December each year.
All intragroup transactions and balances are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES Accounting policies that are material to the financial statements are generally described in the specific note in relation to the individual component of the financial statements indicated by a symbol.
The accounting policies set out in the following paragraphs within this note are considered to be general to the financial statements and not covered by a specific subsequent note.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REFERENCE INFORMATION CONTINUED All accounting policies applied are consistent with those used in the preparation of the prior year financial statements with the exception of the presentation of foreign exchange revaluations described within this note in the next section below.
Segment reporting IFRS 8 Operating Segments requires information to be disclosed about each business activity and economic environment in which the Group operates.
Management has determined the operating segments by considering the business from both a geographic and activity perspective.
The Group is currently organised into one business division the UK segment which consists of Projectrelated activities and the corporate operations.
This division is the segment for which the Group reports information internally to the Board of
The Groups operations are predominantly in the United Kingdom.
The Group has a number of nonUK based entities that are either dormant or whose operations are insignificant in the context of the Group.
Therefore disclosures required under IFRS 8 are already included in the primary statements and so no further information requires disclosure.
Foreign currencies The presentation and functional currency of the Group is Sterling.
Transactions denominated in a foreign currency are translated into Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
At the balance sheet date monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated at the rate prevailing at that date.
All exchange differences are reported as part of finance costs in the income statement.
On consolidation the assets and liabilities of foreign operations which have a functional currency other than Sterling are translated into Sterling at foreign exchange rates prevailing at the balance sheet date.
The expenses of these subsidiary undertakings are translated at average exchange rates applicable in the period.
All resulting exchange differences are recognised through other comprehensive income and accumulated within other reserves.
Upon the disposal or dissolution of foreign subsidiaries all historic exchange differences associated with that subsidiary are recycled from other reserves through the income statement.
The yearend rate which was applied in translating balances denominated in US Dollars into Sterling in the financial statements at 31 December 2017 was 11.35 2016 11.23.
The average exchange rate which was applied to US Dollar transactions occurring during 2017 was 11.29 2016 11.35.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include various instant access deposits and shortterm fixed deposits with original maturities of three months or less.
Bank deposits Amounts reported as bank deposits represent shortterm investments held by the Group which it intends to hold until maturity at which point it will receive cash from the counterparty.
These amounts are recorded at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Derivative financial instruments Derivatives are recognised by the Group when it becomes party to contractual arrangements which include derivative features on a standalone basis or embedded within a linked host nonderivative instrument.
Derivatives are measured at fair value at each reporting date with all changes in fair value being recognised within finance costs within the income statement.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
CHANGE IN ACCOUNTING POLICY From 1 January 2017 the Group has elected to change its accounting policy in accounting for foreign exchange revaluation gains and losses in relation to cash restricted cash and bank deposits.
Previously these were classified within operating costs but the Group has now chosen to classify these within finance costs.
This is on the basis that such gains and losses are more representative of outcomes from the Groups finance hedging strategy rather than a part of underlying operating costs.
The Group has retrospectively made this restatement from 1 January 2016 in these financial statements resulting in an increase in reported operating costs and a reduction in finance costs of 4986000 for the year ended 31 December 2016 compared to those amounts disclosed in the 2016 financial statements.
The effect on the current period has been a decrease in operating costs and increase in finance costs of 22595000.
This change in accounting policy has not led to any change in any balance on the statement of financial position nor statement of changes in equity in any period.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 116 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REFERENCE INFORMATION CONTINUED NEW AND AMENDED STANDARDS ADOPTED BY THE GROUP There are no new standards amendments to standards or interpretations that are effective for the first time for the financial year beginning after 1 January 2017 that have had a material impact on the Group.
A number of new standards and amendments to standards and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning after 1 January 2017 and have not been applied in preparing these consolidated financial statements.
The majority of these are expected by the Group to not have a material impact upon the consolidated financial statements.
The new accounting standards with the most potentially significant impact upon these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group is in the process of assessing the full impact of adopting IFRS 9 but based on the current nature of the Groups financial instruments it is not currently expected that this will have a material impact upon adoption.
IFRS 16 Leases is effective for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The Group is yet to complete its impact assessment of the new standard however based on the current level of operating lease commitments the Group has entered into as set out in note 19 on page 129 as well as the absence of any finance leases then the effect of transition to this new standard is unlikely to materially impact the Groups financial statements.
The Group currently expects to adopt each of these standards in the period that they become mandatory.
JUDGEMENTS ESTIMATES AND UNCERTAINTIES The preparation of financial statements requires the exercise of judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
It also requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis with revisions recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity are summarised below and set out in more detail in the related notes in the boxes denoted by a symbol.
Critical accounting judgements estimates and assumptions The judgements that carry the most significant risk of an outcome that differs from the amount recognised in the financial statements are as follows ACCOUNTING FOR ROYALTY FINANCING AGREEMENT In November 2016 the Group entered into a royalty financing agreement.
IFRS does not provide explicit guidance on how transactions with the features of this agreement should be accounted for and therefore judgement is required in applying the most appropriate and faithful accounting treatment for the contract.
For more information see note 14 on page 126.
FAIR VALUATION OF DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Group has certain financial instruments associated with the stage 1 financing which it is required to classify as derivatives and measure at fair value.
The fair value of each of the derivatives is not directly observable from market prices and so the Group is required to exercise judgement in estimating the appropriate fair values.
For more information see note 21 on page 133.
Other accounting judgements estimates and assumptions ESTIMATION OF PROVISIONS As part of the planning permissions that the Group must comply with as it develops its Project it is required to restore environmental disruption caused on the sites on which it operates.
Such restoration costs are not expected to be settled until the final exhaustion of the Project however the cost of liabilities incurred by each balance sheet date must be estimated and provided against.
For more information see note 12 on page 124.
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS At each reporting date the Group assesses whether there is any indication that any of its assets may be impaired and recognises an impairment if the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
Estimation is required in assessing the recoverable amount of a given asset at each measurement date.
For more information see note 7 on page 120.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 117 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OPERATING LOSS Operating loss is stated after charging Depreciation of property plant and equipment 273 57 Amortisation of intangible assets 26 Operating lease charges 614 240 Sharebased payments 822 844 Sirius Minerals Foundation donation 2000 STAFF NUMBERS AND COSTS
Number
Average monthly number of staff including Directors 91 65 Wages and salaries 12336 6304 Social security costs 1619 973 Pension costs 63 31 Sharebased payments 2038 1011 Total staff costs 16056 8319 6352000 2016 3668000 of the above total expense has been capitalised as part of additions to noncurrent assets during the year.
Total Directors emoluments and emoluments of the highest paid Director together with full details of Directors remuneration pensions and benefits in kind are given in the Annual report on remuneration on pages 86 to 98.
FINANCE COSTS Interest income is accrued using the effective interest rate method.
Interest expense is expensed as incurred except where it relates to the financing of construction or development of qualifying assets.
Interest on borrowings directly relating to the financing of qualifying assets in the course of construction is added to the capitalised cost of those projects under Capital works in progress until such time as the assets are substantially ready for their intended use or sale.
Where funds have been borrowed specifically to finance a project the amount capitalised represents the actual borrowing costs incurred net of all interest income earned on the temporary reinvestment of those borrowings prior to utilisation.
All other borrowing costs are recognised as part of interest expense in the period in which they are incurred.
Restated
Interest income 3755 448 Interest income capitalised on qualifying assets 1942 Interest expense 27671 2858 Interest expense capitalised on qualifying assets 25047 Fair value loss on convertible loans embedded derivative 42498 5744 Fair value lossgain on royalty financing derivative 11074 1041 Foreign exchange lossesgains on net debt 885 549 Total finance costs 55268 6564 During January 2017 the Group commenced significant development work at the Project.
After this point all interest expense incurred and interest income earned on the temporary investment of borrowings has been capitalised.
The foreign exchange gain line item within 2016s finance costs has been restated following the change in accounting policy described in note 1 on page 115.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 118 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Research and development tax credits are recognised within current tax when they can be reasonably estimated.
Corporation tax credit received 362 468 Total tax recognised in statement of comprehensive income 362 468 The tax credit for the year is lower 2016 lower than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 19.25% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 79249 23422 Loss on ordinary activities multiplied by the standard rate of corporation taxation in the UK of 19.25% 2016 20% 15255 4684 Taxation effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 7930 15 Tax losses not recognised see note 17 7325 4669 Research and development tax credit 362 468 Total tax credit for the year 362 468 The standard rate of corporation tax changed from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017.
Accordingly the Groups loss for the year is taxed at an effective rate of 19.25%.
Changes to the UK corporation tax rates were substantively enacted as part of the Finance Bill 2017 on 6 September 2016.
These include reductions to the main rate to reduce the rate to 17% from 1 April 2020.
Deferred taxes at the balance sheet date have been measured using these enacted tax rates and reflected in these financial statements The research and development tax credit is in relation to the HMRC Research and Development Relief Scheme for SMEs and enables the Group to realise tax losses on certain qualifying expenditure to be received immediately in cash rather than waiting for taxable profits to set them against in the future.
LOSS PER SHARE Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
For all periods presented the Groups potentially dilutive ordinary share equivalents being share options issued under equitysettled sharebased payment schemes the convertible loans and share options issued to Hancock British Holdings Limited under the royalty financing arrangement reduce the loss per share and have therefore not been included in determining the total weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the purposes of calculating diluted loss per share.
Loss for the purposes of basic and diluted earnings per share 78887 22954 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purpose of basic and diluted earnings per share number in thousands 4322854 2472762 Basic and diluted loss per share pence 1.82 0.93 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 119 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INTANGIBLE ASSETS EXPLORATION COSTS AND RIGHTS Costs arising from exploration and evaluation activities are accumulated separately for each area of interest and only capitalised as part of intangible assets where such costs are expected to be recouped through successful development.
Expenditure capitalised comprises direct costs that have a specific connection with a particular area of interest.
Capitalised expenditure in respect of areas of interest is written off in the income statement when the above criteria do not apply or when the Directors assess that the carrying value may exceed the expected recoverable amount.
Capitalised costs in respect of an area of interest that is abandoned are written off in the period in which the decision to abandon is made.
When technical feasibility and commercial viability of an area of interest have been demonstrated all capitalised exploration and evaluation expenditure in respect of that area of interest is reclassified from intangible assets to capital works in progress within property plant and equipment.
All subsequent development expenditures on that area of interest are capitalised and classified as capital works in progress within property plant and equipment provided commercial viability conditions continue to be satisfied.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS AND GOODWILL On acquisition the assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities of subsidiaries are measured at their fair values at the date of acquisition.
Any excess of cost of acquisition over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill arising on consolidation is recognised as an asset and allocated to cashgenerating units for the purpose of impairment testing.
Any goodwill recognised is stated at cost less accumulated impairment and any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement and is not subsequently reversed.
OTHER INTANGIBLES Research expenditure is expensed to the income statement as incurred.
Development costs on activities that have moved past the research phase are capitalised and depreciated over their expected useful lives.
Prior to any sales occurring of the products to which the development costs relate they are held at cost and tested annually for impairment.
Computer software is carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairments and is amortised on a straightline basis over its useful life ranging between three and five years.
Amortisation of software is included within operating costs in the income statement.
IMPAIRMENT
At each reporting date the Group assesses whether there is any indication that any of its intangible assets may be impaired.
Where an indication of impairment exists or on an annual basis in the case of goodwill the Group makes a formal estimate of recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount estimated as the valueinuse of the asset the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances based on the Groups latest approved forecasts.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 120 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED Year ended 31 December 2017 Exploration costs and rights
Other
Total
Net book value At 1 January 2017 140443 6643 3118 150204 Additions 2254  4975 7229 Amortisation for the year   26 26 Transfers to property plant and equipment 142697   142697 At 31 December 2017  6643 8067 14710 cost  6643 8097 14740 accumulated amortisation   30 30 Year ended 31 December 2016 000s 000s 000s 000s Net book value At 1 January 2016 128936 6643 2191 121721 Additions 11307  927 12234 At 31 December 2016 140443 6643 3118 150204 cost 140443 6643 3197 150283 accumulated amortisation   79 79 IMPAIRMENT OF INTANGIBLE ASSETS The Group is required to consider whether any impairment may exist in each of its intangible assets.
As a result the Group was required to estimate the value in use of each of these assets based on predicted future cash flows to compare to the assets carrying values.
The estimation of these future cash flows is inherently uncertain and the use of different assumptions could lead to an impairment being recognised.
All of the net book value of goodwill relates to the Groups acquisition of York Potash Limited the legal entity developing the Project in January 2011.
Recoverable amount has been assessed using fair value less costs of disposals based on discounted cash flow techniques where the resulting estimate is based on the detailed longterm production plan which was made public as part of the Groups stage 1 financing.
The lowestoutput future production plan in that document calculated a net present value of the Project of US7.1 billion as at October 2016.
A discount rate of 10% which is considered to be appropriate for a project of this nature and size and consistent with industry norms was applied in calculating that valuation.
No reasonably possible change in the key assumptions on which the goodwills recoverable amount is based would cause its value to fall short of its carrying amount as at 31 December 2017.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 121 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less depreciation and any recognised impairment losses.
Cost includes all expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of these items and for assets that take a substantial period of time to get ready for their intended use borrowing costs.
Subsequent costs are included in the assets carrying amount only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the costs can be measured reliably.
All other costs including repairs and maintenance costs are charged to the income statement in the period in which they are incurred.
Capital works in progress include all spend directly attributable to the development of the Project including buildings civil works equipment labour direct services and professional fees.
These assets are not depreciated.
At the point in time in the future when the Project commences production all assets within this category will be transferred to appropriate separate asset classes and depreciation will commence from that point.
The plant and equipment category currently represents assets used for generally administrative purposes and which are not directly involved in development of the Project including the Groups head office leasehold improvements and IT hardware.
Depreciation is provided on all assets within this category over the estimated useful lives of the assets which are generally between three and five years.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Plant and equipment Capital works in progress
Net book value At 1 January 2017 6093 45  6138 Additions 23606 3145 131318 158069 Depreciation for the year  273  273 Transfers from intangible assets   142697 142697 At 31 December 2017 29699 2917 274015 306631 cost 29699 3612 274015 307326 accumulated depreciation  695  695 Year ended 31 December 2016 000s 000s 000s 000s Net book value At 1 January 2016 1765 84  1849 Additions 4328 18  4346 Depreciation for the year  57  57 At 31 December 2016 6093 45  6138 cost 6093 766  6859 accumulated depreciation  721  721 During January 2017 the Group commenced significant development work at its Project.
All exploration costs and rights in relation to the Project previously capitalised by the Group have been transferred from intangible assets to property plant and equipment from that date since the technical feasibility and commercial viability of the Project had clearly been demonstrated.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 122 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RESTRICTED CASH Restricted cash represents amounts set aside by the Group in bank accounts and which are not available for general use due to contractual restrictions.
Amounts are reclassified from restricted cash to cash and cash equivalents when the contractual restrictions expire.
US Dollar amounts in relation to convertible loans coupon payments 39234 82924 Sterling amounts for local authorities security requirements 35255 Total restricted cash 74489 82924 US Dollar amounts reported by the Group are in relation to the US400 million convertible loans as further described in note 13 on page 126.
Sterling amounts are in respect of local authorities security requirements which reflect a combination of providing environmental restoration for construction works and the security requirements of the Section 106 agreements.
All amounts are classified as noncurrent except for those amounts which are expected to be released back to the Group within the next 12 months.
SHARE CAPITAL An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments generally ordinary shares issued by the Group are recorded at the proceeds received with the par value of shares issued being recorded within ordinary share capital and any surplus net of any direct issue costs being recorded in the share premium account.
The Company has only one class of share capital being ordinary shares with a par value of 0.25p each.
Shares included in the table below are all allotted issued and fully paid up.
Number of shares thousands
At 1 January 2016 2294745 5737 370 million equity issuance 1850895 4627 Allotted in respect of vested share incentives 6225 16 Allotted to employee benefit trust 12649 32 At 31 December 2016 4164514 10412 Allotted on conversion of convertible loans 291287 728 Allotted in respect of vested share incentives 1126 3 Allotted to employee benefit trust 6178 15 At 31 December 2017 4463105 11158 At 31 December 2017 the following number of ordinary shares were contingently issuable depending on the achievement of conditions or exercise of options by the counterparties thousands thousands Convertible loans 1009103 1300390 Hancock US50 million equity derivative 200077 200077 Employee share options 40377 60956 Employee senior awards 10790 9840 Total contingently issuable shares 1260347 1571263 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 123 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain Directors senior managers employees and consultants.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed to the income statement on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions.
For employees employed directly in relation to the Project any charge in relation to options or awards held by them is capitalised as part of additions to property plant and equipment.
At each reporting date the Group revises its estimates of the number of options and awards that are expected to vest and immediately recognises any impact of the revision to original estimates.
The accumulated expense recorded prior to vesting in respect of each sharebased payment is recognised within the sharebased payment reserve and reclassified to share capital upon the issuance of the underlying shares.
If fully vested share options are not exercised and expire then the accumulated expense in respect of these is reclassified to accumulated losses.
The Group operates three equitysettled sharebased payment arrangements as part of its employee remuneration strategy which are detailed below.
The total expense recognised within the income statement in relation to equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in the year is 822000 2016 884000.
Further amounts of 1217000 2016 127000 have been capitalised within property plant and equipment 2016 intangible assets in relation to the fair value of sharebased payments earned by employees who are employed solely on direct development work on the Project.
Share options The Groups share option scheme provides for the grant of share options to certain parties at stipulated exercise prices.
The options are generally conditional upon the completion of a set service period between one and three years and typically expire ten years after grant date.
The Group used the BlackScholes model to value the share options that it awarded under the scheme.
The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had a weighted average remaining contractual life of 3.9 years 2016 3.1 years and exercise prices between 10.2p43.7p 2016 10.2p43.7p.
For the options exercised during 2016 the weighted average share price at the date of exercise was 22.86p.
2017 2016 Number of options thousands
Number of options thousands
Outstanding at 1 January 60956 33.04 67916 32.39 Granted   2500 35.00 Forfeitedlapsed 20579 36.45 5050 30.63 Revaluation   1815 Exercised   6225 19.37 Outstanding at 31 December 40377 31.30 60956 33.04 Exercisable at 31 December 36321 31.20 55554 33.10 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 124 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED Senior awards The senior awards scheme provides for grants of awards in the form of conditional free shares or nil cost options to certain senior employees in the Group.
Shares in relation to the awards vest to participants upon the Groups achievement of strategic milestones to which the individuals directly contribute.
The fair value of awards made under the scheme is equal to the share price on the grant date of the awards.
Movements in the number of shares awarded under the scheme are as follows Number of ordinary share awards thousands 2017 2016 Outstanding at 1 January 9840 18167 Granted 3200 11858 Vested 1126 11505 Forfeited 1124 8680 Outstanding at 31 December 10790 9840 Employee benefit trust awards The Group operates an employee benefit trust award scheme in the form of conditional free shares which are granted to all employees although employees remain liable for any personal tax consequences of the grant.
The vesting of the shares to employees is conditional upon employees continued employment with the Group and the achievement of key Grouplevel strategic milestones principally shaftsinking the completion of stage 2 financing and first commercial ore sale.
The fair value of awards made under the scheme is equal to the share price on the grant date of the awards.
Movements in the number of shares awarded under the scheme are as follows Number of ordinary share awards thousands 2017 2016 Outstanding at 1 January 3119 Granted 7328 4678 Forfeited 186 1559 Outstanding at 31 December 10261 3119
The Group is required to rehabilitate sites and associated facilities during construction and at the end of their lives to a condition acceptable to the relevant authorities in compliance with licence requirements and other commitments made to stakeholders.
The costs associated with these obligations are provided for in the accounting period when the obligation arising from the related disturbance occurs.
Such costs do not include any additional obligations which are expected to arise from disturbance expected to be caused in future years.
Provisions are initially recognised at the net present value of the future cash flows associated with them.
When provisions are initially recognised the corresponding cost is capitalised as an asset within property plant and equipment representing part of the cost of acquiring the future economic benefits of the operation.
At 1 January New amounts capitalised as part of property plant and equipment 2753 At 31 December 2753 The initiation of the Groups development work at the Project during the year has given rise to the future need to undertake restoration activities in order to maintain compliance with relevant planning consents.
The Groups obligation is to undertake the necessary restoration activities at the end of the Projects life in order to restore sites to their previous character.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 125 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PROVISIONS CONTINUED In order to estimate the value of the provision the Group has relied upon valuations which were undertaken for the purposes of determining the value of local security requirements that are held in restricted cash at the end of the year.
These amounts were valued by third parties based on the estimated presentday cost that would be required to remediate the disruption caused by the Groups activities by the end of the year.
These costs which the Group does not plan to be incurred for in excess of 50 years have been discounted at a real risk free rate of 2% per annum based on an estimate of the longterm risk free cost of borrowing.
The Group is required to estimate the net present value of future restoration obligations in settling upon the value of provisions to recognise at each measurement date.
The actual costs of restoration may vary from estimates made at the reporting date.
Such obligations will not be settled for many years and the extent of restoration works that will ultimately be required is inherently uncertain.
Estimates can also be impacted by the emergence of new restoration techniques and experience gained between the measurement date and prior to the costs incurrence.
Where possible the Group relies upon thirdparty valuations to assist with reliably estimating the value of provisions liable at each measurement date.
CONVERTIBLE LOANS Convertible loans represent liabilities entered into by the Group which are principally loans that require repayment but which may ultimately be settled by conversion into shares at the option of the Group andor counterparty based on the terms of a conversion element which is written into the terms of the loan contract.
Convertible loans are assessed according to the substance of the contractual arrangements.
The conversion element of each agreement is split out of the host loan and is classified as a liability or equity on the basis of the contractual characteristics of the conversion features.
Conversion features of convertible loans denominated in the Groups functional currency of Sterling are typically classified as equity amounts and not remeasured while conversion features of convertible loans denominated in a currency other than Sterling are classified as derivative financial instruments.
All transaction costs that are directly attributable to the issuance of the convertible loans are deducted from the initial carrying value of the host loan.
These transaction costs are amortised in line with the host loan and recognised as part of finance costs.
At inception the conversion element is separated from the host loan and is assigned a fair value based on an appropriate fairvaluation technique.
The initial carrying amount of the host loan is equal to the funds raised less the fair value attributable to the conversion option at inception and less transaction costs.
The host loan is held at amortised cost and measured using the effective interest rate method with all interest being charged to finance costs.
Conversion elements that are derivative instruments are remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet and conversion date with any movement in fair value being recorded in finance costs.
Upon conversion the carrying value of the host loan and conversion derivative is extinguished from liabilities and reclassified into equity as share capital and share premium.
FAIR VALUE ESTIMATION OF THE EMBEDDED DERIVATIVE The Group is required to apply judgement in estimating the fair value of the embedded derivative at each point in time.
Further information about the nature and sensitivity of this estimate is provided in note 21 on page 133.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 126 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONVERTIBLE LOANS CONTINUED 2017 2016 Host loan
Host loan
Opening balance on 1 January 278933 42433 Amount initially recognised   283234 36689 Transaction costs incurred   11577 Interest charge 27671  2839 Interest and makewhole payments 33034 Fair value remeasurement  42498  5744 Conversions 51001 36465 Foreign exchange revaluation 21710  4437 Closing balance on 31 December 200859 48466 278933 42433 On 28 November 2016 the Group issued US400 million of seven year 8.5% quarterly coupon US Dollardenominated convertible loans at par receiving gross proceeds of 319923000.
The key terms of the convertible loans are that at any date subsequent to 8 January 2017 up until maturity a loanholder may convert their loans into ordinary shares in the Company at a conversion price of US0.31 per share.
If a loanholder elects to convert prior to 28 November 2018 then as well as receiving ordinary shares in the Company they will also receive a makewhole cash payment equal to the total value of coupon payments that they would have been owed had they held their loans until 28 November 2018.
The Group also has a call option to redeem all loans at par should the Companys share price consistently exceed US0.54 from 19 December 2018 onwards.
Loanholders may not request early cashrepayment of their bonds except under certain protective clauses relating to changes of ownership in the Group.
Under the terms of the convertible loan the Group has also been required to set aside an amount in an Escrow bank account in respect of all coupon payments due until 28 November 2019 which is disclosed as part of restricted cash.
The Group is not able to use this restricted cash for any purpose other than the payment of quarterly coupons and makewhole payments.
Due to the conversion terms of the loans leading to the issuance of a fixed number of ordinary shares in the Company in return for the extinguishment of the bonds whose value is variable in terms of the Companys functional currency of Sterling the Group has accounted for the bonds as a host loan instrument containing an embedded derivative liability in respect of the conversions features.
During 2017 conversion notices in respect of 22.4% of the US400 million convertible loans were delivered by convertible loanholders to the Group leading to the creation of 291287368 new ordinary shares in the Company.
ROYALTY FINANCING AGREEMENT ACCOUNTING FOR ROYALTY FINANCING AGREEMENT The Group entered into a royalty financing agreement during 2016.
Significant judgement is required in determining how the agreement should be accounted for due to the lack of explicit guidance for these types of arrangements under IFRS.
Based on the precise contractual terms of the agreement the Group has concluded that the agreement should be accounted for as a financial instrument to be accounted for in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Furthermore the Group has concluded that prior to drawdown occurring the agreement is analogous to a loan commitment and therefore no recognition of it is necessary in the financial statements until drawdown occurs.
LOAN COMMITMENTS Loan commitments are a financial instrument to be accounted for in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
IAS 39 specifically excludes loan commitments from recognition and measurement prior to drawdown.
Once drawdown of the loan commitment occurs the loan will be initially recognised at fair value generally the value of loan proceeds received and will be subsequently remeasured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 127 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ROYALTY FINANCING AGREEMENT CONTINUED On 25 October 2016 the Group entered into a royalty financing agreement with Hancock British Holdings Limited Hancock.
Under the agreement Hancock will pay consideration of US250 million in return for future royalty payments amounting to 5% of gross revenues on the first 13 million tonnes of product sold in each calendar year and a further 1% of gross revenues on sales in excess of 13 million tonnes for the life of the Project.
Drawdown of the US250 million consideration is subject to certain conditions precedent being met principally the Group giving notice to Hancock that it has expended US630 million of the proceeds of the Groups November 2016 stage 1 financing and that all material permits commercial arrangements and authorisations for the Project remain in place.
The Group has until October 2020 to achieve these conditions.
The agreement also commits Hancock to subscribe for 200 million new ordinary shares in the Company for an additional consideration of US50 million at the time of drawdown of the royalty consideration.
A derivative liability 2016 asset is recognised in respect of this commitment and its fair value is measured as the difference between the fair value of the US50 million that will be received and the fair value of 200 million new ordinary shares that will be issued on the drawdown date.
Further information about the fair value estimation of this derivative is provided in note 21 on page 133.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES Trade and other payables are initially measured at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Trade payables 2997 243 Taxation and social security 278 170 Accruals 26409 5441 Total trade and other payables 29684 5854 NET CASH Opening balance on 1 January 386336 28345 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 17213 229397 Net cash flows from restricted cash and bank deposits 156225 401767 New debt issued  270909 Interest expense on convertible loans 27671 2839 Interest paid on convertible loans 33034 Conversions of convertible loans 51001 Foreign exchange differences 1650 575 Closing balance on 31 December 267612 386336 Net cash is defined by the Group as being the total value of cash and cash equivalents bank deposits and restricted cash less all interestbearing debt.
Interestbearing debt includes only the host loan element of the US400 million convertible loans and not the embedded conversion derivative on the basis that the Group has no obligation to cashsettle the embedded derivative.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 128 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DEFERRED TAXATION Deferred taxation represents temporary differences in the accounting carrying values of assets and liabilities and the tax base of those same assets and liabilities.
Deferred taxation is provided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
In line with IAS 12 Income taxes no deferred tax is recognised on the initial recognition of an asset or liability that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss unless the transaction is a business combination.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised or to the extent that they offset deferred tax liabilities.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the taxable entity or different taxable entities where there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
The following table shows the nature of deferred tax assetsliabilities recognised by the Group
Convertible loans Tax losses Net total At 1 January 2016 6580  6580 Chargedcredited to income statement 122 9187 9065 At 31 December 2016 6458 9187 15645 Chargedcredited to income statement 4290 5381 1091 At 31 December 2017 10748 3806 14554 All deferred tax balances arise from timing differences in relation to UK corporation taxes and are expected to be able to be offset between companies.
Deferred tax assets in respect of tax losses are only recognised to the extent that they offset deferred tax liabilities.
In addition to those tax losses recognised above the Group has further unused UK tax losses which would represent a deferred tax asset of 9716000 2016 2297000.
These losses have not been recognised due to uncertainty over the availability of future taxable profits against which to set them.
In the UK tax losses generally have no expiry.
However for companies which have not yet begun formal trading including the Groups main subsidiary only expenditure from the seven years prior to the date of commencement of trade are available for future use.
Consequently 1129000 of the potential deferred tax asset in respect of unrecognised losses noted above are expected to expire before the expected commencement of trading and therefore will likely not be available for use by the Group.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS There have been no material related party transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil except for key management compensation.
The key management compensation below includes eight 2016 seven Sirius Minerals Plc Directors and three 2016 four further executive management employees who are not Sirius Minerals Plc Directors.
Key management personnel received the following compensation during the period Salaries and shortterm benefits 4415 1482 Postemployment benefit contributions 11 9 Sharebased payments 1431 581 Compensation for loss of office  157 Total key management compensation 5857 2229 Total Directors emoluments and emoluments of the highest paid Director together with full details of Directors remuneration pensions and benefits in kind are given in the Remuneration Committee Report.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 129 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES Operating lease commitments Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases net of any incentives received from the lessor are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
The Group leases certain buildings under operating lease agreements.
The lease terms are between two and fifteen years and the majority of agreements are renewable at the end of the lease period at market rate.
The lease expenditure charged to the income statement during the year is disclosed in note 2 on page 117.
The future aggregate minimum lease payments outstanding under operating leases agreements are No later than 1 year 376 185 Later than 1 year and no later than 5 years 1800 249 Later than 5 years 1925 Total amounts due under operating leases 4101 434 Capital expenditure commitments and contingent liabilities At 31 December 2017 the Group had contracted but unrecognised capital expenditure commitments of 20806000.
The Group has no other commitments or contingent liabilities at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 nil.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS On 14 February 2018 the Group announced that it had signed a design and build contract with DMC Mining Services UK Ltd for the construction for the Projects shafts.
The target price of this contract is consistent with the previously announced allocated Project budget.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The main financial risks faced by the Group relate to the availability of funds to meet business needs liquidity risk and fluctuations in foreign exchange rates market risk. a.
Liquidity risk and capital management Liquidity risk The Groups policy on overall liquidity is to ensure that it can call on sufficient funds to facilitate all ongoing operations and planned expansion of the Project on its optimal production timetable.
The Group monitors its levels of working capital and financial investments to ensure that it can meet its payments as they fall due.
The following table shows the gross contractual maturities of the Groups recognised financial liabilities including unrecognised future interest payments 31 December 2017 Trade and other payables
Total
Amount due within 1 year or less 29387 19556 48943 Amount due within 12 years  19556 19556 Amount due within 25 years  58669 58669 Amount due after 5 years  249634 249634 Total contractual cash flows 29387 347415 376802 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 130 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
31 December 2016 Trade and other payables
Total
Amount due within 1 year or less 5854 27632 33486 Amount due within 12 years  27632 27632 Amount due within 25 years  82895 82895 Amount due after 5 years  380344 380344 Total contractual cash flows 5854 518503 524357 All cash flows contractually due in respect of the convertible loans until the end of 2019 will be settled with the Groups restricted cash.
Capital management The Groups objectives when managing capital are to ensure that it is best placed to further its development of the Project whilst also safeguarding the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
The Group defines capital as being cash and cash equivalents plus bank deposits.
The Board of Directors monitors the level of capital as compared to the Groups commitments and approves plans to adjust the level of capital accordingly in the best interests of shareholders.
The Group is not subject to any externally imposed capital requirements.
As part of the annual budgeting and longterm planning process the Groups cash flow forecast is reviewed and approved by the Board.
The cash flow forecast is updated on a monthly basis taking account of the latest expenditure forecasts.
Based on the size and timing of the forecast expenditures the Group adjusts the mix of holdings of its cash and cash equivalents and bank deposits in order to ensure that it has sufficient liquidity to meet its expenditures whilst maximising the return on its funds within the bounds of the Groups Boardapproved treasury policy. b.
Foreign currency exchange rate risk The Groups operations are essentially based in the United Kingdom and it is expected that future revenues will be denominated in US Dollars.
The majority of the Groups operating and capital expansion costs are denominated in Sterling although a significant portion of capital expansion costs are expected to be denominated in Euros and Canadian Dollars.
The Groups debt financing is denominated in US Dollars.
The table below shows the currency denomination of the Groups recognised financial instruments 31 December 2017 Cash and cash equivalents Bank deposits Restricted cash Trade and other payables
Convertible loans
Sterling 147993 60063 35255 23032   220279 US Dollars 69679 59391 39234 196 10033 249325 91250 Euros 9064 30111  4932   34243 Canadian Dollars 8733 8885  1200   16418 Other 63   27   36 Total 235532 158450 74489 29387 10033 249325 179726 31 December 2016 Cash and cash equivalents Bank deposits Restricted cash Trade and other payables
Convertible loans
Sterling 158262 200095  3397   354960 US Dollars 101851 122093 82924 2457 1041 321366 15914 Euros 28      28 Canadian Dollars 5      5 Other 11      11 Total 260157 322188 82924 5854 1041 321366 339090 Foreign exchange differences on retranslation of monetary items upon settlement and at periodend is recognised as part of finance costs in the income statement except for financial assets in a designated cash flow hedge relationship where these differences are recognised as part of other comprehensive income.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 131 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
The Group is exposed to foreign currency transaction risk on transactions that are denominated in currencies other than the proceeds of the stage 1 financing Sterling and US Dollars.
It is the Groups policy to hedge foreign currency exposures associated with committed or probable expenditures in order to mitigate this potential transaction risk.
The Group achieves this by purchasing cash and bank deposits in the relevant foreign currencies ahead of the occurrence of the transactions and simultaneously designating these foreign cash and bank deposits as hedging instruments in cash flow hedge relationships.
As a result the Group is able to significantly mitigate its exposures to movements in the SterlingEuro and SterlingCanadian Dollar exchange rates both in its expected cash flows and upon its income statement.
The Group is also exposed to foreign currency translation risk since its convertible loan debt financing net of surplus cash that the Group holds which was received on issuance of the convertible loan is denominated in US Dollars.
It is the Groups policy to not hedge this risk.
As a result movements in the SterlingUS Dollar exchange rate will impact upon the Groups reported financial position and performance.
A strengthening of the US Dollar against Sterling would have an adverse impact on reported losses and the Groups financial position.
It is expected that this exposure will reduce over time by conversion of the convertible loans which will crystallise all currency fluctuations in equity without requiring any cash settlement by the Group meaning that this is not expected to give rise to a material cash flow risk.
The impact of a 10% weakening in the SterlingUS Dollar exchange rate compared to the rate prevailing at 31 December 2017 would be an increase in reported loss of 9125000 December 2016 1440000 and a reduction of 9126000 December 2016 1456000 to the Groups reported equity.
The Group has put in place a foreign exchange risk management system within its intercompany borrowing structure to minimise the risk that any adverse fluctuations in the SterlingUS Dollar exchange rate indicated by the sensitivities in the paragraph above could give rise to any material cash tax exposures. c.
Interest rate risk The Groups convertible loans have a fixed rate of interest of 8.5% and so interest payments due under these loans are not exposed to any cash flow risk arising from fluctuations in market interest rates.
The Group has no other interestbearing liabilities.
Cash and cash equivalents bank deposits and restricted cash held by the Group all earn interest which is either floating or fixed for no longer than one year.
The Group seeks to invest its interestbearing financial assets in such a way so as to maximise the interest earned based on prevailing market rates within the bounds of first minimising credit risk associated with the investments and ensuring that the investments are sufficiently liquid to allow the Group to service its daytoday operating and expected capital expenditures. d.
Credit risk The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its cash and cash equivalents bank deposits and restricted cash.
The
Groups maximum credit exposure is equal to the carrying value of its financial assets as reported in the statement of financial position.
This risk is mitigated by placing bank deposits and entering into financial instruments only with approved institutions who have an SandP credit rating of at least A.
Furthermore to prevent concentration risk the Groups treasury policy mandates that no more than 20% of the Groups surplus funds can be placed with any single institution other than the Groups primary relationship bank.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 132 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Financial instruments The carrying value of each class of the Groups recognised financial instruments is detailed below 31 December 2017
Loans and receivables At fair value through profit and loss
Total
Financial assets Restricted cash  74489   74489 Bank deposits 38962 119488   158450 Cash and cash equivalents 16407  219125  235532 55369 193977 219125  468471 Financial liabilities Convertible loans   48466 200859 249325 Derivative financial instrument   10033  10033 Trade and other payables    29387 29387 58499 230246 288745 Net financial assetsliabilities 55369 193977 160626 230246 179726 31 December 2016 Loans and receivables At fair value through profit and loss
Total
Financial assets Derivative financial instrument  1041  1041 Restricted cash 82924   82924 Bank deposits 322188   322188 Cash and cash equivalents 260157   260157 665269 1041  666310 Financial liabilities Convertible loans  42433 278933 321366 Trade and other payables   5854 5854 42433 284787 327220 Net financial assetsliabilities 665269 41392 284787 339090 The carrying value of all the Groups financial assets and liabilities is equivalent to their fair value except for the convertible loans where the host loan element is measured at amortised cost.
The fair value of the convertible loans at 31 December 2017 was 286514000 2016 334679000 compared to the stated carrying value of 249325000 2016 321366000.
The traded market price of the Groups convertible loan at 31 December 2017 was 124.5 2016 102.9.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 133 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Fair value The Group is required to exercise judgement in appropriately estimating the fair value of derivative financial instruments.
Derivative financial instruments held by the Group do not have observable market prices and so the Group is required to identify appropriate valuation models in calculating these fair values.
In making its estimates priority is given to inputs based on actual market data and transactions although these valuations nevertheless require some level of subjective assessment and the use of different valuation assumptions could have a significant impact upon the Groups reported financial performance and position.
Financial instruments measured at fair value are grouped into one of three levels as set out by IFRS 13 Fair Value based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
These levels are as follows Level 1  Quoted prices unadjusted based on active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2  Inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly that is prices or indirectly that is derived from prices Level 3  Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
The only assets or liabilities that the Group has which are measured at fair value are the derivatives associated with the convertible loans and the royalty financing.
These have both been assessed to be a level 2 financial liability since the derivatives themselves are not traded on an active market but their fair values are determined by valuation techniques that are based solely on observable market data.
The main inputs to the derivatives valuations are the traded price of the Groups convertible loans the traded price of the Groups shares forward exchange rates and the debt yields of entities with similar credit profiles to the Group.
In order to estimate the fair value of the convertible loans embedded derivative at any point in time the Group estimates the fair value of the cash flows due under the host loan at an assumed discount rate that would likely apply to any debt issued by the Group which was not convertible and subtracting this from the market value of the convertible loans based on the quoted trading price at the measurement date.
In estimating this assumed discount rate the Group considers publicly quoted bond yield data of comparable entities with similar credit profiles and their prevailing bond yields at the measurement date.
The fair value of the royalty equity investment derivative is estimated as the net present value of the difference between the US50 million receivable in Sterling terms and the 200 million shares to be issued on the royalty drawdown date whose value is based on their spot price at the measurement date.
The inputs used in the fair valuation estimates of these derivatives exposes the Group to further market risks.
Movements in these inputs cause the fair valuation but not the cash flows of the derivatives to fluctuate and affect reported finance costs.
Increases in the convertible loans price and share price which generally move synchronously would cause an increase in the loss reported from both derivatives while an increase in the discount rate assumed would cause an increase in the loss reported from the convertible loans embedded derivative.
Conversely a fall in the Groups share price would cause a gain to be reported on these instruments fair value.
The sensitivity of the derivatives valuation upon the reported loss for the year and total equity resulting from a 10% change in these inputs is as follows Convertible loans and share price increasedecrease 3308933089 3663236632 Discount rate increasedecrease 82268634 1453315650 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 134 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDITORS REMUNERATION Fees payable to the Groups auditor and its associates included in operating costs are as follows Audit fees Fees payable for the audit of the consolidated financial statements 95 78 Fees payable for the audit of the Companys subsidiaries 50 37 Fees payable for review of the Groups halfyear financial statements 11 10 Total auditrelated fees 156 125 Other fees Other tax services  69 Other assurance services 348 320 Total nonaudit fees 348 389 Total auditors remuneration 504 514 Other assurance services relate to reporting upon the Groups financial position and prospects to support the Groups move from AIM to the Main list of the London Stock Exchange  and the provision of comfort letters in respect of the Groups stage 1 financing prospectus  that the Audit Committee deemed appropriate for the Groups auditor to perform.
SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS The following table lists all of the Groups subsidiary undertakings.
The Group owns 100% of the ordinary share capital and consolidates the full results of each of these entities.
The registered office of these subsidiaries is Third Floor Greener House 68 Haymarket London SW1Y 4RF 3f GH unless otherwise stated.
Name
Country of incorporation Activity Registered address York Potash Limited England Project development 3f GH York Potash Processing and Ports Limited England Project development 3f GH York Potash Holdings Limited England Holding company 3f GH Sirius Minerals Holdings Limited England Holding company 3f GH Sirius Exploration Limited England Dormant 3f GH Sirius Resources Limited England Dormant 3f GH Sirius Potash Limited England Dormant 3f GH SACH 1 Limited England Intercompany financing 3f GH SACH 2 Limited England Intercompany financing 3f GH Sirius Minerals Finance Limited Jersey Fundraising 47 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE1 0BD Auspotash Corporation Limited Canada Dormant 102A1075 Bay Street Suite 414 Toronto Ontario M5S 2B2 Canada Dakota Salts LLC USA Employee payroll 811 East Interstate Avenue Bismarck North Dakota 58503 USA Sirius Minerals Singapore Pte Ltd Singapore Employee payroll 80 Robinson Road Singapore Represents those companies whose shares are directly held by Sirius Minerals Plc.
During 2017 the Group completed the winding up of its dormant subsidiary Sirius Minerals Australia Pty Limited registered address 5 Infinity Court Coomera Queensland 4209 Australia which led to the recycling of 42000 of accumulated foreign exchange translation gains out of other reserves through the income statement.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 135 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 ASSETS Note Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 63 2 Investments D 249631 81803 Restricted cash 19678 55283 Total noncurrent assets 269372 137088 Current assets Derivative financial instrument E  1041 Restricted cash 19556 27641 Other debtors 1522 330 Loans to subsidiaries F 519280 90078 Bank deposits 119454 322188 Cash and cash equivalents 210700 258493 Total current assets 870512 699771 TOTAL ASSETS 1139884 836859 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Share capital 10 11158 10412 Share premium account 695356 590723 Sharebased payment reserve 11 6053 6114 Treasury shares 27 Accumulated losses 259333 186601 Total equity 453207 420648 Current liabilities Derivative financial instruments E 58499 42433 Loans from subsidiaries G 625439 370252 Trade and other payables 2739 3526 Total liabilities 686677 416211 TOTAL EQUITY AND LIABILITIES 1139884 836859 Included within accumulated losses is a loss for the year of 74690000 2016 loss for the year of 107596000.
The financial statements on pages 135 to 139 were issued and approved by the Board of Directors on 5 March 2018 and signed on its behalf by TJ Staley Finance Director Company registration number ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 136 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Share capital
Sharebased payment reserve
Accumulated losses
At 1 January 2016 5737 240874 7624  80037 174198 Loss for the year     107596 107596 Transactions with owners Share issue 10 4629 347281    351910 Sharebased payments 11 32 1418 1510  1032 972 Exercised options 10 14 1150    1164 At 31 December 2016 10412 590723 6114  186601 420648 Loss for the year     74690 74690 Transactions with owners Shares issued on conversion of convertible loans 10 728 104484    105212 Sharebased payments 11 18 149 61 27 1958 2037 At 31 December 2017 11158 695356 6053 27 259333 453207 The share premium account is used to record the excess proceeds over nominal values on the issue of shares.
The sharebased payment reserve is used to record the fair value of sharebased payments relating to the Companys shares which are outstanding.
Treasury shares comprise the par value of all shares issued to the Groups employee benefit trust but not yet awarded to employees.
Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
REFERENCE INFORMATION The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
BASIS OF PREPARATION These financial statements relate to Sirius Minerals Plc a publicly traded company incorporated and domiciled in England.
The registered address is Third Floor Greener House 68 Haymarket London SW1Y 4RF.
These financial statements present the results of the Company as an individual entity and are prepared on the going concern basis in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and the Companies Act 2006.
These financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis as detailed in note 1 on page 114 of the consolidated Group financial statements.
As permitted by FRS 101 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under the standard in relation to sharebased payments financial instruments capital management presentation of comparative information in respect of share capital presentation of a cash flow statement standards not yet effective and related party transactions.
Where required equivalent disclosures are provided in the consolidated Group financial statements of Sirius Minerals Plc.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by financial assets and financial liabilities including derivatives stated at fair value through profit or loss.
The principal accounting policies set out below have been consistently applied to all periods presented.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling rounded to the nearest thousand which is the functional currency of the Company.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES The accounting policies which have been applied by the Company when preparing the financial statements are in accordance with FRS 101.
FRS 101 is based on the recognition and measurement requirements of EUadopted IFRS under which the consolidated Group financial statements have been prepared.
As a result the accounting policies of the Company are consistent with those used and disclosed in the consolidated Group financial statements except for the policy relating to investments in subsidiaries which is detailed in note D on page 138.
CHANGE IN ACCOUNTING POLICY Consistent with the equivalent change in Group accounting policy detailed in note 1 on page 115 during the year the Company elected to change its accounting policy in accounting for foreign exchange revaluation gains and losses in relation to cash and cash equivalents restricted cash and bank deposits.
The Company has made this restatement from 1 January 2016 in these financial statements.
This change in accounting policy has not led to any change in any balance reported within the Companys own financial statements.
JUDGEMENTS ESTIMATES AND UNCERTAINTIES The preparation of financial statements requires the exercise of judgement in applying the Groups accounting policies.
It also requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis with revisions recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected.
The most significant estimates and judgements relevant to the Companys financial statements are broadly the same as those for the consolidated Group financial statements as detailed in note 1 on page 116.
The only additional risk is around that of impairment in investments in subsidiaries which is detailed further within note D on page 138.
B.
PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT The Company has not presented its own income statement or statement of comprehensive income as permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The loss for the Company for the year was 74690000 2016 107596000.
Included in the Companys profit and loss account is a charge of 106000 2016 78000 in respect of the Companys audit fee.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 138 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
STAFF NUMBERS AND COSTS
Number
Average monthly number of staff including Directors 33 15 Wages and salaries 4697 1506 Social security costs 728 285 Pension costs 18 13 Sharebased payments 624 797 Total staff costs 6067 2601 Detailed information concerning Directors remuneration interests and options is shown in the table within the Annual report on remuneration which is subject to audit on pages 86 to 98 which forms part of the Annual Report.
Details on key management compensation is contained within note 18 on page 128 of the consolidated Group financial statements.
D.
INVESTMENTS
Investments are initially stated at cost.
Investments are tested for impairment when an indication of impairment becomes apparent.
An impairment loss is recognised in the income statement to the extent that the carrying amount cannot be recovered either by selling the asset or by the discounted future cash flows from the investment.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Company is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity.
IMPAIRMENT OF INVESTMENTS At each reporting date the Company assesses whether there is any indication that any of its investments may be impaired.
Where an indication of impairment exists the Company makes a formal estimate of recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount estimated as the valuein use of the asset if the carrying value of the subsidiarys net assets is less than the carrying value of the Companys investment in it the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
The Company is required to exercise judgement in estimating the recoverable value of subsidiaries.
Estimation is required with regard to subsidiarys valueinuse in a similar way to that described in note 7 on page 120 in relation to the estimates used in estimating the recoverable value of intangible assets.
Net book value of investments in subsidiaries At 1 January 81803 81612 Additions 171086 36880 Impairments recognised 3258 36689 At 31 December 249631 81803 Disclosure of the Companys subsidiaries is given in note 23 on page 134 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
The Directors believe that the carrying value of the investments is supported by the projected discounted cash flows of the subsidiaries which are based on the latest Boardapproved budgets.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 139 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Hancock equity investment derivative 10033 1041 Convertible loans conversion derivative 48466 42433 Total derivative financial assetsliabilities 58499 41392 The Hancock equity investment derivative liability 2016 asset is the same as that disclosed in note 14 on page 127 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
The convertible loans conversion derivative is effectively identical to that disclosed in note 13 on page 126 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Further disclosures in relation to these derivatives are included within note 21 on page 133 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
F.
LOANS TO SUBSIDIARIES All loans to subsidiaries do not bear interest are unsecured and are repayable on demand.
G.
LOANS FROM SUBSIDIARIES Loan from Sirius Minerals Finance Limited 249632 370252 Other loans from subsidiaries 375807 Total loans from subsidiaries 625439 370252 An intercompany loan is in place from Sirius Minerals Finance Limited SMF to the Company for the gross proceeds of the US400 million convertible loans.
The terms of the intercompany loan mirror the terms of the external convertible loans detailed in note 13 to the consolidated Group financial statements.
The liability recognised by the Company in its own financial statements reflects the principal amount of all loans all accrued interest and the gross value of all makewhole payments potentially payable.
The intercompany loan has a stated interest rate of 8.5% payable on the outstanding par value of all unredeemed convertible loans held by SMF.
Upon any conversion of the US400 million convertible loans the Company will receive a redeemable preference share in SMF from external bondholders.
These redeemable preference shares are generally redeemed on the day of issuance against the intercompany loan meaning that the gross intercompany liability faced by the Company continues to mirror the gross contractual liability that the Group has to external bondholders at each point in time.
All other loans from subsidiaries do not bear interest are unsecured and are repayable on demand.
H.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The total charge for the year in respect of sharebased remuneration schemes was 624000 2016 797000.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to the sharebased payment reserve.
The key elements of each scheme along with the assumptions employed to arrive at the charge in the profit and loss account are set out in note 11 to the consolidated Group financial statements.
I.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS The Company has taken advantage of the exemption available under FRS 101 from disclosing transactions with other Group undertakings.
Information on the Group can be found in note 23 on page 134 of the consolidated Group financial statements.
There were no other related party transactions during the year other than those already disclosed in note 18 of the consolidated Group financial statements on page 128.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 140 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION
Chairman
Russell Scrimshaw Executive Directors Chris Fraser  Managing Director and CEO Thomas Staley  Finance Director and CFO NonExecutive Directors Lord John Hutton Jane Lodge Louise Hardy Keith Clarke CBE Noel Harwerth  Senior Independent Director Company Secretary Nick King REGISTERED OFFICE Third Floor Greener House 68 Haymarket
SW1Y 4RF
Websitesite
AUDITORS
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Central Square 29 Wellington Street
LS1 4DL
Link Asset Services 6th Floor 65 Gresham Street
EC2V 7NQ
Allen and Overy LLP One Bishops Square
E1 6AD
Barclays Bank Plc 1 Churchill Place
E14 5HP
J.
Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf
E14 5JP
Liberum Capital Limited Ropemaker Place Level 12 25 Ropemaker Street
EC2Y 9LY
Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf
E14 5JP WH Ireland 20 Martin Lane
EC4R 0DR ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 2018 Date and time 31 May 2018 1pm Venue The Events Centre The Principal York Station Road
YO24 1AA 141 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AGM Annual General Meeting
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CFO Chief Financial Officer
CSR corporate social responsibility DWalling diaphragm walling EBIT companys earnings before interest and tax
EBITDA companys earnings before interest taxes depreciation and amortisation EBITDA EC electric conductivity FDI foreign direct investment FSA Financial Services Authority GHG greenhouse gases GWP global warming potential JORC Australasian Joint Ore Reserves Committee LSE London Stock Exchange LTIP longterm incentive plan MHF materials handling facility MOP muriate of potash  common name for potassium chloride Mtpa million tonnes per annum MTS mineral transport system NYMA North Yorkshire Moors Association NYMNP North York Moors National Park NYMNPA North York Moors National Park Authority POLY4 Sirius Minerals trademarked polyhalite product Prospectus prospectus issued by the Company on 25 April 2017 for the admission to the premium listing segment of the Official List and to trading on the London Stock Exchanges Main Market for listed securities available on the Companys websitesite RNS regulated news service Robust as set out on page 19 SOP sulphate of potash SOPM sulphate of potash and magnesium STEM science technology engineering and maths STEM  governments programme to encourage young people to develop skills in these subjects TBM Tunnel boring machines ToP takeorpay in relation to sales agreement a takeorpay contract is a rule structuring negotiations between companies and their suppliers.
With this kind of contract the company either takes the product from the supplier or pays the supplier a penalty
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT 142 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES 143 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES 144 Sirius Minerals Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
