NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report and Accounts NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Making a difference by being different NonStandard Finance plc 2017 Annual Report and Accounts Meet our customers When lending direct we aim to meet all our customers facetoface.
Whilst more expensive to operate than other models it means we can lend when others cant or wont.
Edwins story We lend a hand when most others wont.
Page 10
01 2017 highlights 02 NSF at a glance 04 Chairmans statement Strategic Report Were changing the narrative about nonstandard finance 10 Case study Home credit 14 Case study Branchbased lending 18 Case study Guarantor loans 20 Market review 22 Business model
Group Chief Executives report
Strategy
Principal risks 2017 Financial review Divisional overview Branchbased lending Divisional overview Home credit Divisional overview Guarantor loans Culture and stakeholder management
Board of Directors Governance report Audit Committee report Nomination Committee report Risk Committee report Directors remuneration report Directors report Financial statements 86 Independent auditors report 93 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements Additional information 124 Company information Glendas story Regulation has helped us to improve our offer.
Page 18 Stephens story We offer responsible affordable lending with the human touch meeting most of our customers facetoface.
Page 14 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 1 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview
2017 highlights Serving over 168000 customers through a network of over 120 locations we are a leading player in the nonstandard finance sector.
Reported results Normalised results Operational highlights Combined loan book 44% 2016 180.4m
48% 2016 72.8m Operating profit na 2016 loss of 5.2m Basic and fully diluted loss per share 25% 2016 2.60p Dividend per share 83% 2016 1.20p Combined loan book 30% 2016 191.4m
48% 2016 81.1m Operating profit 72% 2016 15.6m Basic and fully diluted earnings per share 38% 2016 3.09p Dividend per share 83% 2016 1.20p Strong growth across all three business divisions Reduced rate of impairment 34 new locations opened Over 650 new staff and self employed agents added Full FCA permissions for Loans at Home received on 16 May 2017 Acquisition of George Banco completed on 17 August 2017 260m of new longterm funding completed in August 2017 Full FCA permissions for George Banco received on 28 September 2017 Visit our website for further information site Before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items and temporary additional commission.
Before fair value adjustments.
2016 has been adjusted to include George Banco.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 2 Formed in 2014 NonStandard Finance has over 120 locations across the UK.
NSF at a glance A leading provider of unsecured credit
Locations
Net loan book
Selfemployed agents Net debt Loans at Home 69 Guarantor Loans 2 Everyday Loans 53 NSF 1 1 Before fair value adjustments.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 3 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview
By phone
Every adult should have access to credit they can afford to repay  we help consumers that are either unable or unwilling to borrow from mainstream financial institutions.
Customer touch points Unlike most of our competitors when lending direct we aim to meet all our customers facetoface.
The quality of our customer relationships and how we manage them are key drivers of our longterm success.
Onlineby phone Our first point of contact is often by phone or online when we confirm the customers details and start the loan application process.
Facetoface
In branchbased lending and home credit meeting the customer faceto face is an important part of our lending process.
Branchbased lending Everyday Loans The UKs largest branchbased provider of unsecured loans to subprime borrowers.
Guarantor loans George Banco and TrustTwo The clear number two player in a fastgrowing market.
Home credit Loans at Home The UKs third largest provider of unsecured home credit.
Loan book Loan book Loan book See page 42 21% 2016 122.4m See page 44 53% 2016 33.4m See page 47 35% 2016 35.6m Before fair value adjustments.
Before fair value adjustments and including George Banco.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 4
Chairmans statement
2017 results The Groups performance in 2017 was ahead of our original expectations driven by a strong performance from Everyday Loans and also by a sharp uplift at Loans at Home which benefited from operational challenges at a major competitor.
It also includes a maiden contribution from George Banco whose results were consolidated from the middle of August 2017.
Reported revenues were 107.8m 2016 72.8m and the Group produced an operating profit of 3.8m 2016 operating loss of 5.2m.
Higher interest costs and the impact of exceptional charges resulted in a reported loss per share of 3.26p 2016 loss per share of 2.60p.
On a normalised basis and excluding temporary additional commission the Groups underlying performance was strong delivering a 35% increase in pretax profit to 16.4m 2016 12.1m and earnings per share of 4.25p 2016 3.09p.
Strategy
Our strategy remains unchanged.
We remain focused on serving the needs of consumers who are unable or unwilling to borrow from mainstream institutions through three distinct business divisions branch based lending home credit and guarantor loans.
Each of these segments offers significant opportunity for growth and having already achieved our target of 20% loan book growth across the Group as a whole we remain on course to also deliver a 20% return on assets in each of our operating divisions.
This will be achieved through the execution of the three elements of our business strategy Being a leader in our chosen markets Investing in our core assets and Acting responsibly.
Each of these is explained in more detail in the Strategic Report on pages 6 to 53.
Management
During 2017 we made a number of changes to the senior management in each of our three business divisions.
These changes resulted in a marked increase in both ambition and pace of execution  a combination that is feeding through into enhanced operational and financial performance.
As Everyday Loans accounts for over half our business we appointed one of our founding Directors Miles CresswellTurner to lead the business in May 2017.
Davie
Thompson became CEO of Loans at Home in January 2017 and brings over 30 years experience in the home credit industry 18 of which were working with John van Kuffeler.
Marc Howells the Managing Director of George Banco became CEO of our newly formed Guarantor Loans Division comprising both George Banco and TrustTwo in September 2017.
As a Board we have long recognised the value of strong leadership not just in helping to achieve shortterm goals but also in shaping the culture and longterm potential of each of our business divisions.
Culture
In last years Annual Report I set out the process that we had initiated to identify the core elements that underpin the culture of each of our businesses and the target behaviours that we believe will enable us to succeed.
This effort continued throughout 2017 and thanks to the drive and determination of our new business leaders we have been able to refine and start to embed these values across the Group as part of our appraisal and reward process.
A year of progress 2017 was another year of substantial progress for the
We delivered strong loan book growth in all three business divisions whilst the overall rate of impairment declined.
We also completed the acquisition of George Banco for an enterprise value of approximately 53.5m and more than doubled our committed debt facilities to Having delivered overall loan book growth of more than 20% in 2017  we remain on course to also achieve a 20% return on assets in each of our three divisions.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 5 Strategic Report Overview Employee engagement is a key measure that we monitor closely to determine how effectively we are promoting these values and to confirm that we are upholding the high standards we expect.
During 2017 we hosted a series of management conferences and also launched a Groupwide intranet.
This is proving popular among staff as a source of the latest Company news as well as a repository for useful documents and procedures.
An abridged version of the intranet is also available to all of our selfemployed agents that represent an important stakeholder group.
Our latest internal surveys show that our people are wellengaged and whilst not complacent we are pleased with the progress made so far see the survey results on page 35.
Effective reporting systems and controls help the Board to manage and mitigate risk but cannot eliminate it altogether.
Throughout
2017 the Board received regular updates from each of the operational management teams and also made a number of site visits to operations around the country spending time with staff selfemployed agents and customers.
In addition my three executive colleagues visited our frontline operations on a regular and sometimes weekly basis.
Hearing firsthand about operational issues and how they are impacting the experience of our customers helps us to refine our operations and strategic priorities.
Regulation
Each of our businesses is fully licensed by the FCA and we remain supportive of their efforts to maintain a rigorous regulatory framework ensuring the protection of consumers effective competition and a wellfunctioning market.
We also welcome their recent HighCost Credit Review Update in which they note Consumers can benefit from using highcost credit where repayments are sustainable and appropriate forbearance is shown if they have temporary repayment problems.
Whilst supportive of the FCAs objectives we believe that any potential gains from additional regulation must always be measured against the cost of achieving them.
As well as executing the sometimes significant changes required of firms as part of the FCAs licensing process there has also been a near continuous flow of consultations indepth research and proposed regulatory changes that regulated firms have to address see An evolving regulatory landscape on page 28.
Even for wellcapitalised groups such as NSF this adds significantly to both the regulatory burden and the uncertainty of managing a business in an evershifting regulatory landscape.
Smaller firms may be less wellplaced to meet these demands and may look to exit the market resulting in less choice for customers.
We are pleased that the FCA appears to have no major concerns regarding branchbased lending or guarantor loans.
In home credit however the FCA has said that it may look to introduce measures that it believes will reduce the risk of harm andor consumer detriment.
However we do not believe it has provided any clear evidence that such harm or detriment exists in the home credit market.
In fact we would argue that the contrary is true customer complaints are low customer satisfaction is high and the very design of the home credit product means that the risk of customer detriment or financial distress from late payment is low.
We continue to engage actively with the FCA on a number of levels both directly as well as through industry associations.
We are determined to demonstrate the important service that home credit provides to over a million UK consumers for whom mainstream credit may be either out of reach or less suited to their needs.
Board
We were delighted to welcome Niall Booker to join the Board as an independent Non Executive Director in May 2017 .
Niall has brought a wealth of experience from his time at HSBC Household and more recently Cooperative Bank where he was CEO until December 2016.
Final dividend Having declared a halfyear dividend of 0.50p per share in August 2017  the Board is pleased to recommend a final dividend of 1.70p per share 2016 0.9p making a total of 2.20p for the year as a whole 2016 1.20p.
If approved by shareholders this final dividend would mean that we had reached our target of a payout ratio of at least 50% of 2017 normalised posttax earnings before temporary additional commission.
If approved at the AGM the final dividend would be paid to those shareholders on the Companys share register on 18 May 2018 with payment being made on 15 June 2018.
Outlook
Each of our three business divisions has excellent growth prospects and is a top three player in its individual market segment.
Each is led by a highly experienced management team and has the potential to deliver a 20% return on assets before central costs.
With 260m of committed debt facilities in place we are wellfunded and we are optimistic about the Groups prospects.
Charles Gregson NonExecutive Chairman 28 March 2018 Our values Doing the right thing we recognise our collective responsibility for delivering great outcomes  not just for our customers but also our other stakeholders.
We dont cut corners and always seek the path that is right before the path that is easy.
Integrity we expect our people to respect colleagues and other key stakeholders and to do what we say we will do.
Shared purpose delivered through teamwork we have clear strategic and operational goals and expect all of our people to understand and share in that vision.
Our businesses are complex combining many different elements to achieve our overall objectives.
By working together we are likely to solve problems more effectively than trying to do things on our own.
Clear communication we listen carefully to those dealing directly with our customers we are well informed and believe its our duty to speak up when we disagree or believe something is not right we celebrate success and dont blame others when something goes wrong always learning from our mistakes.
Entrepreneurial leadership we lead by example using our initiative and not just waiting to be told what to do knowledgeable and inquisitive we are prepared to try new things so we can perform better and be the best we can be.
HighCost Credit Review Update  FCA 31 January 2018.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 6 Strategic Report Were changing the narrative about nonstandard finance We lend a hand when most others wont We offer responsible affordable lending with the human touch meeting most of our customers facetoface Regulation has helped us to improve our offer Read how we lend a hand when most others wont on page 10 Read how we offer responsible affordable lending with the human touch on page 14 Read how regulation has helped us to improve our customer offer on page 18 Having been in the sector for over 35 years I can honestly say that the common misconceptions about our industry are not new.
However at NSF the reality is certainly very different and we are changing the narrative around nonstandard finance.
NSF was founded exactly because we recognised the opportunity to build a sustainable and profitable business by being at the vanguard of best practice meeting the highest standards of regulatory compliance and by delivering great outcomes for customers.
John van Kuffeler Group Chief Executive NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 8 Case study How we are changing the narrative We lend a hand when most others wont NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 10 Case study Home credit When my agent Michelle comes round she calls me first and I go to the window and drop the keys down to her so that I dont have to go all the way downstairs.
While she comes upstairs I put the kettle on and make her a cup of coffee  best cup of coffee ever she tells me.
Anyway I needed some Euros for my grandkids that were going away on holiday  it was their first time abroad and so it was a bit special.
Anyway Michelle did my loan for me and then went off to the post office to get the Euros I dont really understand foreign money but she did it all for me and brought it back.
Sometimes she says shes up and down my stairs like a yoyo Edwin Sheffield Edwins story I can manage and I know theres help when I need it.
Im not as quick on my feet as I used to be.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 11 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Profit for shareholders andor reinvestment
Cost of funds Other admin costs People costs Impairments 100% 36% 18% 9% 2% 11% 24% An estimated ten million people in the UK are unable to borrow from their highstreet bank many of which have been closing branches and are reluctant to lend to those on low or variable incomes.
Home credit is a business model that has been operating since 1880.
With a high level of personal engagement it is often one of few sources of regulated credit available for those at the lower end of the income scale.
Loans at Home is the third largest home credit operator in the UK and each of our 1000 self employed agents is out seeing their customers every week chatting about their lives making sure they are ontrack and importantly that nothing has changed that we need to know about.
Living on low income can be particularly challenging when things happen that are not expected.
By building longterm relationships we are wellplaced to understand the needs of our customers and so can support them through difficult times should they need a bit of extra help.
It is this intimate customer knowledge that makes home credit so unique and allows us to lend to those that many either will not or cannot.
Lending money to a customer in trouble or who cannot afford a loan is the last thing an agent wants to do.
The customer is likely to run into difficulty quite quickly which means that they cannot repay  this is not good for them or the agent.
If circumstances do change and a customer perhaps needs some more time with their payments we are only too happy to work out a revised schedule that works for the customer and at no extra cost.
Why are our APRs so high This is a question we often get asked.
To answer it we need to explain what happens to the revenue we generate.
The chart shown here illustrates what happens to NSF Group revenue based upon the 2017 normalised results.
Whilst each of our three businesses has different dynamics we have sought to provide an NSF overview as follows
Lending to customers with low or impaired credit ratings is a risky business and a significant proportion of revenue is lost through the impairment of loans that dont get repaid.
Higher risk customers tend to result in higher impairments and so when lending to such customers lenders look to charge higher APRs.
An estimated 1.6m customers use home credit in the UK Source FCA.
53% Loans at Home grew its loan book before fair value adjustments by 53% in 2017.
Our
People costs Staff and selfemployed agent costs are significant given the scale of our facetoface networks through which we engage with our customers either in a branch or in their home.
In home credit temporary additional commission paid to newlyarrived agents is key to allowing them the time to build up a sufficient number of customers in order to earn their target level of income through our regular commission structure.
Other admin costs Property IT and other infrastructure and support related costs are significant for branchbased lending and home credit requiring higher APRs.
Business models with lower infrastructure costs may be able to charge lower APRs.
The size and term of loans being offered are also factors in driving APRs  smaller shortterm loans like those in home credit tend to attract higher APRs as many of the costs of delivery are the same irrespective of the size or term of loan issued.
Cost of funds and taxes Whilst we have sourced significant equity capital the majority of our loan book is funded by debt facilities provided by thirdparty credit funds.
After paying taxes due the balance is used to reward shareholders through dividend payments share buybacks andor by reinvesting funds to deliver future growth.
Why are our APRs so high Normalised revenue 100% NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 12 Case study How we are changing the narrative We offer responsible affordable lending with the human touch meeting most of our customers facetoface NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 14 Case study Branchbased lending I was looking for a loan to complete my Site Management qualification so that I could get back onto my feet after a rocky business experience that impacted my credit rating.
Having an impaired credit history isnt something I felt comfortable talking about however everyone at the branch was fantastic and they never judged me.
I told them my whole story and having explained everything in detail they approved my loan so that I could rebuild my finances and my credit score.
Since then Ive been able to borrow small amounts from time to time to pay for my training courses.
Whilst some say I might get a better rate if I shopped around I will keep going back to the branch because the service is top notch.
I have got stability back in my life and it is all due to the great and professional team at the branch in
Thank you Stephen Newport Stephens story Everyone at the branch was fantastic I was looking for a loan to complete my Site Management qualification.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 15 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Everyday Loans is the UKs largest branchbased provider of unsecured credit to the credit impaired.
With 53 branches at the end of 2017 we plan to open a further 12 branches in 2018.
Unlike many of our competitors we see meeting the customer as an essential part of our underwriting process as it helps us to make better lending decisions.
As part of our cultural review see Culture and Stakeholder Management on page 50 Everyday Loans defined its purpose as being to help make peoples everyday lives better.
We know that issuing a loan that a customer doesnt want or that wont address their need is not going to help them.
In 2017 Everyday Loans processed over one million applications but lent money to just 3% of those that applied  we are therefore highly selective about who we are prepared to lend money to.
Of those we do lend to on balance we tend to provide customers with slightly smaller loans than they originally ask for particularly when serving a customer for the first time.
Once we have built a good relationship with them and they have proven their ability to repay as planned we may be prepared to extend further credit to them and depending upon the circumstances on better terms.
1million Everyday Loans processed over one million applications in 2017.
Our
Our customers Our branchbased lending customers tend to earn average incomes and are looking to borrow between 3000 and 4000 over three years.
Customer numberstel 2014 34300 2013 29000 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 16 Case study How we are changing the narrative Regulation has helped us to improve our offer NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 18 Case study Guarantor loans My mum agreed to be my guarantor as she knew that improving my credit score would help to get myself straight.
Having taken out a 24month loan which I paid off as due I then found myself in a tight spot having been made redundant.
While I was confident of being able to secure another permanent job I needed some cash to tide me over in the meantime and went back to the team at George Banco who agreed to help me again with my mum as guarantor.
As I had kept up with my payments on my first loan the team were able to offer me a new loan at a lower APR.
Having sorted myself out I now have a great full time job as a sales and customer services representative.
Thank you George Banco Glenda Preston Glendas story With a guarantor I was able to borrow at a rate I could afford.
I a ppr o a c h e d George Banco to see if I could improve my poor credit rating as it had been affected by some issues in the past.
I found that with a guarantor I was able to borrow at a rate I could afford.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 19 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Customer numbers Formalising a process that has long been used to extend credit to those that might otherwise be unable to borrow on their own guarantor loans have become one of the fastest growing segments of the UKs nonstandard finance market.
Our Guarantor Loans Division comprising the George Banco and TrustTwo brands is the clear number two provider of guarantor loans in the UK.
With a loan book of 48.2m before fair value adjustments and over 17000 customers at the end of 2017 our approach is always to ensure that by providing credit we are genuinely meeting the customers needs.
Since assuming control of the UKs consumer credit market in 2014 the FCA has raised standards across the nonstandard finance sector through a rigorous licensing process as well as through ongoing supervision of all licensed lenders.
Since acquiring TrustTwo in 2016 and George Banco in August 2017 we have received all of the requisite permissions to operate from the FCA.
However we are never complacent and are always looking to improve our processes and procedures to ensure the delivery of great outcomes for our customers.
This includes incorporating mechanisms into our employee incentives that reward best practice and doing the right thing from the customers perspective.
30% The UKs guarantor loans market is estimated to be growing at 30% per annum.
Each of our businesses is fully licensed by the
Our
Our customers Our guarantor loan customers tend to earn just under the national average and are looking to borrow 30004000 over 35 years.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 20 18.4% Proportion of total jobs that are deemed to be lowpaid jobs 15% of the UK workforce is selfemployed over County Court
Customers have low credit statusare credit impaired Customers are low paid or on variable income Market review 1 LEK  Executive Insights Volume XVIII April 2016.
2 Low pay is defined as the value that is twothirds of median hourly earnings.
For example median hourly earnings for fulltime employees in 2017 was 14.00 therefore low pay employees are considered to be anyone earning below twothirds of 14.00 which is 9.33  ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings 26 October 2017.
3 ONS UK Labour market May 2017.
4 Registry Trust Limited 12 March 2018.
5 FCA  Understanding the financial lives of UK adults October 2017.
Over ten million consumers are either unwilling or unable to borrow from mainstream financial institutions Customer characteristics
There is significant demand for nonstandard finance in the UK 20% c.10m of the adult population people NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 21 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview The supply of nonstandard nance in the UK  outstanding receivables Source LEK  Executive Insight Volume XVIII April 2016 and Company estimates.
Inactive loans Online unsecured lenders Logbook loans Branchbased lenders
Guarantor loans HCSTC online lenders Home collected credit Car nance Rent to buy Credit unions Store cards Mail order Point of sale loan Subprime credit cards Employment rate % OctDec 2012 JanMar 2013 AprJun 2013 JulSep 2013 OctDec 2013 JanMar 2014 AprJun 2014 JulSep 2014 OctDec 2014 JanMar 2015 AprJun 2015 JulSep 2015 OctDec 2015 JanMar 2016 AprJun 2016 JulSep 2016 OctDec 2016 JanMar 2017 AprJun 2017 JulSep 2017 OctDec 2017 Whilst there has been strong growth in consumer credit in the UK in recent years the FCA has confirmed that this has been driven by prime customers not those with lower credit scores to support future growth.
Macroeconomic
Record rates of employmentlow unemployment Incomes of the lowest 10% of earners have risen by 16.2% since 2013 Having peaked at 3.1% per annum inflation has now reduced to 2.7% Brexit creates general uncertainty but is unlikely to affect most of our customers
Limited number of large profitable and wellcapitalised firms Many mainstream lenders left the market post2008 High barriers to entry with few new entrants in recent years Technology evolution may mean that new business models emerge
Strict regulatory framework ensures a level playing field for all operators FCA has indicated no material issues for branchbased lending or guarantor loans FCA is examining home credit Continuous evolution of the regulatory framework 2 There is a shortfall in supply 3 External drivers are mostly favourable 6 www.
CA. iteinsightwhosdrivingconsumercreditgrowth.
7 ONS  Annual survey of Hours and Earnings.
8 ONS  Consumer price inflation UK February 2018.
Source ONS  UK Employment rate people aged 1664 years seasonally adjusted.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 22 Business model A relationship driven model Our purpose What sets us apart To help those who need credit but are either unwilling or unable to borrow from mainstream institutions.
Building personal relationships is key and enables us to balance the delivery of great outcomes for our customers and attractive returns for shareholders.
Culture
Providing a helping but firm hand to our customers is an ethos that runs deep through each of our businesses.
We are entrepreneurial and are not afraid to try new things.
We listen carefully learn fast and dont blame others when we make mistakes.
Instead we learn from them so that we can improve outcomes for our customers and deliver greater long term returns for our shareholders.
See Culture and stakeholder management section on page 50
NSF is led by a highly experienced Board and senior management team with unrivalled knowledge of the sector and a proven track record of creating value for shareholders.
See Governance section on page 54
Our extensive branch and agent networks mean we are able to have facetoface contact with our customers.
We also develop sophisticated technology platforms which improve our customer service and collection capabilities.
Whilst more expensive to operate then many other business models our infrastructure is highly scalable.
Compliance and risk management We have developed a robust risk management framework and established a Risk Committee which oversees risk assessment and advises the Board on the Companys overall risk appetite tolerance and strategy.
See Principal risks section on page 36 Access to longterm funding The Group is financed through a combination of longterm debt and equity and has sufficient funding to meet the current growth plans of each of our business divisions.
See Financial review on page 39 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 23 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview What we do How we create value
Feefo rating 2016 4.85 Net promoter scores 97% 2016 98% Trust Pilot 91% FOS complaints 0.00% 2016 0.02%
Loan book growth Branchbased lending 21% 2016 18% Home credit 53% 2016 19% Guarantor loans 35% 2016 19% Payout ratio 52% 2016 36% Return on assets Branchbased lending 17.0% 2016 17.1% Home credit 9 .1% 2016 6.7% Guarantor loans 13.4% 2016 8.5%
Total training days 2016 2107
Number of staff 2016 537 Number of selfemployed agents 2016 785 Number of branchesoffices 2016 88
Develop focused tailored and affordable loan products
Attract customers
Develop focused tailored and affordable loan products
Conduct
Regulation
Credit
Liquidity
Competition
Business strategy and operations
Cyber risk Identify suitable customers Assess credit via external and internal scorecard Understand customer needs Assess affordability income and expenditure Tailor product to suit their needs Ensure customer understands Lend responsibly Encourage timely payment Show forbearance if and when required Identify vulnerability Suggest sources of support if in difficulty Collect responsibly
Debt
Equity
Reinvest in our core assets
People
Technology
Brands
Manage costs Network costs
Taxes
Losses impairments site is a thirdparty customer review site.
It invites customers at Everyday Loans and TrustTwo to review our performance.
The rating shown is the aggregation of all scores received for Everyday Loans with a maximum score of 5.
The same score for TrustTwo was 4.7 out of 5.
Percentage of customers that were very satisfied or quite satisfied with overall services at Loans at Home last survey based on 299 responses January to December 2017 2016 896 responses April to December . ite is an online review community website.
Based on 2413 reviews 91% rated George Banco as
No data is available for 2016.
Number of upheld cases at the Financial Ombudsman Service as a percentage of 250483 loans written in 2017 Everyday Loans 3 cases TrustTwo and George Banco 3 cases Loans at Home 6 cases.
Based upon 2017 normalised earnings per share before temporary additional commission of 4.25p and a total dividend per share of 2.20p.
Total for Everyday Loans Loans at Home staff and agents TrustTwo and George Banco in 2017.
Facetoface
By phone Online NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 24
Group Chief Executives report
2017 Full year results A number of key operational and strategic milestones were achieved in 2017 Branchbased lending appointed Miles CresswellTurner as CEO and strengthened the senior management team opened 12 new branches launched two new products and added 77 new staff processed over 1 million loan applications for the first time Home credit promoted Davie Thompson to become CEO and invested 5.3m to help drive a 53% increase in the net loan book opened 22 new offices added over 100 staff and 442 self employed agents to our network completed the rollout of our latest handheld technology to all agents reached over 104000 customers obtained a full licence from the FCA Guarantor loans acquired George Banco to become the clear number two player obtained a full licence from the FCA for George Banco following its acquisition
Were wellpositioned to meet the demand for nonstandard finance 2017 was a year of delivery with significant organic loan book growth whilst impairment reduced from 29% to 24% of normalised revenue.
I am pleased to say that these trends have continued into the current year.
With strong market positions in each of our chosen segments a clear plan for growth and long term funding in place we remain confident in the full year outlook and are pleased to recommend a final dividend of 1.70p per share making 2.20p for the year as a whole 2016 1.2p an increase of 83% over the prior year.
John van Kuffeler Group Chief Executive Key performance indicators Year ended 31 Dec 17
Branch based lending
Guarantor
Loans
Loan book growth 21.3% 53.3% 35.4% Revenue yield 45.8% 147.0% 35.8% Risk adjusted margin 37.0% 101.3% 30.3% Impairmentsrevenue 19.1% 31.1% 15.3% Impairmentsaverage net loan book 8.8% 45.7% 5.5% Operating profit margin 37.2% 6.1% 37.3% Return on assets 17.0% 9.1% 13.4% 7 Excluding fair value adjustments the amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
8 Revenue as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
9 Revenue less impairments as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
10 Operating profit as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 25 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview These achievements contributed to strong loan book growth in all three divisions and the combined net loan book at 31 December 2017 increased by 51% to 247.9m before fair value adjustments 2016 164.6m and to 259.8m 2016 180.4m after fair value adjustments.
Adjusting for the acquisition of George Banco the yearonyear increase in the net loan book before fair value adjustments was 30% 2016 191.4m.
A summary of the key performance indicators for each of our businesses is shown on the previous page.
This strong growth increased normalised revenue by 48% to 119.8m 2016 81.1m and normalised operating profit before 3.2m of temporary additional commission at Loans at Home increased by 72% to 26.9m 2016 15.6m.
Normalised operating profit after these costs increased by 71% to 23.7m 2016 13.8m and normalised earnings per share increased by 31% to 3.44p 2016 2.62p.
Adjusting for the oneoff nature of the temporary additional commission normalised earnings per share was 4.25p 2016 3.09p.
The Groups 2017 reported or statutory results are significantly affected by the acquisition of George Banco the full year impact of the April 2016 acquisition of Everyday Loans including TrustTwo fair value adjustments and the amortisation of acquired intangibles.
Reported revenue after fair value adjustments was up 48% to 107.8m 2016 72.8m while the sale of a nonperforming loan portfolio generated other operating income of 1.9m 2016 0.5m.
A 40% increase in administration costs to 77.1m 2016 54.8m included 3.2m of temporary additional commission and 2.1m of other Loans at Home related expansion costs.
Finance costs increased due to strong loan book growth and the impact of the Groups new financing arrangements see below while exceptional items totalled 6.3m 2016 0.6m primarily reflecting the writeoff of previously capitalised fees associated with prior period debt raising.
The net result was that the Group delivered a reported loss before tax of 13.0m 2016 loss of 9.3m and a reported loss per share of 3.26p 2016 loss per share of 2.60p.
Reflecting our confidence in the outlook the Board is recommending a final dividend of 1.70p making a total of 2.20p for the year 20161.2p.
This represents a 50% payout ratio based on adjusted normalised earnings per share before 3.2m of Loans at Home temporary additional commission of 4.25p.
Acquisition of George Banco Branchbased lending Our largest business Everyday Loans delivered an outstanding performance with a particularly strong second half driven by increased loan volumes higher yield and lower impairment.
The change of pace and ambition was led by a revitalised senior management team under the stewardship of Miles CresswellTurner who took over the leadership of the business in May 2017.
Normalised operating profit before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items was up 53% to 22.7m 2016 14.8m.
Contributing to this strong growth was the expansion of our branch network with 12 new branches opened during the year and each new branch performing as expected.
As a result there were 53 branches open at the end of 2017 a 47% increase since we acquired the business in April 2016.
We also extended our product range in 2017 with the launch of the Selfy loan a tailored product for selfemployed customers as well as a new 12month loan that is particularly suited to new customers.
Home credit Davie Thompson was promoted to CEO of Loans at Home in January 2017 and has overseen a transformational period for the business.
Our plan for growth was accelerated by the announcement of a major restructuring by the market leader in February 2017.
This resulted in us being approached by large numbers of self employed agents and management staff that were keen to join Loans at Home.
By
31 December 2017 we had added over 440 experienced selfemployed agents as well as over 100 staff to our business we had also opened 22 new offices.
While there was an associated investment of 5.3m comprising 3.2m of Loans at Home temporary additional commission and 2.1m of other expansion related costs the collections and lending performance of the new agents has been particularly strong and helped to drive a 53% increase in the loan book a reduction in the rate of impairment and an 11% increase in the number of customers.
Before temporary additional commission normalised operating profit was up 73% to 6.3m 2016 3.6m after deducting these costs normalised operating profit was up 67% to 3.1m 2016 1.9m.
30m net loan book Having issued its first loan in 2014 George Banco grew quickly by leveraging its strong broker relationships and had a 30m loan book on acquisition.
NSF now clear 2 in guarantor loans Our guarantor loans division now has a loan book of 48.2m up 35% versus the prior year on a pro forma basis.
Earnings enhancing in first full year The acquisition remains ontrack to deliver incremental earnings in 2018.
Strong growth potential The UKs guarantor loans market is growing strongly and we intend to increase our market share.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 26
Group Chief Executives report continued
Guarantor loans The Group acquired George Banco on 17 August 2017 to become the clear number two in the UK guarantor loans market.
Under the leadership of Marc Howells the CEO of George Banco our Guarantor Loans Division enjoyed strong loan book growth in 2017 up 35% on a likeforlike basis.
This helped to drive normalised operating profit that increased by 497% to 2.7m 2016 0.5m.
Strategy
We provide unsecured credit to the 1012 million UK consumers who are unable or unwilling to borrow from mainstream institutions either because they are on low or variable earnings are credit impaired have a thin credit file or have had an unsatisfactory experience of borrowing from mainstream lenders.
With a net loan book of almost 250m before fair value adjustments and almost 169000 customers at the end of December 2017 we represent an important source of credit for consumers credit that many other lenders are not prepared to provide but which plays a meaningful part in helping to drive the UK economy.
Where we differ from many of our competitors is that when lending direct in addition to conducting a digital credit check we also aim to meet potential customers facetoface.
Whilst an expensive model to operate this represents an important part of our underwriting process and helps us to better understand the customers circumstances and make better lending decisions.
Having delivered annual loan book growth of more than 20% in 2017 we remain focused on reaching our second target of a 20% return on assets in each of our operating businesses.
This will be achieved through the continued execution of our business strategy that comprises the following three elements Being a leader in each of our chosen business segments We subscribe to the view that leadership is a key driver of longterm success and are wellplaced in all three areas of our business Branchbased lending  Everyday Loans is the clear market leader in unsecured branchbased lending to the credit impaired with 47000 customers.
Home credit  Loans at Home is ranked third in the market having grown strongly with over 104000 customers in 2017.
Guarantor loans  Following the acquisition of George Banco we are now the clear number two in the market with a loan book of close to 50m and over 17000 customers.
Investing in our core assets Through suitable investment in people our distribution networks technology and brands we are increasing our capacity to drive further loan book growth whilst at the same time managing operational risks through effective spans of control.
People  establishing a good relationship with our customers through facetoface contact is at the heart of our business model and in 2017 we increased the size of our workforce by 40% to over 750 full time employees.
We also launched a sharesave scheme for all staff so they can participate in the future success of the Group.
In home credit we recruited over 440 experienced selfemployed agents taking our total number to over 1000.
Such expansion required significant investment in training and incentives that are focused on rewarding both financial results and the delivery of good customer outcomes.
Distribution networks  we opened 12 new Everyday Loans branches in 2017 taking the total number now open to 53  we plan to open a further 12 in the first half of 2018.
At Loans at Home we opened 22 new offices to support the rapid expansion of our selfemployed agent network and we now have 69 locations including the head office across the UK.
Technology  while facetoface contact lies at the heart of both branchbased lending and home credit all three of our business divisions rely heavily on 247 access to scalable and robust technology.
With thousands of customers up and down the country effective data management and analysis ensures that we can process large volumes of transactions conduct full credit scoring and lead management and can monitor and optimise our daytoday business performance.
Brands  securing the trust and confidence of our customers and other key stakeholders is vitally important especially now that purchase decisions for financial services are increasingly made online or through remote channels.
The quality of our service and size of our customer base means that continuing to invest in our brands and reputation is a source of substantial longterm value for the Group.
Acting responsibly As noted in the Chairmans Statement on pages 4 to 5 how we behave as a business is not just defined by prevailing laws or regulations but also by our culture or how we do things around here.
Right at the outset and at the very heart of our longterm strategic plan was the vision that NonStandard Finance plc would represent the very best in consumer credit with the highest standards of compliance and best practice.
We monitor closely how our behaviour and conduct might impact our key stakeholders whether they be customers staff self employed agents suppliers our environment or the communities where we have a physical presence.
Through a number of initiatives across the Group including a series of employee workshops we have identified a number of core behaviours that we see as being vital if we are to achieve our strategic goals Doing the right thing we recognise our collective responsibility for delivering great outcomes for our customers even when others are not looking.
Integrity we respect colleagues and other key stakeholders and always do what we say we will do.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 27 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Shared purpose delivered through teamwork we have clear goals and expect all of our people to share in that vision.
By working together we are likely to solve problems more effectively than trying to do things on our own.
Clear communication we are well informed and listen carefully to those dealing direct with our customers we also speak up when something is not right we celebrate success and dont blame others when something goes wrong always learning from our mistakes.
Entrepreneurial leadership we lead by example and use our initiative trying new things so we can improve.
By embedding each of these into our employee review protocol we aim to formalise the process by which we recognise and reward these values and behaviours so that we can stand out from our competitors.
Financing
On 3 August 2017 we announced the acquisition of George Banco the number two provider of guarantor loans in the nonstandard sector for 18.6m representing an enterprise value of To finance the acquisition and refinance all of the Groups existing debt facilities as well as to provide additional funding to support future growth we secured a new 175m term loan facility the Term Loan provided by a group of institutional investors led by Alcentra
The new sixyear loan bears an interest rate of LIBOR plus 7.25% per year with interest payable every six months.
The same investors also agreed to provide an additional committed facility of up to 50m under the same terms as the Term Loan taking their total commitment to the Group to 225m.
In addition the Group secured a new 35m revolving credit facility provided by Royal Bank of Scotland at an interest rate of LIBOR plus 3.5% per year.
As at 31 December 2017 the Group had cash at bank of 11.0m 2016 5.2m and gross borrowings of 208.1m 2016 87.3m leaving total headroom on the Groups debt facilities of 51.9m 2016 12.9m.
Regulation
With each of our three business divisions now fully authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA we believe we have established a constructive dialogue with the regulator at both an operational as well as at a more strategic level.
The FCA published a number of documents regarding consumer credit in 2017 and while there appear to be no concerns regarding branchbased lending or guarantor loans through its ongoing review of highcost credit the FCA is continuing to improve its understanding of certain segments including home credit.
Through our regular interactions with the FCA as well as through formal consultations we continue to inform the FCAs understanding around home credit and its importance to over a million UK consumers.
In its response to Good work the Taylor Review of modern working practices the Government announced in February 2018 its intention to consult widely on a variety of matters affecting the UK workforce including employment status.
With a network of over 1000 selfemployed agents the majority of whom are women we are monitoring these developments closely and will be contributing to the consultations in due course.
A summary of some of the recent regulatory developments that may have a bearing on the Groups business is set out in An evolving regulatory landscape on page 28.
Final dividend Having declared a halfyear dividend of 0.5p per share in August 2017 2016 0.3p the Board is pleased to recommend a final dividend of 1.70p per share 2016 0.9p making a total of 2.20p for the year as a whole 2016 1.2p.
If approved by shareholders based on normalised posttax earnings before temporary agent commission this would mean that we had exceeded our mediumterm target of a payout ratio of 50%.
If approved at the Companys Annual General Meeting on 14 May 2018 the final dividend would be paid to those shareholders on the Companys share register on 18 May 2018 the Record Date with payment being made on 15 June 2018.
Current trading and outlook We have made a good start to the year with each of our business divisions continuing to deliver strong loan book growth whilst maintaining tight control on impairment.
We therefore remain confident about the Groups full year prospects.
John van Kuffeler Group Chief Executive 28 March 2018 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 28
Group Chief Executives report continued
An evolving regulatory landscape During 201718 there were a number of regulatory developments that may have a bearing on the Groups activities and business operations in the future.
Some of the more pertinent developments are summarised below.
January 2017 The FCA published its final guidance on how consumer credit firms should address the matter of default notices in respect of guarantor loans.
This was a revision to previous guidance having taken into account a number of responses made.
February 2017 The FCA closed its call for input into highcost credit on 15 February 2017 .
The review covered the payday lending cap unauthorised overdrafts as well as a broader review of all forms of highcost credit including homecollected credit.
April 2017 The FCA published its Mission Sector Views and Business Plan for 2017 .
Each provides a valuable insight into the views objectives and operating parameters adopted by the FCA in carrying out its duties.
They also refer to some of the thematic reviews that the FCA expects to undertake in the future.
The FCA published a consultation on its proposed measures to address persistent credit card debt and to require credit card firms to use their data to identify customers at risk of financial difficulties.
June 2017 The FCA published its impact assessment on the amendments to the guarantor lending rules pursuant to PS1523.
July 2017 The FCA published its feedback statement following its call for input into highcost credit and also issued a consultation into creditworthiness and affordability in consumer credit.
The FCA published Occasional Paper No.28  Preventing financial distress by predicting unaffordable consumer credit agreements An applied framework.
Much of this research was used to support proposals in the creditworthiness and affordability consultation also issued on 31 July 2017 see above.
The Taylor Review of Modern Working Practices was published making a number of recommendations to government regarding the definition of workers and the principles which workers and employers should be expected to adopt.
July 2017 continued The FCA published a consultation on staff incentives remuneration and performance management in consumer credit.
The review aims to help firms identify practices that may promote inappropriate behaviour by company representatives that in turn could result in poor customer outcomes.
The Financial Guidance and Claims Bill that creates the framework for a single financial guidance body was introduced in the Queens speech and had its second reading in the House of Lords.
September 2017 The FCA published an occasional paper on the ageing population and financial services including the FCAs strategy for mitigating the potential harm arising.
October 2017 HM Treasury launched a call for evidence to gain further insight from the debt advice sector and creditors about how best to design implement administer and monitor a sixweek breathing space scheme and statutory debt management plan.
The FCA published Understanding the financial lives of UK adults  Findings from the FCAs Financial Lives Survey 2017 an extensive piece of research into how different segments of the UK population interact with regulated financial services.
Based on nearly 13000 facetoface and online interviews Financial Lives is the FCAs largest tracking survey on consumers and finance.
November 2017 The FCA published their findings on illegal lending in the UK in a paper titled Shining a light on illegal money lending consumer experiences of unauthorised lending in the UK.
The FCA published a document detailing its approach to consumers which is intended to broaden the debate started in its Mission published on 18 April 2017 by exploring its approach to regulating for retail consumers.
The Information Commissioners Office published its updated guide to the General Data Protection Regulation which is due to come into force on 25 May 2018 including guidance on contracts and liabilities as between data controller and data processors and on obtaining recording and managing consents.
December 2017 The FCA published a document detailing its approach to promoting competition in the interests of consumers and not for its own sake.
The FCA is focused on keeping markets open to entry and innovation tackling anticompetitive conduct and intervening to ensure competitive forces drive good outcomes for consumers.
The FCA published a document explaining the purpose of and its approach to authorisation the public value it delivers and changes the FCA is making to improve its approach.
The document describes how authorisation is a tool primarily to prevent harm from occurring by ensuring that all regulated firms and individuals meet common sets of minimum standards.
January 2018 The FCA published an update on progress on the HighCost Credit Review and thoughts on the direction of travel with indications on the further work it is undertaking and the planned timelines for that work.
February 2018 The Government published its response to the Taylor Review on Modern Working Practices see above.
At the same time the Government launched four consultations on the following key areas employment status increasing transparency in the labour market agency workers and enforcement of employment rights.
The consultations close on various dates in May and June 2018.
The Financial Guidance and Claims Bill that creates the framework for a single financial guidance body completed the Committee Stage in Parliament and is expected to enter the Report Stage in the House of Commons in due course.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 29 Our strategy is focused on three elements Being a leader in each of our chosen segments Investing in our core assets Acting responsibly To find out more go to page 34 To find out more go to page 30 To find out more go to page 32
The Group has become the UKs largest branchbased provider of unsecured credit the second largest provider of guarantor loans and the third largest provider of home credit.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 30 Has achieved the high standard required for This is to certify Andrew Mabbutt CEO Feefo Holdings Ltd February 2018 Gold Trusted Service Based on the genuine ratings of their verified customers Everyday Loans
Our strategy and KPIs We aim to be the best at what we do  not just from a customers perspective but also from that of our employees our regulator and each of our key stakeholders.
While technology and regulations have changed credit markets considerably the core elements of what good lending looks like to us have not changed know our customers really well tailor our products to suit their needs deliver great customer service if they get into difficulty work with them to achieve a satisfactory solution for both borrower and lender Progress and outlook Having the right procedures policies and infrastructure can only get you so far  to deliver on each of the objectives above we must also have the right culture and ethos at all levels of our business.
Our
We may not be the biggest but we certainly want to be the best at what we do delivering great customer outcomes and longterm returns for shareholders.
John van Kuffeler Group Chief Executive Being a leader in each of our chosen segments site is a thirdparty customer review site that invites our customers to review our performance.
The rating shown is the aggregation of all scores received and is out of a maximum score of 5.
For guarantor loans the score is for TrustTwo only. were very satisfied or quite satisfied.
2017 KPI relates to period July August September October November December 2017 based on 299 responses.
2016 KPI relates to period AprilDecember 2016 based on 896 responses.
Normalised revenue less impairment as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12month average.
Normalised operating profit as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12month average.
Everyday Loans received a Gold Trusted Service certificate in February 2018 from Feefo in recognition of its high rating by customers.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 31 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview KPI measure Rationale Mediumterm target 2017 KPI Status
Evidence that our reach and quality of service is driving customer volumes.
Everyday Loans Branchbased lending 2016 39600 Loans at Home Home credit 2016 93600 Guarantor loans Guarantor loans 2016 3300
A lead indicator of future business volumes given our numbers of repeat customers and customer referrals.
Branchbased lending Branchbased lending 2016 4.85 Home credit 95% Home credit 2016 98% 97% Guarantor loans Guarantor loans 2016 4.75 Annual loan book growth By growing our loan book we can invest in reaching more customers and deliver attractive returns to shareholders.
We are also careful not to grow too quickly as this can lead to operational challenges impacting performance.
Branchbased lending 20% Branchbased lending 2016 18% 21% Home credit 20% Home credit 2016 19% 53% Guarantor loans 20% Guarantor loans 2016 19% 35% Risk adjusted margin Each of our three businesses has very different dynamics.
This measure takes into account the different revenue models as well as the different rates of impairment.
Branchbased lending 35% Branchbased lending 2016 35.1% 37.0% Home credit 95% Home credit 2016 97.3% 101.3% Guarantor loans 30% Guarantor loans 2016 31.9% 30.3% Return on assets Measured as normalised operating profit before exceptional items as a percentage of average loan book this shows we are allocating capital properly and delivering the returns required by our shareholders.
Whilst not yet at our target we made good progress in 2017 .
Branchbased lending 20% Branchbased lending 2016 17.1% 17.0% Home credit 20% Home credit 2016 6.7% 9 .1% Guarantor loans 20% Guarantor loans 2016 8.5% 13.4% Green Already achieving mediumterm target Amber Ontrack to achieve mediumterm target Red Not yet ontrack to meet mediumterm target NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 32
Our strategy and KPIs continued The nature of our business means that other than the loans we make to customers our core assets tend to be intangible in nature and include things such as distribution networks our people our technology and our brands.
In 2017 we continued to invest in a number of key areas Branchbased lending  12 new branches Home credit  22 new offices Guarantor loans  acquisition of George Banco Progress and outlook 2017 saw us invest significant sums in our distribution networks with 34 new locations and over 650 additional staff and selfemployed agents.
The acquisition of George Banco in August 2017 positioned us as the clear number two in the UKs guarantor loans market.
The investment made in 2017 will help to drive our performance in 2018 that will also benefit from the opening of a further 12 new Everyday Loans branches and additional webbased applications in our home credit businesses.
In guarantor loans our main focus will be on integrating our two brands onto a single loan management platform.
We are determined to sustain our strong position in each of our chosen segments and continue to invest in our networks people technology and brands.
Nick Teunon Chief Financial Officer Investing in our core assets Everyday Loans opened its Kings Heath branch in March 2018.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 33 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview KPI measure Rationale Mediumterm target 2017 KPI Status Number of branchesoffices By increasing our geographic coverage we can be closer to customers.
Branchbased lending Home credit Branchbased lending 2016 41 Home credit 2016 47 People turnover We aim to keep this within industry norms by offering competitive financial rewards and creating environments where people enjoy their work.
The increase for guarantor loans in 2017 was due to the merger with George Banco.
Branchbased lending 15% Branchbased lending 2016 15% 19% Home credit 5% Home credit 2016 2% 3% Guarantor loans 15% Guarantor loans 2016 16% 37% % of loans booked in the year to new customers We need to continue to attract new customers as well as look after existing ones if we are to succeed.
Branchbased lending 6570% Branchbased lending 2016 67% 70% Home credit 1520% Home credit 2016 24% 26% Guarantor loans 6570% Guarantor loans 2016 80% 71% Average monthly turnover of selfemployed agents excluding vacancies monthly leavers as a % of total number of agents.
Proportion of loans booked in a year to new or previous borrowers i. excluding existing borrowers.
Green Already achieving mediumterm target Amber Ontrack to achieve mediumterm target Red Not yet ontrack to meet mediumterm target NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 34
Our strategy and KPIs continued Doing the right thing is one of our core behaviours that emerged from a series of culture workshops that we held across the Group in 2017.
However this philosophy goes much deeper than just our customerfacing activities  it also applies whenever we interact with any of our key stakeholders.
We believe that staff engagement is a powerful measure of how we are conducting ourselves as a business.
Our KPIs are designed to help us measure our performance so that we can identify areas of potential risk and determine whether or not our working practices can be improved or need to change.
Being responsible lies at the heart of our business strategy.
Not just because it is the right thing to do but also because it makes good business sense.
Heather McGregor Chair Risk Committee Acting responsibly NSF is a supporter of Loan Smart a charity established to help consumers spot potential loan sharks and offering guidance on where to get debtrelated advice.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 35 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview KPI measure Rationale Mediumterm target 2017 KPI Status Impairment as a % of revenue Lending is easy but lending profitably is more difficult  this measure helps us balance annual loan book growth and shortterm profitability.
Grow too quickly or lend when you shouldnt and impairment will increase to unacceptable levels.
Note that these targets will change following the adoption of IFRS 9 see Financial Review on page 39.
Branchbased lending 2025% Branchbased lending 2016 21.0% 19 .1% Home credit 3035% Home credit 2016 36.3% 31.1% Guarantor loans 1317% Guarantor loans 2016 14.8% 15.3% Number of FOS complaints upheld as a % of total number of loans made Whilst focused on delivering great customer outcomes we dont get everything right all of the time.
Careful monitoring of all complaints shines a light on areas of our service that need to improve.
Branchbased lending 1% Branchbased lending 0.1% Home credit 1% Home credit 0.0% Guarantor loans 1% Guarantor loans 0.0% % of workforce engaged in pro bono activity across the
The significant volume of change during 2017 meant that our plan to introduce a Groupwide pro bono scheme was delayed until 2018.
We plan to provide an update on progress in future reports.
1015% in the previous 12 months na
With over 750 staff and their importance in helping us to deliver a great service engagement is critical and without it we will not succeed.
Branchbased lending 70% Branchbased lending 2016 na 71% Home credit 75% Home credit 89% Guarantor loans na Guarantor loans na na
In 2017 the Group adopted a formal charity policy to provide financial support for debtrelated as well as other charities.
Our chosen charities included National Debtline run by The Money Advice Trust Loan Smart Great Ormond Street Hospital and Cancer Research.
Percentage of staff that scored at least 4 out of 5 in response to the question I am satisfied working at Everyday Loans  sample of 217 responses in November 2017.
Percentage of respondents scoring 4 out of 5 or higher in response to the question I enjoy coming to work  based on 203 responses in Q4 2017.
No survey has yet been conducted since acquiring George Banco in August 2017.
Green Already achieving mediumterm target Amber Ontrack to achieve mediumterm target Red Not yet ontrack to meet mediumterm target NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 36 Principal risks Riskdefinition Mitigation Change in 2017
Conduct
Inappropriate or substandard behaviour by the Groups representatives.
A strong culture committed to doing the right thing and delivering great outcomes for customers Extensive training Close and active monitoring of customer complaints Balanced incentive programme Clear policies and procedures including whistleblowing Diligent application of Three Lines of Defence policies procedures and quality assurance in customerfacing roles compliance and conduct assurance and internal audit.
During 2017 we appointed new leaders for each of our three business divisions.
Each are highly experienced in consumer finance and are passionate about ensuring that we have the right culture and customer focus.
In branchbased lending and guarantor loans we have appointed a new Chief Risk Officer with many years experience in consumer finance and have invested further resources in extending our risk and compliance function.
In home credit we have rolledout handheld technology so that the entire customer application process can be conducted digitally providing a full audit trail of all stages of the lending process.
Regulation
All licensed firms are subject to a rigorous licensing process as well as strict ongoing supervision by the
Noncompliance can result in fines or loss of approvals to operate.
Key regulatory developments over the past year are summarised on page 28.
Active engagement with the FCA as well as industry peers Diligent monitoringassessment of all regulations both inhouse as well as through external advisers An active regulatory affairs programme identifying and addressing the concerns of key stakeholders A continuous process of investment quality assurance and internal audit reviews ensures we meet all of our regulatory obligations All of the Groups business divisions have now received full authorisation from the FCA.
While there appear to be no regulatory concerns regarding branchbased lending or guarantor loans the FCA is continuing to examine the home credit industry and the regulatory framework is always subject to change.
Decreased
Increased
Unchanged
A robust approach to risk management The Group faces a number of potential risks that could have a material impact on its performance and that might cause actual results to differ materially from both expected and historic results.
The table below and overleaf highlights each of the principal risks identified by the Board what we are doing to manage them whether the risk has increased decreased or stayed the same over the past year and where there has been a change a brief explanation as to why the change has occurred.
For further information on our approach to risk please see the Risk Committee report on page 64.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 37 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report Riskdefinition Mitigation Change in 2017
Credit
Any marked increase in the rates of impairments or defaults by the Groups customers could impact the performance of the Group.
Detailed weekly and monthly management information on historic and expected future credit performance Continuous process of review and refinement of each businesss credit scorecard and lending criteria Regular credit committee reviews of policies and outcomes The levels of impairment have either remained broadly flat or reduced in each of our three business divisions in 2017 .
Business strategy A failure to execute and integrate acquisitions including technology or to execute the Groups strategy as planned may increase the risk of financial loss.
Detailed due diligence is completed on all acquisitions with advice from specialists on legal financial and regulatory aspects Detailed review of weekly and monthly management information on operating performance Careful monitoring of market dynamics competitor behaviour and performance Annual review of all aspects of the Groups strategy New leadership at all three businesses has been followed by strong loan book growth and falling rates of impairment.
Everyday Loans represented c.60% of the Groups total loan book in 2017 before fair value adjustments and opened 12 new branches in 2017 as planned and on schedule.
Loans at Home represented 21% of the Groups total loan book in 2017 .
While the decision to capitalise on the restructuring of a major competitor incurred 5.3m of additional cost it also delivered loan book growth of 53%.
George Banco was acquired on 17 August 2017 and together with TrustTwo represented c.19% of the Groups total loan book in 2017 before fair value adjustments.
It has performed as expected since being acquired.
No other acquisitions were made in 2017 .
Operational
Key areas of risk for the Group include IT failure integration of George Banco and TrustTwo onto a single technology platform fraud changes in the selfemployed status of home credit agents threats to agent safety failure to recruit and retain key staff underperformance by key staff disaster recovery IT policies are in place to mitigate risk including disaster recovery plans A detailed integration plan has been developed and is now being executed to move George Banco onto the existing Everyday Loans including TrustTwo loan management platform Policies and procedures are in place to identify investigate and report fraud Careful monitoring with our advisers of the tax status of home credit agents Agents receive regular training about personal safety and any incident is carefully monitored to inform policy and procedures A series of recruitment retention and incentive programmes are already in place Members of the NSF management team sit on and attend all board meetings of the operating subsidiaries Technology integrations can be complex and can take longer than expected.
The Government has announced a series of consultations into working practices in the UK including one on employment status.
As a result the employment status of selfemployed workers for a number of UK business models may change.
While agentrelated incidents are rare we are never complacent and continue to ensure that agents follow procedures to ensure they remain safe.
A tight span of control ensures we retain appropriate oversight of all areas of our home credit business.
The Group is recruiting the people that it needs to execute its plans and while there is a degree of turnover  it is within the expected levels of tolerance.
Cyber risk The Group may suffer data loss or be subject to an unauthorised change that causes a security issue data or systems abuse cyberattack or denial of service to any of the Groups systems.
The Group has dedicated internal teams supported by external providers that monitor and assess such risks Divisional and Group Risk Committees oversee cyber risks including monitoring and crisis management plans in line with industry best practice Internal audit and external third party review of cyber security status across all businesses Increased connectivity in the workplace coupled with the increasing importance of data and data analytics in operating and managing consumer finance businesses means that this risk has been identified separately from operational risk.
Many recent examples of where such risks have become reality means that the Group now views such risks as being greater than previously.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 38 Riskdefinition Mitigation Change in 2017
Liquidity
The Group may not be able to meet its financial obligations because it is unable to borrow to fund lending by its operating businesses has failed to renewreplace existing debt facilities as they become payable cannot fund growth and further acquisitions The Groups shortterm loans to customers provide a natural hedge against mediumterm borrowings The Group successfully refinanced all of its bank facilities in August 2017 and raised additional longterm debt funding from a range of different providers The new 225m loan facility is for six years and is supplemented by a 35m revolving credit facility Cash and covenant forecasting is conducted on a monthly basis as part of the regular management reporting exercise With net debt of c.
197m and total debt facilities of 260m at 31 December 2017  the Group has sufficient headroom on its existing facilities to fund the Groups growth plans in 2018.
Reputational
Lending money at high rates of interest means that consumer finance can attract a higher level of media and political scrutiny than certain other business sectors.
Whilst the Group is committed to meeting all of its regulatory obligations including the delivery of positive customer outcomes its reputation may become tarnished by the activities of other businesses or the practices of others.
This in turn could have an impact on the Group s operational or financial performance.
As a PLC listed on the main market of the London Stock Exchange the Group is highly transparent with full disclosure regarding its business and financial performance The Group conducts an active regulatory affairs programme to ensure that all stakeholders not just the providers of capital have an accurate picture of what the Group is trying to achieve our ethos culture and business strategy Whilst a relatively new company we have embarked upon a Groupwide exercise to ensure that what we say is what we do and that our processes and procedures are consistent with our desired culture values and behaviours see Culture and stakeholder management on pages 50 to 53 We continue to engage actively with all of our key stakeholders including the FCA Members of Parliament debtrelated charities other regulators journalists thinktanks investors and debtproviders.
Through this process of engagement we aim to demonstrate that not all consumer finance companies are the same  we explain why we are different and why we believe that NSF stands out from competitors.
However we remain vigilant always ensuring that our reputation is both nurtured and protected.
Principal risks continued NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 39 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report 2017 Financial review Strong performance in the year Context for results The Group acquired George Banco on 17 August 2017 Everyday Loans including TrustTwo on 13 April 2016 and Loansathome4u now Loans at Home on 4 August 2015.
The 2016 and 2017 reported results include fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items relating to the acquisitions.
Normalised results are presented to demonstrate Group performance before these items.
Given the unusual circumstances that prevailed in the home credit market during 2017 we have broken out the temporary additional commission paid to newly signedup agents during 2017.
Normalised figures are before fair value adjustments the amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
Group 2017 full year results The reported Group results for the year ended 31 December 2017 include a full period of Everyday Loans including TrustTwo that was acquired on 13 April 2016 and approximately four and a half months performance of George Banco that was acquired on 17 August 2017.
The prior year reported figure included approximately eight months performance from Everyday Loans including TrustTwo.
Nick Teunon Chief Financial Officer Financial summary Year ended 31 December 2017
Temporary additional commission
Fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items
Revenue 119756  119756 11985 107771 Other operating income 1926  1926  1926 Impairments 28795  28795 Admin expenses 66019 3184 69203 7897 77100 Operating profit 26868 3184 23684 19882 3802 Exceptional items    6342 6342 Profit loss before interest and tax 26868 3184 23684 26224 2540 Finance cost 10481  10481 Profit loss before tax 16387 3184 13203 26224 13021 Taxation 2926 613 2313 4999 2686 Profit loss after tax 13461 2571 10890 21225 10335 Earnings loss per share Dividend per share 2.20p 1 When a new home credit agent agrees to provide lending and collection services to the Group we may decide to offer a limited period of additional commission whilst the agent builds up a critical mass of active loan customers.
2 Adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
3 Basic and diluted earnings loss per share based on the weighted average number of shares in issue of 316901254 2016 307315588.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 40 Normalised revenue was 119.8m 2016 81.1m reflecting just over four months contribution from George Banco that was acquired on 17 August 2017 and a full period of Everyday Loans including
Figures for the prior year included just eight months of Everyday Loans including TrustTwo.
Normalised operating profit before temporary additional commission of 3.2m 2016 1.8m was up 72% to 26.9m 2016 After deducting these costs normalised operating profit was up 71% to 23.7m 2016 13.8m.
As a result the reported operating profit was 3.8m 2016 loss of 5.2m.
Exceptional costs of 6.3m 2016 0.6m included the writeoff of previously capitalised fees incurred in connection with the Groups previous debt raising as well as MandArelated costs.
Finance costs increased to 10.5m 2016 3.5m due to the increased levels and higher cost of borrowing under the Groups new debt arrangements resulting in a reported loss before tax of 13.0m 2016 loss of 9.3m.
A tax credit of 2.7m 2016 1.3m meant that the loss after tax was 10.3m 2016 8.0m equating to a reported loss per share of 3.26p 2016 loss per share of 2.60p.
A more detailed review of each of the operating businesses is outlined in the divisional overview.
Pro forma normalised divisional results In order to set out clearly the underlying performance of the Group the table below provides an analysis of the normalised results for the Group for the 12month period to 31 December 2017.
We have also reproduced the pro forma normalised results for the 12 months to 31 December 2016.
The 2016 pro forma results include Everyday Loans and TrustTwo which were acquired on 13 April 2016 for the 12 months ended 31 December 2016.
Neither the 2017 or 2016 pro forma results include any contribution from George Banco prior to its acquisition on 17 August 2017.
Year ended 31 December 2016
Temporary additional commission
Fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items
Revenue 81099  81099 8342 72757 Other operating income 450  450  450 Impairments 23651  23651  23651 Admin expenses 42303 1771 44074 10714 54788 Operating profit loss 15595 1771 13824 19056 5232 Exceptional items    626 626 Profit loss before interest and tax 15595 1771 13824 19682 5858 Finance cost 3484  3484  3484 Profit loss before tax 12111 1771 10340 19682 9342 Taxation 2619 341 2278 3622 1344 Profit loss after tax 9492 1430 8062 16060 7998 Earnings loss per share Dividend per share 1.20p 1.20p 2017 Financial review continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 41 4 Assuming Everyday Loans including TrustTwo was acquired on 1 January 2016 and adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Branchbased lending Home credit Guarantor loans Central costs NSF plc normalised Revenue 60937 50741 8078  119756 Other operating income 1926    1926 Impairments 11654 15776 1365 Revenue less impairments 51209 34965 6713  92887 Admin expenses 28555 28679 3965 4820 66019 Temporary additional commission Operating profit 22654 3102 2748 4820 23684 Finance cost 7051 1299 2029 102 10481 Profit before tax 15603 1803 719 4922 13203 Taxation 3146 88 130 875 Profit after tax 12457 1891 589 4047 10890 Normalised earnings per share 3.44p Dividend per share Year ended 31 December 2016 Pro forma normalised
Home credit Guarantor loans Central costs NSF plc Pro forma normalised Revenue 50088 42170 2416  94674 Other operating income 450    450 Impairments 10484 15313 358  26155 Revenue less impairments 40054 26857 2058  68969 Admin expenses 20631 23229 1402 3257 48519 Temporary additional commission  1771   1771 Operating profit 19423 1857 656 3257 18679 Finance cost 4720 323 316 264 5623 Profit before tax 14703 1534 340 3521 13056 Taxation 2941 54 68 374 2688 Profit after tax 11762 1480 272 3147 10368 Pro forma normalised earnings per share 3.37p Dividend per share 1.20p NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 42 Branchbased lending UK Market Our customers 16% Estimated compound annual growth CAGR 20112016 0.2bn 2016 receivables outstanding 1% Estimated share of the UK nonstandard consumer credit market in 2016 Typical loan size 80.7% Average APR Average income Branchbased lending Divisional overview Everyday Loans is the largest branchbased provider of unsecured loans in the UKs nonstandard finance sector.
With 53 branches across the UK the business ended 2017 with over 47000 active customers an increase of 19% over the prior year 2016 39600 and a total net loan book of 148.5m up 21% 2016 122.4m.
Having made some management changes in May 2017 the business responded with newfound pace and ambition under the leadership of Miles CresswellTurner supported by a strengthened senior management team.
As well as increasing the expectations of what could be achieved management also delivered against our key operational objectives for the year including the opening of 12 new branches and the adoption of a new management structure the introduction of eSignature and Faster Payments increasing the volume and quality of leads coming into the network and extending our product range.
Network expansion  our branch opening programme was a key source of growth in 2017 further extending our customer reach as well as increasing our capacity to deliver additional loan book growth.
By meeting our customers facetoface we are able to build a relationship and improve our understanding of their needs both of which form key elements of our underwriting process.
Where a customer is unable to attend one of our branches we may be comfortable to complete the loan by telephone.
However we have no plans to shift away from using our branch network that has proven its ability to deliver strong revenue growth whilst at the same time maintaining a tight control on impairment.
Operational improvements  the introduction of eSignature and Faster Payments during 2017 helped us improve our service to customers through more timely execution.
Having strengthened the senior management team we also introduced a new structure for the branch network with six new area managers that are responsible for between two and four branches.
This has improved knowledge across the network and increased the sharing of best practice both of which have contributed to increased conversion and lower impairment.
Increased volumes  growth is a function of the number and quality of the leads we receive and our ability to convert those leads into loans.
By expanding our capacity with 12 more branches during the year we were able to process more leads from financial brokers through direct marketing and also from our existing customers.
In 2017 we processed over 1 million leads 2016 860000 and converted these into 32668 loans 2016 26535 with an improvement in conversion from new borrowers from 1.97% in 2016 to 2.23% in 2017.
New products  other drivers of growth include the introduction of new products and in 2017 loan volumes of our new Selfy loan continued to build on the back of an increased number of applications.
The selfemployed represent around 15% of the total UK workforce and we plan to grow lending volumes significantly to this large and growing segment of the UK economy.
Our new 12month loan product was launched in August 2017 and provides branches with an opportunity to offer new customers a starter loan that is typically smaller in size and so allows the customer to prove their ability to manage their repayments before moving on to a larger longerterm loan.
The success of this new product contributed to a small reduction in average loan size to 3584 2016 3842.
1 LEK  Executive Insights Volume XVIII April 2016 and Company estimates.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 43 Overview Strategic Report
Normalised revenue was up 64% to 60.9m 2016 37.1m reflecting strong loan book growth as well as the inclusion of Everyday Loans for a full period.
Fair value adjustments increased to 11.9m 2016 7.9m reflecting a full period of the fair value unwind of the acquired loan portfolio and resulted in reported revenue of 49.1m 2016 29.2m.
Impairments increased to 11.7m 2016 8.1m but fell as a percentage of revenue reflecting our continued focus on quality underwriting and collections.
Administrative expenses increased to 47% of normalised revenue 2016 40% reflecting the substantial investment in new branch openings together with the associated costs of recruitment and training.
We added 77 new staff during the year taking the total to 307 an increase of 33% versus the prior year.
As a result administration costs increased to 28.6m 2016 14.7m and the net impact of all of these movements was that normalised operating profit increased by 53% to 22.7m 2016 14.8m.
Exceptional costs of 5.3m 2016 nil related to the refinancing of the Everyday Loans bank facilities and restructuring costs.
Finance costs increased to 7.1m 2016 2.7m reflecting the growth in the loan book as well as the increased average cost of the Groups new debt arrangements that were put in place in August 2017.
As a result normalised profit before tax increased by 29% to 15.6m 2016 12.1m.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Fair value adjustments and exceptional items
Revenue 60937 11874 49063 Other operating income 1926  1926 Impairments 11654  11654 Revenue less impairments 51209 11874 39335 Admin expenses 28555  28555 Operating profit 22654 11874 10780 Exceptional items 5290 5290 Profit before interest and tax 22654 17164 5490 Finance cost 7051 Profit before tax 15603 17164 1561 Taxation 3146 3274 128 Profit after tax 12457 13890 1433 Year ended 31 December 2016
Fair value adjustments and exceptional items
Revenue 37080 7916 29164 Other operating income 450  450 Impairments 8095  8095 Revenue less impairments 29435 7916 21519 Admin expenses 14671  14671 Operating profit 14764 7916 6848 Exceptional items Profit before interest and tax 14764 7916 6848 Finance cost 2699  2699 Profit before tax 12065 7916 4149 Taxation 2540 1504 1036 Profit after tax 9525 6412 3113 5 Reported figures adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments.
Key performance indicators A modest increase in revenue yield to 45.8% 2016 44.2% reflected a small shift in business mix together with the flowthrough effect of pricing changes from the previous trading period.
Impairments at 19.1% of revenue 2016 21.0% reflected the quality of our underwriting process as well as our continued focus on delinquency.
The net result was that the risk adjusted margin increased to 37.0% 2016 35.1%.
Operating profit margin fell slightly to 37.2% 2016 38.8% reflecting the significant investment in new branches during the year however the return on assets was broadly unchanged at 17.0% 2016 17.1%.
Year ended 31 December Key Performance Indicators
Normalised
Number of branches 53 41 Period end customer numbers 000 47.0 39.6 Period end loan book m Average loan book m Revenue yield % Risk adjusted margin % Impairmentsrevenue % 19.1 21.0 Impairmentaverage loan book % 8.8 8.8 Operating profit margin % 37.2 38.8 Return on asset % 6 Assuming Everyday Loans was acquired on 1 January 2016 and adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments.
7 Excluding fair value adjustments.
8 Excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
9 Revenue as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
10 Revenue less impairments as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
Operating profit as a percentage of average loan book excluding fair value adjustments 12 month average.
Plans for 2018 We remain focused on driving loan book growth through increased volumes and better conversion all whilst maintaining a tight control on impairment.
This will be underpinned by the following initiatives in 2018 Branch openings  we are ontrack to open a further 12 locations in the first half of 2018 and have already opened new branches in Dudley Kings Heath and Bootle.
Ten out of the twelve new branch managers are internal promotions helping to mitigate operational risk when opening a number of branches in a short space of time.
The 37 new staff required were recruited in January 2018 and underwent an intensive training programme before being deployed across the network and ahead of joining their new branches.
As previously announced we expect this expansion to incur an additional 3m of costs in 2018 including the costs of new staff training and premises.
Active lead management by channel  with over one million leads processed in 2017 we are actively reviewing all acquisition channels in order to ensure we maintain lead quality as well as volume and also manage carefully our customer acquisition costs.
Product development  we remain optimistic about our new Selfy and 12month products and continue to explore the potential for additional loan products that can be tailored to our customers circumstances.
Extending our relationship with customers  as well as attracting new customers every month we also plan to improve our retention of existing customers especially those that have performed well.
With an established relationship in place such customers tend to be lower risk and so can attract lower APRs meaning we can improve our pricing for a better customer outcome.
Building on the momentum achieved in 2017 we plan to continue to grow our loan book at 20% or more and fully expect to achieve our target of a 20% return on assets in due course.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 44 Home credit Divisional overview Loans at Home received its full permissions from the FCA in May 2017 and is the third largest home credit business in the UK with over 104000 customers 2016 93600 and a net loan book at 31 December 2017 of 51.2m an increase of 53% over the prior year 2016 33.4m.
The announcement of a major restructuring at the market leader in February 2017 prompted a large number of highly experienced agents and staff to approach us keen to continue working in home credit but preferring our operating model of a network of self employed agents rather than employed customer experience managers.
Recognising the significant opportunity this presented we quickly established a rigorous onboarding process including the development of an individual business plan for each agent which projected their expected weekly performance from their anticipated start date until the end of 2017.
Once agreed we committed to provide them with temporary additional commission to help support them financially as they built up their customer rounds over the coming months.
Having added 229 agents in the first half of 2017 by 31 December 2017 this had increased to 442 and our total number of agents had increased to 1005 an increase of 28% 2016 785.
To accommodate this expansion we opened 22 new offices and added over 100 staff at a variety of levels including 55 new business managers and 23 new area managers thereby maintaining an effective span of control with six agents per business manager and three business managers per area manager.
While this required a sizeable investment in infrastructure and temporary additional commission totalling 5.3m it also delivered substantial loan book growth and improved the quality of our customer base  at 31 December 2017 the number of quality customers who had paid 70% or more of their due payments over the previous 13 weeks had increased to 66000 or 64% of the total 2016 53%.
We rolledout our collections app for agents in February 2017 and our lending app became fully operational during the fourth quarter of 2017.
Both have been wellreceived by agents removing the need for a paperbased process.
They also provide managers with realtime performance data by customer and agent so that any issues can be quickly identified and acted upon.
An additional advantage is that we now have a digital audit trail of lending and collecting and can easily perform quality assurance reviews on individual agents and customers.
1 FCA HighCost Credit Review Technical Annex 1.
2 LEK  Executive Insights Volume XVIII April 2016 and Company estimates.
3 FCA Sector Views 2017.
Home credit market UK Market UK Customers Number of originations 1.1bn 2016 receivables outstanding Number of licensed firms Number of customers 5% Estimated share of the UK nonstandard consumer credit market in 2016 Typical loan size 5% of home credit borrowers have a mortgage 17500p.
Average income 1 Corporate Governance Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 45 Overview Strategic Report
While 2017 normalised revenue of 50.7m 2016 42.2m was the same as reported revenue in 2016 reported revenue was 0.4m lower than the normalised figure due to the final unwinding of the fair value adjustment made to the carrying value of the loan book at acquisition in 2015.
Capitalising upon the considerable opportunity presented by the restructuring of a major competitor we invested a total of 5.3m during the year comprising 3.2m in temporary agent commission 2016 1.8m and an additional 2.1m of additional staff training and premises costs 2016 nil.
Normalised operating profit before temporary additional commission increased by 75% to 6.3m 2016 The new agents that joined our network received temporary additional commission while they built up their customer numbers and the level of income earned through our normal commission structure.
The exceptional number of new agents added in 2017 meant that the total amount of additional commission was considerably higher than had been expected at the start of the year.
Normalised operating profit after these costs was 3.1m 2016 1.9m.
Exceptional costs of 0.5m related to the refinancing of the Loans at Home bank facility.
Finance costs increased to 1.3m 2016 0.3m reflecting the strong loan book growth as well as the increased cost of funds of the Groups new longterm debt arrangements.
Before 3.2m of temporary additional commission 2016 1.8m profit before interest and tax increased to 6.3m 2016 3.6m.
After deducting these costs normalised profit before tax was up 20% to 1.8m 2016 1.5m.
Year ended 31 December 2017
Temporary additional commission
Fair value adjustments and exceptional items
Revenue 50741  50741  50741 Impairments 15776  15776 Revenue less impairments 34965  34965  34965 Admin expenses 28679 3184 31863 Operating profit 6286 3184 3102  3102 Exceptional items Profit before interest and tax 6286 3184 3102 467 2635 Finance cost 1299  1299 Profit before tax 4987 3184 1803 467 1336 Taxation 525 Profit after tax 4462 2571 1891 376 1515 Period ended 31 December 2016
Temporary additional commission
Fair value adjustments and exceptional items
Revenue 42170  42170 426 41744 Impairments 15313  15313  15313 Revenue less impairments 26857  26857 426 26431 Admin expenses 23229 1771 25000  23229 Operating profitloss 3628 1771 1857 426 1431 Exceptional items Profit before interest and tax 3628 1771 1857 426 1431 Finance cost 323  323  323 Profitloss before tax 3305 1771 1534 426 1108 Taxation 395 341 54 81 27 Profitloss after tax 2910 1430 1480 345 1135 12 Reported figures adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 46 Home credit continued Divisional overview Key performance indicators The significant growth in our agent network had a knockon effect on all of our KPIs.
The increased number of customers taking out larger longerterm loans meant that revenue yield reduced slightly to 147%.
However the increased quality of our loan book and strong collections performance of the recently joined agents is reflected in the marked reduction in impairment that fell to 31.1% of revenue 2016 36.3% in line with our previous guidance.
Operating profit margins of 6.1% 2016 4.4% reflect the 5.3m additional investment 3.2m of temporary additional commission and 2.1m of other expansion related costs made in 2017.
Before these expenses operating margin was 16.6% 2016 8.6% and return on asset was 24.4% 2016 13.1%.
Year ended 31 December Key Performance Indicators
Normalised
Period end agent numbers 1005 785 Period end number of offices 69 47 Period end customer numbers 000 104.1 93.6 Period end loan book m 51.2 33.4 Average loan book m 34.5 27.6 Revenue yield % 147.0 152.8 Risk adjusted margin % 101.3 97.3 Impairmentsrevenue % 31.1 36.3 Impairmentaverage loan book % 45.7 55.5 Operating profit margin % 6.1 4.4 Return on asset % 9.1 6.7 13 All definitions are as per above.
Plans for 2018 Having invested in our infrastructure and grown our net loan book by 53% our network of selfemployed agents by 28% and our number of staff by 26% in 2017 we now have an excellent platform to deliver further growth in 2018 albeit at a more measured pace than in 2017.
With a strong management team in place we will seek to bed in all of the changes made over the past 12 months and in particular we will focus on Maintaining our focus on delivering great outcomes for our customers  if we fall short on this objective then we will not be able to grow and sustain our business.
Completing the integration of recently joined agents  as each of our new agents reaches their target number of customers so we can then remove the need for temporary additional commission.
Augmenting our handheld technology further  we will continue to develop new applications for agents in the field and additional management information to help increase operational efficiency.
Maintaining a tight span of control  whilst new technology and improved management information might present an opportunity to relax the current spans of control at some point in the future we plan to maintain these at current levels in 2018 whilst we continue to grow.
Selectively expanding our network  we will look to add more agents and field staff but only on a highly selective basis to ensure that any additions are profitable in 2018.
Continuing to improve the quality of our customer base  whilst we believe that there remains a significant opportunity for loan book growth we are determined that this will not be at the expense of quality.
We will continue to improve our underwriting and collections performance through the further deployment of behavioural scoring as well as through access to thirdparty datasets as they become available.
Each of these initiatives should help us to continue to drive loan book growth albeit at a slower pace than in 2017  and we still plan to achieve 20% per annum while maintaining a tight grip on impairment.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 47 Strategic Report Overview Guarantor loans The acquisition of George Banco on 17 August 2017 transformed our guarantor loans business that is now the clear number two in the UK market.
Marc Howells the CEO of George Banco was appointed Managing Director of the newly named Guarantor Loans Division that now has a clearly defined management structure and in its first few months as a combined business has delivered strong growth in loan book revenue and profit.
By retaining both the TrustTwo and George Banco brands we are able to address complementary segments of the market offering different customer journeys through different channels but with a common underwriting approach.
While TrustTwo is focused on price comparison websites and the direct channel George Banco specialises in capturing leads from the financial broker community.
We announced our receipt of full authorisation from the FCA for George Banco on 28 September 2017 and completed our 100day plan for the enlarged business on schedule.
Having been held back by funding constraints prior to acquisition George Banco quickly returned to its previous levels of lending and TrustTwo responded positively to the change of leadership.
As a result the division reached record volumes in November and December 2017 and risk adjusted margin was over 30%.
Despite growing quicklysitesite
The reported results for 2017 include a full period of TrustTwo and four and a half months of George Banco that was acquired on 17 August 2017.
The figures for 2016 comprise TrustTwo only from its acquisition on 13 April 2016 and there were no differences between normalised and reported results in 2016.
As at 31 December 2017 the division had a net loan book of 48.2m 2016 8.8m.
The significant contribution from George Banco meant that normalised revenue increased to 8.1m 2016 1.8m and normalised operating profit to 2.7m 2016 0.5m.
Increased finance costs of 2.0m 2016 0.2m reflected both the strong loan book growth in the year as well as the terms of the new debt arrangements that were put in place at the time of the George Banco acquisition.
As a result normalised profit before tax more than doubled to 0.7m 2016 0.3m.
Exceptional items of 0.2m 2016 nil comprised stamp duty on the purchase of George Banco and reorganisation costs post completion with the result that reported profit before tax was up 33% to 0.4m 2016 0.3m.
Guarantor loans market UK Market UK Customers 34% Estimated CAGR 0.5bn 2016 receivables outstanding 3% Estimated share of the UK nonstandard consumer credit market in 2016 Typical loan size 26100p.
Average income 1 LEK  Executive Insights Volume XVIII April 2016 and Company estimates.
2 FCA HighCost Credit Review Technical Annex 1.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 48 Year ended 31 December
Fair value adjustments and exceptional items
Reported
Revenue 8078 111 7967 1849 Impairments 1365 1365 243 Revenue less cost of sales 6713 111 6602 1606 Admin expenses 3965 3965 1146 Operating profit 2748 111 2637 460 Exceptional items Profit before interest and tax 2748 341 2407 460 Finance cost 2029 2029 198 Profit before tax 719 Taxation 130 65 Profit after tax 589 14 Reported figures adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments and exceptional items.
Key performance indicators All of the KPIs were transformed by the acquisition of George
The 2017 KPIs include George Banco for a full 12 months while the 2016 KPIs only reflect 12 months of TrustTwo emphasising the significant impact of George Banco on the division.
In particular the differential in pricing between George Banco and TrustTwo lifted revenue yield and also drove risk adjusted margin which was over 30% in 2017.
Rates of impairment remained within our target range and while return on asset is below our target of 20% we remain confident that this can be reached as the business continues to grow strongly.
Year ended 31 December Key Performance Indicators
Normalised
Period end customer numbers 000 17.4 3.3 Period end loan book m 48.2 8.8 Average loan book m 40.4 7.7 Revenue yield % 35.8 31.9 Risk adjusted margin % 30.3 26.7 Impairmentrevenue % 15.3 14.8 Impairmentaverage loan book % 5.5 4.6 Operating profit margin % 37.3 27.2 Return on asset % 13.4 8.5 15 2016 KPIs assume TrustTwo was acquired on 1 January 2016.
2017 KPIs assume George Banco was acquired on 1 January 2017.
Revenue for the full year was 14.5m 2016 2.4m and operating profit was 5.4m 20160.8m.
All definitions are as per above.
Plans for 2018 There are a number of initiatives underway for 2018 including Move to a single loan management platform  this significant project is our number one priority in 2018.
The project is well underway and we expect it to be completed before the end of the current year.
Benefits include improved management information reduced reliance on third parties and scale economies.
Development of a more tailored customer journey  our objective is to be able to identify the best customer journey for an individual applicant depending upon a range of criteria including size of loan asked for income credit score and application channel.
We are developing this capability in parallel with our move to a single loan management platform.
Maintain a wellbalanced channel mix  whilst keen to capitalise on our strengths in order to drive down customer acquisition costs we will also continue to diversify our acquisition channels and seek to increase significantly the volume of branch referrals from Everyday Loans as this represents a unique source of high quality traffic for the division.
Common underwriting approach  we are moving to a unified approach one that will enable more dynamic riskbased pricing and which should expand our customer reach.
Harmonised collections  where we have been unable to contact or take a payment from a customer for some time we plan to move such loans into a centralised collections function one that pools the divisions expertise and ensures a consistent approach and to freeup capacity.
We are excited about the prospects for our Guarantor Loans Division and given our strong position in the market we remain confident of being able to meet our target of 20% annual loan book growth and a 20% return on assets.
Guarantor loans continued Divisional overview NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 49 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Strategic Report Overview Central costs Year ended 31 December 2017
Amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items
Revenue
Admin expenses 4820 7897 12717 Operating loss 4820 7897 12717 Exceptional items Loss before interest and tax 4820 8252 13072 Finance cost 102 Loss before tax 4922 8252 13174 Taxation 875 1569 2444 Loss after tax 4047 6683 10730 16 Adjusted to exclude the amortisation of acquired intangibles related to the acquisition of Loans at Home Everyday Loans George Banco and exceptional items.
Period ended 31 December 2016
Amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items
Revenue
Admin expenses 3257 10714 13971 Operating loss 3257 10714 13971 Exceptional items  626 626 Loss before interest and tax 3257 11340 14597 Finance cost 264  264 Loss before tax 3521 11340 14861 Taxation 374 2037 2411 Loss after tax 3147 9303 12450 17 Adjusted to exclude the amortisation of acquired intangibles related to the acquisition of Loans at Home and Everyday Loans and exceptional items.
Normalised administrative expenses increased to 4.8m 2016 3.3m reflecting growth in the scale of the Group and includes the accrual of bonus payments to Executive Directors none having been paid in 2016 and a full year of costs relating to certain head office staff who were recruited during 2016.
The amortisation of acquired intangible assets fell to 7.9m 2016 10.7m reflecting a reduced charge for Loans at Home a full period of amortisation for Everyday Loans and a small charge relating to George Banco.
Finance costs of 0.1m 2016 0.3m related to the amortisation of fees capitalised on the prior year fundraising while the 0.4m exceptional charge comprised acquisition costs together with the writeoff of the remaining balance of capitalised fees referred to above.
The prior year exceptional charge of 0.6m related to stamp duty paid on the acquisition of Everyday Loans.
Stamp duty on the acquisition of George Banco in the current year is included in exceptional costs of Everyday Loans.
IFRS 9 The International Accounting Standard Boards introduction of a new accounting standard covering financial instruments became effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
This standard replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
The new standard requires that lenders i provide for the Expected Credit Loss ECL from performing assets over the following year and ii provide for the ECL over the life of the asset where that asset has seen a significant deterioration in credit risk.
As a result whilst the underlying cash flows from the asset are unchanged IFRS 9 will have the effect of bringing forward provisions into earlier accounting periods.
This will result in a oneoff adjustment to receivables deferred tax and reserves on adoption and will result in delayed recognition of profits.
To assist analysts and investors and in order to provide some illustrative guidance on the potential impact on future reporting periods set out below is an estimate of the impact on the closing balance sheet for 2017 and the potential impact on the full year income statement in 2017 assuming IFRS 9 had been adopted for the full accounting period ending 31 December 2017.
2017 IFRS 9 income statement IAS 39 IFRS 9 adjustment IFRS 9 Normalised operating profit Branchbased lending 22.7 1.3 21.4 Home credit 6.3 4.4 1.9 Guarantor loans 2.7 0.3 2.4 Central costs 4.8  4.8 Adjusted normalised operating profit 26.9 6.0 20.9 2017 IFRS 9 balance sheet IAS 39 IFRS 9 adjustment IFRS 9
Branchbased lending 148.5 1.7 146.8 Home credit 51.2 10.6 40.6 Guarantor loans 48.2 0.9 47.3 Total receivables 247.9 13.2 234.7 Net assets 233.2 10.7 222.5 18 Adjusted to exclude temporary additional commission fair value adjustments the amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
19 Adjusted to exclude fair value adjustments.
The adoption of IFRS 9 results in an unaudited reduction in receivables of 13.2m at 31 December 2017 which net of deferred tax results in an unaudited reduction in net assets of 10.7m.
Whilst the particularly strong loan book growth in home credit means that it experiences the largest adjustment to receivables net assets and earnings it is important to note that cash flow remains unchanged and IFRS 9 only changes the timing of profits made on a loan.
There will be no change to the Groups underwriting process and our scorecards will be unaffected by the change in accounting.
The ultimate profitability of a loan is the same under both IAS 39 and IFRS 9 and the cash flows and capital generation over the life of a loan remain unchanged.
The calculation of the Groups debt covenants are unaffected by IFRS 9 as they are based on accounting standards in place at the time they were set.
Principal risks Save for the addition of cyber risk the principal risks facing the Group together with the Groups risk management process in relation to these risks are unchanged from those reported in the Groups Annual Report for the period ended 31 December 2016 which is available for download at httpsite.
The principal risks are summarised on pages 36 to 38.
On behalf of the Board of Directors Nick Teunon Chief Financial Officer 28 March 2018 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 50 Culture and stakeholder management A business with strong values Our approach Our approach to culture and stakeholder management has been forged by the significant experience of the Groups Board of Directors and senior management team.
They view such an approach as being essential for longterm success and as being wholly consistent with our strategy to be a leader in each of our chosen markets see Strategy on pages 29 to 35.
Our business model see pages 22 to 23 is centred around building a strong relationship with our customers normally facetoface and this forms a key part of our overall lending process.
Providing a helping but firm hand is an ethos that is common across each of our three business divisions and we believe that by sustaining the values and behaviours that support it we will remain oncourse to deliver our goal of 20% annual loan book growth and a return of 20% on assets in each of our operating businesses.
NSF is a relatively young company but has chosen to adopt a cultural approach that is more akin to that of a much larger long established business.
The acquisitions of Everyday Loans including TrustTwo Loans at Home and George Banco were each made after extensive legal financial and operational due diligence a process that also provided valuable guidance on the cultural values and behaviours that were embedded within each organisation.
As a result the Board was comfortable that all three businesses were guided by similar principles of business ethics.
Identifying and developing our own culture has been conducted in the context of the FCAs own guidance for regulated firms regarding the cultural approach that it expects them to adopt.
We define culture as the way we do things around here and are determined that the actions of our leaders staff selfemployed agents or anyone authorised to represent one or more of our businesses reflect our desired values and behaviours.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 51 Strategic Report Overview desired target valuesbehaviours 5.
Determine desired target valuesbehaviours valuesbehaviours across each business Assess current to inuence values Identify ways behaviour to monitor cultural Establish metrics performance that hinderpromote Identify things goodbad behaviour Our cultural approach NSFs culture Before our IPO back in February 2015 we set ourselves a vision of becoming a leading participant in the UKs non standard finance sector.
Over the past three years we have made great progress towards achieving this goal.
However leadership is something that cannot just be attained and then left to drift.
It must also be sustained perhaps over many years if it is to have any real meaning and in corporate terms real value.
By fostering the right cultural values and overall business approach we plan to do both.
As a business we wholeheartedly subscribe to Peter Druckers sentiment that culture eats strategy for breakfast.
FCA guidance on cultural approach develop strong clear leadership and controls identify key risks in their strategies business models and cultures that may prevent the delivery of positive market and consumer outcomes identify appropriate steps to mitigate such risks through appropriate systems and controls including appropriate ways of using whistleblowing intelligence align strategies business models systems and controls with core values that ensure positive outcomes market and customer ensure employee behaviours fall within a prescribed risk appetite using appropriate incentives develop a culture that supports the longterm interests of the firm its customers and the longterm integrity of the markets in which the firm operates and demonstrate that the principles of good conduct towards customers and markets are embedded throughout their business and that these are working to deliver such outcomes and market behaviour.
Having completed an extensive cultural review of each of our three business divisions during 2017 we have identified several common cultural values or target behaviours.
Whilst there are some subtle differences between each division it is clear that as a Group we share a common business approach founded upon the following key values and behaviours Doing the right thing we recognise our collective responsibility for delivering great outcomes  not just for our customers but also taking into account the impact on other stakeholders.
We dont cut corners and always seek the path that is right before the path that is easy.
Integrity we expect our people to respect colleagues and other key stakeholders and to do what we say we will do.
Shared purpose delivered through teamwork we have clear strategic and operational goals and expect all of our people to understand and share in that vision.
Our businesses are complex combining many different elements to achieve our overall objectives.
By working together we are likely to solve problems more effectively than trying to do things on our own.
Clear communication we listen carefully to those dealing with customers we are wellinformed and believe its our duty to speak up when we disagree or believe something is not right we celebrate success and dont blame others when something goes wrong always learning from our mistakes.
Entrepreneurial leadership we lead by example using our initiative and not just waiting to be told what to do knowledgeable and inquisitive we are prepared to try new things so we can perform better and be the best we can be.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 52 However we also recognise that certain aspects of our business represent potential hot spots due to the presence of potentially conflicting objectives.
One example is incentives that might be at risk of promoting poor behaviour in order that certain performance targets are met and personal rewards achieved.
Managing such conflict is part of the daytoday activity within each of our business divisions.
Whilst we dont profess to get everything right all of the time the systems and controls we have in place together with a keen focus on promoting our culture and target behaviours help to ensure we meet all of our regulatory obligations and remain on course to achieve our longterm strategic and financial objectives.
This approach guides the way in which we address the needs and desires of each of our key stakeholder groups including customers employees and contractors regulators the communities where we work and those who have provided us with the requisite equity and debt funding to succeed.
Customers
Delivering great customer outcomes is an objective that is embodied within all of our policies and procedures our training programmes our incentive arrangements and the way we run our business.
However we also recognise that it is deeds not words that count and so we regularly survey our customers to find out how we are performing.
We also monitor and take very seriously all complaints we receive in order that we can learn from our mistakes and hopefully improve our service.
Employees and selfemployed agents As a people business we are determined to continue to invest in our human capital and this lies at the heart of our business strategy.
As well as a proper induction process we also invest in extensive and tailored training modules for all new joiners so that they can make a contribution as soon as they start work.
We also invest in training for existing staff and selfemployed agents.
Online training programmes provide us with a perfect audit trail for each participant providing analysis on which modules have been completed and the achievement level attained.
Gender mix The following table sets out the breakdown by gender of the Directors and senior managers of the Company as well as the total number of employees Male Female Total Number of Company Directors 5 1 6 Number of senior managers excluding Executive Directors Directors of subsidiary businesses and heads of function 36 12 48 Total number of employees 406 345 751 Gender Pay As part of this years Annual Report and Accounts we are disclosing for the first time our gender pay gap in accordance with the UK Government regulations for gender pay gap reporting.
Our overall mean and median gender pay and bonus gap based on a snapshot date of 5 April 2017 hourly pay and bonus paid in the 12 months to 5 April 2017 is as follows Pay and Bonus  difference between males and females Mean Median Hourly pay gap 26.6% 12.6% Bonus pay gap 35.6% 2.6% Proportion of males and females receiving a bonus payment
71.6%
66.4% Why do we have a gap The calculation behind the gender pay gap is not the same as equal pay.
The underlying reason behind the gap is predominantly due to the structure of our workforce where there is a lower representation of women in senior leadership roles within our business approximately 78% of men and 23% of women were in senior management roles as at the snapshot date.
As can be seen in the quartile graphs on page 53 the gender mix shifts as we move towards the upper higher pay quartiles indicating that our mean gaps are significantly impacted by these imbalances.
We recognise that female representation is lower in the upper quartiles and are committed to increasing the number of women in these bands.
Culture and stakeholder management continued We are confident that we do not have any processes or practices where people are being paid differently due to their gender.
The gap in our mean figure relating to bonuses is due to the same reasons that we have an hourly gender pay gap our senior workforce which has a different bonus structure from the rest of the workforce also has a greater proportion of male employees.
The equality of our pay structure is reflected in our median pay and median bonus figures which is not distorted by very large or small pay and bonuses this shows a much smaller gap between males and females.
How are we addressing the gap The Office for National Statistics 2016 numbers put the mean salary gap at 34% for the financial services industry.
Whilst we understand our gender profile is typical of many financial services companies across the UK we are committed to addressing this through a series of actions as follows improving our recruitment targeting to ensure a diverse range of applicants are considered reviewing the structure of our workforce listening to our employees and improving our policies around diversity actively reviewing decisions around performance pay and bonuses supporting employees through flexible working and professional development delivering tailored plans to promote gender diversity across the Group and supporting female progression into senior roles.
1 A positive percentage figure indicates that typically female employees have lower pay or bonuses than male employees.
2 httpvisual. ns. gapforyourjob.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 53 Strategic Report Overview As well as providing competitive compensation arrangements for both staff and selfemployed agents we also introduced a Save As You Earn scheme for all Group employees in 2017.
This scheme enables staff to buy shares in Non Standard Finance plc in a taxefficient way and thereby participate in the future success of the Company.
Regulators
We maintain a regular dialogue with the FCA both as part of the ongoing supervision process as well as at a more strategic level through periodic faceto face meetings and by responding to relevant FCA consultations policy documents and research.
We also continue to keep the FCA fullyinformed regarding the Groups broader strategic plans.
Communities and charity As the vast majority of our business is conducted facetoface we recognise the importance of becoming a valued member of the towns and cities where we have a presence.
With over 750 staff 1000 selfemployed agents and over 168000 customers that we serve through a network of over 120 offices across the UK we are deeply ingrained within the fabric of a number of local communities.
Whilst the introduction of a pro bono scheme to enable our staff to give up some of their time during office hours for good causes was delayed due to other business priorities the Group did implement a Groupwide charity policy in 2017 formalising a process by which we can provide financial support not just in local communities but also nationwide.
Whilst only in place for part of the year the Group made total donations totalling 45262 to a range of charities including National Debtline run by The Money Advice Trust Loan Smart Great Ormond Street Hospital and Cancer Research.
Environment
Whilst we are a relatively small company compared with many others and given the nature of our business we do not believe that we have a material impact on the environment.
However we are growing fast and are keen to minimise any impact that our activities might have.
Therefore during 2017 we began to capture and record data on CO2 production from car mileage as well as the volume of water and electricity used during the year across all three business divisions.
As such the table below represents a starting point against which we plan to measure our impact in future years Kg of CO 2 produced KW hours used of water used 2017 53413 667253 29389 Quartile 1 Male 39% Female 61% Male 57% Female 43% Quartile 2 Male 59% Female 41% Quartile 3 Male 64% Female 36% Quartile 4 Gender mix by pay quartile each containing just over 134 employees and quartile 1 being the lowest and quartile 4 being the highest.
Whilst we acknowledge we have a gender pay gap were clear on why it exists and are focused on the steps we need to take to close the gap.
Providers of capital The Company keeps shareholders credit funds and lending banks informed of business developments via its Annual Report fullyear and half year results as well as periodic trading update announcements.
All other price sensitive information is publicly disclosed via a regulatory news service.
All these items of information are also available on the Companys corporate website site The website also contains other information about the Group and its business.
Throughout the year the Group Chief
Executive Chief Financial Officer and
Director of IR and Communications meet with equity and debt investors on request or via organised investor roadshows supported by the Companys advisers as well as by attending and presenting at industry and investor conferences.
The
Chairman and other NonExecutive Directors may also meet with investors as required.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 54 Board of Directors Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 55 John de Blocq van Kuffeler 69 Group Chief Executive Appointed 8 July 2014 Committees None
John was Chief Executive and then Chairman of Provident Financial plc for a combined total of 22 years until December 2013.
He was Chairman of Marlin Financial Group Limited the consumer debt purchasing company for four years until its sale in February 2014 and was also Chairman of Hyperion Insurance Group Limited for five years until December 2013.
John was previously Chief Executive of Brown Shipley Holdings PLC which included Medens Trust Limited a consumer car finance company and was Chairman of the credit committee of Brown Shipley Holdings PLCs main banking subsidiary Brown Shipley and Co.
Limited.
External appointments NonExecutive Chairman of Paratus AMC Limited Miles CresswellTurner 55 Executive Director and CEO of Everyday Loans Appointed 10 December 2014 Committees None
Before joining NSF Miles was a partner in Duke Street LLP where he specialised in the finance sector and led on the acquisitions by Duke Street LLP of Marlin Financial Group Limited and UKWM Limited.
Before becoming a partner at Duke Street LLP Miles was a partner at Palamon Capital Partners LLP from 1998 to 2008 where he led the investment in Towry Law plc.
Prior to Palamon Capital Partners LLP Miles spent seven years as a Director in the Leveraged Finance Department of HSBC Investment Bank.
Miles was appointed Executive Chairman of Everyday Loans in May 2017 and became Chief Executive of Everyday Loans in September 2017.
External appointments Levana Education Ltd Charles Gregson 70 NonExecutive Chairman Appointed 10 December 2014
Audit Committee Chair until May 2017 Nomination Committee Chair Remuneration Committee Chair Risk Committee
Charles is a highly experienced executive having previously held a number of senior positions in finance previously he was NonExecutive Chairman of ICAP plc from 1988 to 2016 when it became Nex Group plc and he became Chairman NonExecutive Chairman of Wagon Finance Group Limited from 1996 to 2006 NonExecutive Director and Deputy Chairman of Provident Financial plc from 1998 to 2007 and Non Executive Director of International Personal Finance Plc from 2007 to 2010.
Charles is a former Chairman of CPP Group Plc and of St Jamess Place Plc.
Charles was Executive Director of United Business Media Plc formerly MAI Plc from 1985 to 2003 and Global CEO and Chairman of PR Newswire from 2003 to 2009.
As part of his responsibilities at United Business Media Plc Charles built Harlow Meyer Savage from a small money broking business into the international business of Garban PLC a listed company with offices in 25 countries which later merged with ICAP plc.
External appointments NonExecutive Chairman of Nex Group plc NonExecutive Director Senior Independent Director and Chair of the Remuneration Committee of Caledonia Investments Plc Nick Teunon 52 Chief Financial Officer Appointed 8 August 2014 Committees None
Nick was Chief Financial Officer of Marlin Financial Group Limited the consumer debt purchasing company from August 2013 until June 2014.
Prior to that Nick spent five years as Chief Financial Officer of FTSE International joining from the Press Association where he was Group Finance and Strategy Director for seven years.
At both FTSE International and the Press Association Nick was responsible for all mergers and acquisitions activity and related debt funding in addition to leading the finance function.
External appointments
Niall Booker 59 Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed 9 May 2017
Audit Committee Chair Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Risk Committee
Niall has spent 35 years in banking providing him with a wide range of experience in both consumer and wholesale products.
His previous roles include being Group Managing Director and CEO of HSBC North America where he worked through the issues in HSBC Finance Corporation and in doing so worked closely with US regulators on these and other matters.
Most recently he was CEO of the Cooperative Bank from 2013 to December 2016 having been tasked with rebuilding the capital base stabilising the operational infrastructure and maintaining the franchise after the problems the bank faced in 2013.
Niall has been a member of the College Council at Glenalmond College since 2012 and became Chairman of the Council in August 2017.
External appointments Chairman Glenalmond College Council Professor Heather McGregor CBE 56
NonExecutive Director Appointed 10 December 2014
Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Risk Committee Chair
Heather is the Executive Dean of Edinburgh Business School the Graduate School of Business of HeriotWatt University and is also an independent NonExecutive Director of International Game Technology
She began her early career in financial communications and investor relations before joining ABN Amro as a sellside analyst.
She then spent eight years with the bank working in London Hong Kong Singapore and Tokyo before joining Taylor Bennett an executive search firm in 2000.
She has an MBA from the London Business School and a PhD from the University of Hong Kong.
Heather was the founder of the Taylor Bennett Foundation which works to promote diversity in the communications industry and is a founding member of the steering committee of the 30% Club which is working to raise the representation of women at senior levels within the UKs publicly quoted companies.
She is also an experienced writer and broadcaster in the national media.
In 2017 she was appointed to the Honours Committee for the Economy.
External appointments Executive Dean of Edinburgh Business School the graduate school of business of HeriotWatt University Chairwoman of the executive search firm Taylor Bennett and Non Executive Director of International Game Technology PLC Governance NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 56 Dear Shareholder
I am pleased to present our 2017 Corporate Governance report for the Company which incorporates reports from the Chairs of each of the Audit Nomination Risk and Remuneration Committees on pages 61 to The Board is committed to applying the highest standards of corporate governance and although the Company does not have a premium listing on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange the Board has chosen to seek to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code where practical throughout the year to 31 December 2017 .
A copy of the Code is available from the Financial Reporting Councils website www. rc.
Nomination Committee report on page 63 the Risk Committee report on page 64 and the Directors remuneration report on page 65.
For the Companys shareholders our primary aim is to deliver significant growth and as a Board we believe that the development of a strong governance framework is key to that achievement.
The Board is responsible for and committed to maintaining and developing such procedures as are required to ensure that good standards of corporate governance operate across all levels of the Group including each of its operating subsidiaries.
2017 saw the completion of the Groups third major acquisition one that involved a substantial debt financing exercise.
Having broadened the operational base substantially the Board has extended its governance framework so as to ensure that the Groups values and behaviours are reflected in each of its businesses and that these tie back to the Groups business strategy and management incentives.
Highlights of the financial year During 2017  we completed the successful acquisition of George Banco strengthening our position in the fastgrowth guarantor loans market.
Our home credit business Loans at Home also experienced significant growth in the year following a major restructuring at a large competitor.
Everyday Loans opened 12 new branches as planned taking the total to 53 branches as at 31 December 2017 .
We continued to engage with our investors through a comprehensive programme of investor relations including oneonone meetings conference calls analyst visits and an investor day held in London in November 2017  during which analysts and investors received an indepth review from the senior management of all three business divisions.
The investor day was wellattended and we received positive and encouraging feedback and will continue to hold investor days in the future.
The Groups funding position was strengthened in August 2017 with the agreement of new funding arrangements giving the Group clear committed funding of 260m until 2023.
We were delighted to welcome Niall Booker who joined the Board on 9 May 2017 and was appointed as Chair of the Audit Committee.
Niall brings a wealth of experience gained over many years in a number of senior executive positions in financial services firms both in the UK and internationally.
Over the course of the year we maintained our commitment to continue to develop the Companys corporate governance framework despite there being no requirement to comply with the Code.
Having completed an initial Board evaluation in 2016 a wider evaluation was undertaken in 2017 and included the Group Board as well as each of the subsidiary boards so allowing an evaluation of the effectiveness of the developing Group structure.
The results were reviewed and assessed by an independent thirdparty that made a number of recommendations drawing upon the themes and actions identified in both the 2016 and 2017 evaluations.
Having reviewed the recommendations made the Board has updated its list of actions aimed at improving the Group s governance structure.
During the year the Board approved and implemented a series of Groupwide policies and has also committed to embedding and then evaluating a governance framework for the Group as a whole during 2018.
Recognising the Companys fast rate of growth and appetite for acquisitions the Remuneration Committee is focused on ensuring that it has the capability to both retain and incentivise existing management as well as attract additional and complementary talent that may be required to fulfil the Groups longterm strategic objectives.
During the course of 2017  LongTerm Incentives LTIs for key executives in each of the Groups three divisions were approved.
To enable Miles Cresswell Turner to participate in the Everyday Loans LTI and to incorporate some other small changes we are proposing to adopt a new Directors Remuneration Policy details of which are set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 65 to 82 and which will be put to shareholders for approval at the 2018 AGM.
As well as investing in the development and implementation of appropriate and suitably testing executive remuneration schemes we also approved and launched a Save As You Earn SAYE share scheme for all eligible employees across the Group.
Having even a small stake in the ultimate parent of the firm where they work ensures that participating employees are able to benefit directly from any future success and are more likely to be engaged and focused on contributing to that future success.
To reduce the impact of dilution for existing shareholders the Board initiated a limited share buyback programme during 2017 in order to satisfy any future obligations under the Group s SAYE and longterm incentive share plans.
As at 22 March 2018 the Group had repurchased a total of 3401089 shares that are held in treasury.
In 2018 we plan to improve our governance principles and processes further by continuing to embed our governance frameworks and corporate policies and by monitoring our progress through the evaluation process outlined above.
The deployment of a Groupwide risk management system during 2018 will also help to ensure consistency and transparency of the active risk management activity taking place across the Group.
The Board will continue to ensure that governance processes are documented and implemented and where appropriate improved.
Charles Gregson NonExecutive Chairman 28 March 2018 Governance report for the year ended 31 December 2017 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 57 The Board does not consider Charles Gregson to be independent as he is a holder of Founder Shares.
More details on the Founder Shares are set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 65 to 82.
The Board determines that Charles Gregson would be an independent Non Executive Director in the event that he did not hold Founder Shares.
The Board and its Committees are considered to have an appropriate balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Company to enable them to discharge their respective duties and responsibilities effectively.
The Directors have a wide range of backgrounds and extensive knowledge of a variety of relevant sectors
Bankinglendingfinance
Home credit
Law
Media
Private equity Equity research Executive search
Specific key decisions have been reserved for the Board and these are outlined in the Boards terms of reference a copy of which is available on the Groups corporate website site However certain responsibilities have been delegated to the Boards four committees so to assist the effective operation of the Board and to ensure the right level of attention and consideration is given to all relevant matters.
The Company has four different committees as outlined below Board of
Audit
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Risk
Committee
The composition and role of each committee is detailed in their respective reports that follow.
The Audit Committee report is on page 61 the Nomination Committee report is on page 63 the Risk Committee report is on page 64 and the Directors remuneration report is on page The terms of reference for each committee can be observed at the Companys registered office address and also on the Companys website site The Board Statement of compliance with the Code During the financial year ended 31 December 2017  the Company has not complied with all of the provisions of the Code.
Following the appointment of Niall Booker to the Board as an independent NonExecutive Director the Board now has two independent NonExecutive Directors and therefore meets the requirements of B1.2 B2.1 and C3.1.
The Company did not meet requirement D.2.1 of the Code as the Chairman is also the Chair of the Remuneration Committee.
However the Board considered this provision to not be appropriate due to the size and nature of the Company.
The Board has not appointed a Senior Independent Director and therefore does not comply with provision A.4.1 of the Code.
This provision is not considered to be appropriate due to the relatively small size of the Board.
Board operation The Chairman and the Group Chief Executive roles are fulfilled by separate individuals and their roles are set out in writing and agreed by the Board.
The Chairman Charles Gregson is responsible for the leadership of the Board and the daytoday executive responsibility is undertaken by John van Kuffeler the Group Chief Executive assisted by the Groups Board of Directors.
The Board is responsible for the longterm success of the Company in relation to its strategy operations and values and for establishing a sustainable capital structure for the Group alongside a strong corporate governance structure and practices that support an effective decisionmaking process.
The Board sets annual objectives as well as the overall strategic direction of the Company.
These objectives are reviewed regularly at Board meetings and are implemented through the approval and regular assessment of the Companys strategy and business plan.
At each Board meeting the Board discusses the financial operational strategic and governance issues that affect the Group.
Board composition and structure The Board comprised five Directors through the year until 9 May 2017 when Niall Booker was appointed to the Board.
For the rest of the financial year the Board comprised six Directors all of whom have served throughout the financial year including NonExecutive Chairman Group Chief Executive Two Executive Directors Two independent NonExecutive Directors
In accordance with section B.1.1 of the Code the Board determines Heather McGregor and Niall Booker to be independent NonExecutive
The Boards assessment is based on the fact that Heather McGregor and Niall Booker receive no additional benefits from the Group have not previously held an executive role within the Group and have served less than nine years on the Board.
The Board believes that there are no current or past matters which are likely to affect Heather McGregors or Niall Bookers independent judgement and character.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 58 Internal control and risk management systems The Board is responsible for the overall system of internal controls and risk management for the Group and for reviewing their effectiveness on an annual basis.
The Companys internal controls are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure in pursuit of the Groups overall business objectives.
The risk management framework is embedded within our management and governance processes and can be adjusted if and when required in response to a material change in circumstances.
The Board discharges or intends to discharge its duties in this area through the review of financial performance including budgets KPIs forecasts and debt covenants on a monthly basis the receipt of regular reports which provide an assessment of key risks and controls and how effectively they are working scheduling annual Board reviews of strategy including reviews of the material risks and uncertainties facing the business the receipt of reports from senior management on the risk and control culture within the Group the presence of a clear organisational structure with defined hierarchy and clear delegation of authority and ensuring there are documented policies and procedures in place.
Through the Risk Committee the Board reviews the risk management framework the key risks facing the business and how they have changed since the previous review see pages 36 to 38.
The Finance Department is responsible for preparing the Group financial statements and ensuring that accounting policies are in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards.
All financial information published by the Group is subject to the approval of the Audit Committee.
The Board with advice from the Risk and Audit Committees is satisfied that a system of internal controls and risk management is in place which enables the Company to identify evaluate and manage key risks.
Directors
Each of the Directors is committed to their respective roles and has sufficient time to fulfil their duties and obligations to the Company.
The NonExecutive Directors other significant commitments were disclosed to the Board before their appointment.
Chairman
The Chairman is responsible for the proper function of the Companys Board of Directors that oversees the strategic direction of the Group.
To ensure that the Board devotes its attention to the right matters he sets the Board meeting agendas with the Company Secretary and facilitates and encourages active engagement and appropriate challenge by all Directors.
Role of Executive Directors The Executive Directors are responsible for all matters affecting the performance of the Group and for the implementation of strategy policies budgets and the financial performance of the Group.
Their responsibility also includes the development and direction of the Groups culture recognising that a healthy corporate culture can both generate and sustain longterm shareholder value.
Executive Directors provide specialist knowledge and experience to the Board and lead and manage the risk and finance functions across the Group.
Role of NonExecutive Directors The NonExecutive Directors are responsible for providing constructive challenge and help develop proposals put forward by the Executive Directors on strategy and other matters affecting the Groups operational and financial performance.
They provide an external focus to the Boards discussions and continually review the performance of the Executive Directors and the wider senior management team.
The Board has adopted a procedure for the appointment of new Directors by appointing a Nomination Committee to lead the process of appointment and to make recommendations to the Board.
Non
Executive Directors have been appointed for fixed periods of three years subject to confirmation by shareholders.
Their letters of appointment may be inspected at the Companys registered office or can be obtained on request from the Company Secretary.
The Board has not appointed a Senior Independent Director as this provision is not considered to be appropriate due to the relatively small size of the Board and the fact that the Board only includes two independent NonExecutive Directors.
The NonExecutive Directors are available to shareholders if they have any concerns which contact through the normal channels of Chairman or the Executive Directors has failed to resolve or for which such contact is inappropriate.
The appointment of a Senior Independent Director was reviewed as part of the 2017 Board evaluation and will continue to be considered annually.
Should the Board find it necessary an appointment will be made.
Company Secretary The role of Company Secretary is fulfilled by Sarah Day who was appointed by the Board to the role on 27 November 2017 prior to this date Nick Teunon performed the role of Group Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary.
With many years experience in consumer finance and having held a similar position at the consumer credit division of a major competitor she ensures that all Directors have full and timely access to all relevant information to ensure that the Board is able to make informed decisions.
She is responsible for ensuring that correct Board procedures are followed and for advising on governance matters and ensuring that there is a good flow of information within the Board and its Committees and between senior management and the NonExecutive Directors.
The Company Secretary supports the Chairman in setting the agenda for each Board meeting.
The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is a matter for the Board as a whole.
Board diversity The Company recognises the importance of diversity both at Board level and throughout the whole organisation.
The Board remains committed to increasing diversity.
Consequently diversity is taken into account during each recruitment and appointment process and the Company is determined to attract outstanding candidates with diverse backgrounds skills ideas and culture.
In last years report we indicated our plans to participate in The Future Boards Scheme an initiative launched by The 30% Club UK the UK Government and Board Apprentice giving senior women a unique opportunity to get board experience to progress their careers to the next level.
The Group believes the scheme has the potential to grow the talent pipeline of women executives significantly by giving women 12 months experience on one of the Groups subsidiary boards.
Following consideration and selection of an internal candidate the Group will participate in the scheme in 2018.
Governance report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 59 Election and reelection of Directors In accordance with the Companys Articles of Association and the Code the Directors are required to submit themselves for reelection annually at the Annual General Meeting.
Each Director will offer themselves for reelection at the next Annual General Meeting taking place at 11.00am on 14 May 2018.
Induction and professional development The Company has a policy in place to ensure that all new Board appointments receive a full formal induction tailored to the needs and experience of the new Director.
They are also provided with opportunities to meet major shareholders.
Following the appointment of Niall Booker during 2017  he took part in a formal induction programme including visits to subsidiary Boards as well as firsthand experience of subsidiary operational activities.
Adhering to the requirements of the Code during 2017 the Chairman reviewed and agreed with each Director their training and development needs taking into account their individual qualifications and experience.
The Board Evaluation exercise carried out towards the end of 2017 also gathered information from Directors to help facilitate the planning of ongoing training and development needs for 2018.
The
Directors have full access to a regular supply of financial operational strategic and regulatory information to help them discharge their responsibilities and keep themselves fully informed of developments affecting the Company and each of its operating subsidiaries.
Independent advice All Directors have access to independent professional advice at the Companys expense and the Board and its Committees are provided with sufficient resources to undertake their duties.
Matters reserved for the Board The Boards full responsibilities are set out in the matters reserved for the Board and its powers and duties are set out in the Companys Articles of Association and the relevant regulations applicable to the Company as a public listed company registered in England and Wales.
The Board is primarily responsible for the overall leadership of the Group and setting core values and standards determining the strategic direction of the Group including the approval of the Groups strategic aims and objectives approval of the annual operating and capital expenditure budgets and any material changes to them oversight of the Groups operations reviewing the Groups performance in light of the Groups strategic aims objectives business plans and budgets and ensuring that any necessary corrective action is taken approval of the Groups annual and halfyear results ensuring adequate succession planning for the Board and senior management determining the Companys Remuneration Policy approving major capital projects acquisitions and divestment promoting good governance and seeking to ensure that the Company meets its responsibilities towards all stakeholders approval of the Groups risk management and control framework and the appointmentreappointment of the Groups external auditor following recommendations from the Audit Committee approval of internal regulations and policies the Groups finance banking and capital structure arrangements the Companys dividend policy and shareholder circulars convening of meetings and stock exchange announcements.
In addition the Board has adopted formal authorisation limits which set out the levels of authority for the Executive Directors and employees below Board level to follow when managing the Groups business on a daily basis.
Activities covered during 2017 During 2017 the Board had 11 scheduled meetings to review current trading and operational performance of the business as well as to consider the following items of business Month Business matters discussed January  Changes to divisional management structures Divisional debt sale February  Capital structure review Review of achievement of strategic objectives March  Review and approval of the 2016 Annual Accounts Review and approval of the 2016 Group results announcement Approval of the divisional incentive schemes Approval of final dividend to be proposed at the 2017 AGM Consideration of potential acquisitions April  Consideration of potential acquisitions May  AGM Directors strategy days Change to divisional CEO Review of funding Change of joint stockbroker Appointment of additional NonExecutive Director June  Refinancing discussions Review of strategic decisions July  Approval to grant share options under the NSF
Approval of acquisition of George Banco Ltd and new financing arrangements Review and approval of the 2017 halfyear results and announcement August  Approval of interim dividend September  Approval of entry into a share repurchase agreement Approval of subsidiaries reorganisation Approval to grant options to eligible individuals under longterm incentive arrangements October  Approval to carry out a Board evaluation across the Group Review and approval of Chairmans remuneration Approval of share buyback scheme Approval to grant share options under the NSF
November  Capital Markets Day materials and announcement Resignation of former and appointment of replacement Company Secretary December  Board evaluation report Review of 2018 budget proposals Themes and messages for the 2017 Annual Report Governance NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 60 Matters to be covered in 2018 Review of the longterm vision and strategic direction of the Group Review of the financial performance of the Group Analysing the Group structure and management performance Group projections Review of the Groups debt funding arrangements Potential acquisitions Undertaking an annual review of the Group strategy Approval of the Groups halfyear and fullyear results.
Evaluation of governance framework Overview of Business Continuity activity within the Group Review of the Groups corporate culture Board and committee meetings All Directors are required to attend Board meetings as well as committee meetings for which they hold membership alongside an additional twoday offsite strategy meeting to review and agree the Groups threeyear business and financial strategy.
The strategy meeting in 2017 was attended by the Directors although Nick Teunon was unable to attend and senior management where appropriate.
The agenda for the strategy day included a facilitated discussion of the Groups future financial and funding strategy a presentation and consideration of the business strategy of each of the Groups three divisions review and discussion of the nonstandard finance consumer market in which the Group operates the macroeconomic outlook for the UK and possible impact on the Groups businesses and a presentation on the investor relations public affairs and communications plans for the Group.
All Directors receive Board papers and minutes for all the meetings which are circulated approximately one week in advance of scheduled meetings.
All Directors have access to the Company Secretary and independent professional advice at the Companys expense as and when required.
A table reflecting the Directors attendance at Board meetings is shown below.
Conflicts of interests Directors have a statutory duty to avoid situations in which they have or may have interests that conflict with those of the Company unless that conflict is first authorised by the Directors.
The Companies Act 2006 and the Companys Articles of Association require the Board to consider any potential conflicts of interest.
The Board considers and if appropriate authorises each Directors reported actual and potential conflict of interest taking into consideration what is in the best interests of the Company and whether the Directors ability to act in accordance with his or her wider duties is or may be affected.
All potential conflicts approved by the Board are recorded in a Conflicts of Interest Register which is reviewed by the Board at least quarterly to ensure that the procedure is working effectively.
Relations with shareholders The Company keeps shareholders informed of all material business developments via its public disclosures including its Annual Report its halfyearly financial statements and periodic trading update announcements.
In addition other pricesensitive information is disclosed via a regulatory news service.
All these items are available from the Companys corporate website site The website also contains other information about the Group and its business.
The Group Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer ensure that the views of shareholders are communicated to the Board and that the Companys governance and strategy are discussed with major shareholders.
The Board aims to foster close relations with its investors and sellside analysts through a regular and comprehensive programme of investor relations activity.
Throughout the year the Chairman Group Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer and Director of Investor Relations and Communications meet with shareholders on request or via organised investor roadshows supported by the Group s brokers as well as by attending and presenting at industry and investor conferences.
During 2017 there were over 80 such meetings.
Annual General Meeting Shareholders are invited to attend the Companys Annual General Meeting AGM where Board members and the Boards advisers are available to answer any shareholder questions.
The 2018 Annual General Meeting of the Company is to be held at the offices of The Maitland Consultancy 13 Kings Boulevard London N1C 4BU at 11.00 am on 14 May 2018.
The Notice of Meeting contained in a separate letter from the Chairman includes a commentary on the business to be transacted at the Annual General Meeting.
Sarah Day Company Secretary 28 March 2018 Governance report continued Meetings and attendance
Attendance and total number of meetings to which the Director was entitled to attend Explanation John van Kuffeler 1212 Nick Teunon 1112 Nick Teunon was unable to attend one Board meeting due to a diary conflict Miles CresswellTurner 1212 Charles Gregson 1212 Heather McGregor 1212 Niall Booker appointed 9 May 2017 47 Meetings were scheduled prior to the appointment of Niall Booker who was unable to attend certain meetings due to diary conflicts Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 61 Audit Committee report for the year ended 31 December 2017
Following the appointment of Niall Booker as a NonExecutive Director in May 2017  he was appointed as Chair of the Audit Committee.
The
Audit Committee the Committee now comprises three NonExecutive Directors two of whom are independent.
The provisions of the Code C3.1 require that the Audit Committee for smaller companies comprises two independent NonExecutive Directors.
Prior to the appointment of Niall Booker the Company did not meet the requirements of the Code in this regard.
The names of the Directors and their biographical details are set out on pages 54 to 55.
Role and responsibilities The key objective of the Committee is to provide assurance to the Board as to the effectiveness of the Companys internal controls and the integrity of its financial records and externally published results.
In doing so the Committee operates within its terms of reference that are also available on the Group s corporate website site The primary functions of the Committee include monitoring the integrity of the financial statements including the annual and halfyearly reports of the Group and any other formal announcements relating to the Companys financial performance and reviewing significant financial reporting judgements contained in them before these are submitted to the Board for final approval making recommendations to the Board concerning any proposed new or amendment to an existing accounting policy advising the Board on whether the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable meeting with the external auditor at the reporting stage to discuss the audit including any problems andor reservations arising from the audit and any matters that the auditor may wish to discuss in the absence of NSF management where appropriate reviewing the adequacy and effectiveness of the Companys internal audit review function and internal financial controls ensuring appropriate coordination between the internal audit function and the external auditor reviewing i the adequacy and security of the Companys arrangements for its employees and contractors to raise concerns about possible wrongdoing in financial reporting or other matters ii the Companys procedures for detecting fraud and iii the Companys systems and controls for the prevention of bribery making recommendations to the Board in relation to the appointment reappointment and removal of the Companys external auditor providing recommendations on their remuneration and approving the terms of engagement of the external auditor overseeing the relationship with the external auditor and assessing the external auditors independence and objectivity and the effectiveness of the audit process and developing and implementing policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
Meetings and attendance The Committee met on eight occasions during the year.
Attendance and total number of meetings that the Director was entitled to attend Charles Gregson Chairman until 9 May 2017 88 Heather McGregor 78 Niall Booker appointed 9 May 2017 when he became Chairman 44 The Directors above met on two occasions for a discussion with the external auditor without executive management present.
Committee meetings are attended by both the Chief Financial Officer and the Company Secretary.
The external auditor is invited to attend meetings of the Committee and other nonmembers are sometimes invited to attend all or part of any meeting as and when appropriate and necessary.
Significant issues and areas of judgement considered by the
Throughout 2017 the Committee determined that the following areas of the financial statements were of significant interest.
Impairment of goodwill Management performed a goodwill impairment assessment as at 30 June 2017 and 31 December 2017 by determining the recoverable amount based on a fair value less coststosell of each of the cash generating units and comparing these to the respective net asset values and carrying values of goodwill.
The Committee challenged the appropriateness of managements key assumptions and was satisfied with the conclusion that no impairment of goodwill was required.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and estimates along with the respective sensitivity of the headroom to those judgements and estimates is set out in notes 2 and 13 to the financial statements.
Impairment of customer receivables The assessment of provisions for impairment losses against customer receivables requires management to make significant judgements.
The
Committee regularly challenges the appropriateness of managements judgements and assumptions underlying the impairment provision calculations and concluded that the provisions held against the loan book are reasonable.
Further detail in respect of the assumptions is set out in note 2 to the financial statements.
IFRS 9 During the course of the year the Committee has reviewed and challenged the appropriateness of key assumptions made by management with regard to the interpretation and implementation of a new accounting standard IFRS 9.
The Committee was satisfied that the requirements of IFRS 9 have been appropriately implemented and that the transitional impact on the financial statements has been correctly outlined in note 1 to the financial statements.
Refinancing of the Groups existing bank facilities To finance the acquisition of George Banco as well as to provide additional funding to support future growth NSF announced that it had secured a new 175m term loan facility the Term Loan provided by a group of institutional investors led by Alcentra Limited.
The new sixyear loan bears an interest rate of LIBOR plus 725 basis points per year with interest payable every six months.
The same investors also agreed to provide an additional committed facility of up to 50m under the same terms as the Term Loan.
In addition the Group also secured a new 35m revolving credit facility provided by Royal Bank of Scotland at an interest rate of LIBOR plus 350 basis points per year.
The
Committee challenged management on the new arrangements and received advice from Lazard and Co.
Limited regarding their suitability for the Group.
Acquisition accounting and intangibles On 17 August 2017  Everyday Loans Limited completed the acquisition of George Banco.
IFRS 3 Business Combinations requires assets and liabilities acquired to be recognised initially at their fair values.
Intangible assets must also be recognised at fair value if they are separable or arise from other contractual rights.
The Committee challenged managements identification and valuation of assets on acquisition and found the methodology used to be appropriate.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and assumptions is set out in notes 2 13 14 and 24 to the financial statements.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 62 Review of the halfyear results Review of impairment of goodwill intangibles and customer receivables valuation Review of acquisition accounting Review of halfyear results Review and approval of the going concern paper which confirmed it was appropriate to prepare the halfyear results for the six months ended 30 June 2017 on a going concern basis Review of the report on the interim review from the external auditor Review of the halfyear results announcement and Discussion with the external auditor without any Executive Director or employee being present.
Review of the Annual Report and financial statements Review of impairment of goodwill intangibles and customer receivables valuation carried out by management Review of the calculation of goodwill and intangibles assets on the acquisition of the Everyday Loans Group Review and approval of the going concern paper which confirmed it was appropriate to prepare the Annual Report and financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2016 on a going concern basis Review of fullyear results and the form and content of the draft Annual Report and financial statements Discussion with the external auditor without any Executive Director or employee being present Review of the preliminary results for the year ended 31 December 2016 and Review of the statement on internal controls.
Internal audit function The internal audit function which is provided by a thirdparty regularly reports on internal audit activities to the Committee.
A review of the internal audit activity is approved by the Committee.
The internal audit activities encompass all divisions within the Group and therefore provide a consistent and balanced overview of the Group to the
The Committee met with management separately to give management the opportunity to raise issues with the internal audit function directly to the Committee.
Nonfinancial audit fees paid to the external auditor for the year A review of the nonfinancial audit fees is undertaken by the Committee and an analysis of the nonaudit fees paid to the external auditor for the provision of nonaudit services is provided on page 104 of the Annual Report.
These issues were discussed with management and the external auditor to ensure that the required level of disclosure is provided and that the appropriate level of rigour has been applied where any judgement may be exercised.
External audit The Companys auditor is Deloitte LLP  who have been in office since 22 October 2014.
As noted above the Committee is responsible for assessing the efficacy of the external auditor for monitoring the independence and objectivity of the external auditor for considering the reappointment of the external auditor and for making recommendations to the Board.
The Committee also reviews the performance of the auditor taking into consideration the services and advice provided to the Company and the fees charged for these services.
Details of the auditors total fees for the year can be found on page 104.
On the basis of the auditors performance the Committee considers Deloittes selection to be in the best interests of the Company and has recommended to the Board that Deloitte should be proposed for reappointment at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
The Committee has considered the independence of Deloitte and the level of nonaudit fees and believes that the independence and objectivity of the external auditor are safeguarded and remain strong.
The Committee will continue to review the qualification expertise resources and independence of the external auditor and the effectiveness of the audit process during the current financial year.
Nonaudit work The Committee monitors the level of nonaudit work carried out by the external auditor and seeks assurances from the auditor that it maintains suitable policies and processes ensuring independence and monitors compliance with the relevant regulatory requirements on an annual basis.
During 2017 the level of nonaudit fees amounted to 192000 2016 44000.
The nonaudit work carried out during the year related to due diligence 2016 tax and VAT.
The fees paid to the external auditor are set out in note 4 on page 104.
The fees for nonaudit work carried out by the auditor in 2017 represents 42% 2016 13% of audit fees.
During 2017 the Company had a formal nonaudit work policy in place.
In line with the nonaudit policy the Committee has challenged the appointment of the external auditor for nonaudit work during the period and expects it to demonstrate clearly its independence on an ongoing basis through its work and at Committee meetings.
Internal audit The Committee appointed KPMG one of the UKs leading accounting firms as Internal Auditor to the Group during 2016.
The Internal Auditor reports directly to the Risk Committee which ensures the independence and effectiveness of the Internal Auditor.
The Internal Auditor provides regular reports to the Audit Committee as well as the Risk Committee and to the Board as a whole.
Niall Booker Chairman of the Audit Committee 28 March 2018 Audit Committee report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 63 Nomination Committee report for the year ended 31 December 2017 The principal purpose of the Nomination Committee the Committee is to monitor the balance of skills knowledge experience and diversity on the Board and recommend any changes to the composition of the
This report gives more detailed information on how the Committee performed its duties.
Membership
The provisions of the Code require that the Nomination Committee comprises of independent NonExecutive Directors only.
Following his appointment as a NonExecutive Director on 9 May 2017  Niall Booker became a member of the Nomination Committee from that date.
As only two Directors are considered to be independent the Company did not meet the requirements of the Code in this regard.
However given the makeup of the Group and its current stage of development the Board considers that despite not meeting this requirement the Nomination Committee can fulfil its role effectively in its current form.
Meetings and attendance
Attendance and total number of meetings that the Director was entitled to attend Explanation Charles Gregson
Heather McGregor 22 Niall Booker appointed 9 May 2017 01 Meetings were scheduled prior to the appointment of Niall Booker who was unable to attend one meeting due to diary conflict The Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary attended all Nomination Committee meetings.
The biographies of the members are set out on page 55.
Role and responsibilities The Nomination Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities relating to the composition and makeup of the Board and any other committees of the Board.
To fulfil that role the Committees primary functions include following an evaluation of the balance of skills experience independence and knowledge of the Board identifying and nominating candidates who are assessed as having such skills and or experience as well as sufficient time to devote to their responsibilities to fill Board vacancies and making appropriate recommendations to the Board for the appointment of Directors reviewing the structure size and composition of the Board and making recommendations to the Board with regard to any proposed changes reviewing and considering the performance and effectiveness of the Committee through the results of the Board evaluation process and considering and formulating succession planning for Directors and senior executives.
Principal activities of the Committee during 2017 Reviewing the composition of the Board and the balance of Executive and NonExecutive Directors and Reviewing the succession plans for the Board and the senior management within the Group.
Diversity
The Company and each of its operating companies seek to engage train and promote employees on the basis of their capabilities qualifications and experience.
Discrimination or pressure to discriminate by any of the Groups employees contractors or customers in respect of age sex sexual orientation race ethnic origin marital status or civil partnership nationality disabilities political or religious beliefs is strictly forbidden.
The Group seeks to pursue diversity including gender diversity throughout the business and while the Board endorses the aspirations of the Davies Review on Women on Boards the Board is not committing to any specific targets.
Our Board currently has one female Director and the Committee will give due consideration to Board balance and diversity when recommending new appointments to the Board.
The Board will also ensure that its own development in this area is consistent with its strategic objectives and enhances its overall effectiveness.
Board induction All Directors are required to undertake a formal and rigorous induction to the Group upon joining the Board.
Niall Booker joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director on 9 May 2017 and underwent a thorough induction process following his appointment including visits to subsidiary Boards as well as firsthand experience of subsidiary operational activities.
Board evaluation During the year the Board completed an evaluation process of its effectiveness.
The results of the evaluation were reviewed by the Committee and the list of planned actions has been updated and will be actioned over the coming year.
Areas of focus in 2018 The main area of focus for the Committee in 2018 is to conduct a further review of succession plans and review the Boards training programme.
The Committee will also continue to fulfil its general responsibilities with particular emphasis on compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code and succession planning.
Charles Gregson Chairman of the Nomination Committee 28 March 2018 Governance NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 64 Risk Committee report for the year ended 31 December 2017 The principal purpose of the Risk Committee the Committee is to assist the Board in its oversight of risk within the Company with particular focus on risk appetite risk profile and the effectiveness of the Companys internal controls and risk management systems.
Membership and attendance The Committee consists of the NonExecutive Directors of the Company.
Following his appointment as a NonExecutive Director on 9 May 2017 Niall Booker became a member of the Risk Committee from that date.
Both the Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary attended all Committee meetings.
Other relevant parties are also invited to attend Committee meetings as appropriate.
The Directors attendance at the meetings during 2017 is recorded in the table below
Attendance and total number of meetings that the Director was entitled to attend Explanation Heather McGregor
Charles Gregson 55 Niall Booker joined 9 May 2017 02 Meetings were scheduled prior to the appointment of Niall Booker who was unable to attend two meetings due to diary conflicts Crossmembership between each of the Boards committees ensures that all material risks and related issues are appropriately identified communicated and taken into account in the decisions of each committee and that of the Board.
The Committee met five times during the year.
In addition the Committee Chair attended meetings with both the Executive Directors and management at Everyday Loans and Loans at Home.
Role and responsibilities The Board has delegated the oversight of risk management to the Committee although it retains overall accountability for the Companys risk profile.
The Committees primary functions include the assessment of material risks and the Companys overall risk management framework.
The Committee takes account of the current and prospective macroeconomic financial and regulatory environment in order to advise the Board in respect of the most appropriate configuration of the Companys overall risk appetite tolerance and strategy.
In doing so the Committee considers the Companys ability to identify and manage new risk types reviews any material breaches of risk limits and reviews the effectiveness of the Companys internal controls and risk management systems responsibility for overseeing and challenging stress and scenario testing the provision of advice in relation to risk and for the formulation of the Companys risk policies and working closely with the Audit Committee in order to review the effectiveness of the Companys risk management and internal control systems.
Principal activities of the Committee during 2017 The Committee performed a comprehensive review of the Companys risk management and internal control systems including all material financial operational and compliance controls identifying the key risks affecting the Company.
These are set out on pages 36 to 38.
A key theme for the Committee has been to ensure that appropriate risk management strategies are monitored and implemented effectively.
The Committee worked on the development of the Companys risk management capabilities by creating an effective enterprise risk management framework and by undertaking regular and detailed analysis of the key risks faced by the business.
During the year to 31 December 2017 the Committee focused on the following matters a detailed review of the lending and collections process was carried out by the Internal Auditor with the findings reported to the a review of cyber security across the Group.
Viability statement In accordance with the 2014 FRC Corporate Governance Code the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due for the next three years.
The Directors assessment has been made with reference to the Groups current position strategy as laid out in the Strategic Report see pages 6 to 53 and the Groups principal risks and uncertainties and how these are managed see pages 36 to 38.
In particular noting the ability of the Group to reduce lending at the point of peak seasonal demand and the Companys intention to raise additional debt funding to support its longerterm lending ambitions.
The Groups strategy and principal risks underpin the Groups three year plan and scenario testing which the Directors review at least biannually.
The review of the threeyear plan is strengthened by regular updates from the divisional management teams.
The threeyear plan is built on a divisional basis using a bottomup approach.
The plan makes certain assumptions about future economic conditions the regulatory environment divisional performance and growth and the ability to refinance existing debt facilities as they fall due.
This plan is then stresstested considering downside scenarios.
These scenarios consider financial and regulatory downsides.
The financial downside scenario uses the 200809 financial crisis as its basis and therefore reflects a number of principal risks of the business.
The regulatory downside scenario is based on fundamental changes in the business model as a result of regulatory change.
Following the assessment the Directors also considered it appropriate to prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis as set out on page 85.
Areas of focus in 2018 The Committee intends to continue to improve and embed the Companys risk management framework during 2018.
Key tasks include further review and enhancement of the Group risk management framework review of liquidity and credit risks and further development of the Groups risk register.
Heather McGregor Chairman of the Risk Committee 28 March 2018 Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 65 Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017 The disclosures in this report have been prepared in compliance with The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the Regulations as well as the Companies Act 2006.
This report is set out in the following key sections Part A Annual Statement Part B Our remuneration at a glance Part C Directors Remuneration Policy Executive Director Remuneration Policy Illustrations of application of Remuneration Policy Approach to recruitment and promotions Executive Director service contracts and payment for loss of office Consideration of employee remuneration and shareholders NonExecutive Director Remuneration Policy and letters of appointment Part D Annual Report on Remuneration Single figure remuneration table Executive Directors Implementation of Remuneration Policy for the Executive Directors for 2018 Consideration by the Committee of matters relating to Directors remuneration for 2017 and 2018 Group Chief Executive and employee pay Single figure remuneration table NonExecutive Directors Directors shareholding and share interests Shareholder voting Part A Annual Statement Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present to you our Directors Remuneration Report for NonStandard Finance plc NSF.
The Group has delivered strong loan book growth in each of its three businesses whilst maintaining a tight control on impairment.
In May 2017  Miles CresswellTurner took on the role of acting Chief Executive of the Everyday Loans Group ELG following the departure of Danny Malone.
Some of Mr CresswellTurners responsibilities as Chief Operating Officer and head of MandA were transferred to the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer in order to allow him to focus on ELG while remaining an Executive Director of NSF .
On 12 September 2017  Mr CresswellTurner was appointed as the permanent Chief Executive of ELG.
In light of Mr CresswellTurners new role and the additional responsibilities now carried out by the CEO and CFO changes have been made to their remuneration specifically their base salary.
In addition it is proposed that Mr CresswellTurner should participate in the ELG LongTerm Incentive Plan ELG LTI.
As Mr CresswellTurner also participates in the NSF LongTerm Incentive Plan NSF LTI which rewards participants based on the growth of the whole Group the total payment made to Mr CresswellTurner at vesting in December 2020 under the two plans which will be in the form of shares in NSF will be limited to the greater of the payment calculated under the NSF LTI and the payment calculated under the ELG LTI.
In other words the ELG LTI will underpin Mr CresswellTurners award under the NSF LTI.
Our new Directors Remuneration Policy As noted above it is proposed that Mr CresswellTurner will participate in the ELG LTI.
As this participation was not included in the Remuneration Policy approved at the 2017 AGM we are proposing a revised Remuneration Policy at the 2018 AGM.
The terms of the new Remuneration Policy will be exactly the same as the current policy that was approved at the 2017 AGM apart from i the inclusion of Mr CresswellTurner in the ELG LTI and ii a minor change in respect of our NonExecutive Directors the details of which are given below.
Under the ELG LTI adopted in March 2017  participants share in a pool of 5% of the growth in ELGs equity value above a hurdle of 267m.
The hurdle is based on a base equity value of ELG at 1 January 2016 with a compound growth of 12% per annum to 31 December 2019.
The value of the pool is subject to a cap of 6m.
The structure of the award is a nilcost option over NSF shares.
It is proposed that Mr CresswellTurner will receive an allocation of 15% of the pool which will result in a 0.75% share of the growth in equity value of ELG above 267m at 31 December 2019 subject to a cap of 900000.
Mr CresswellTurners award will also be in the form of a nilcost option over shares in NSF .
Performance will be measured against the hurdle at 31 December 2019 though the right to exercise the nilcost option will be deferred until 31 December 2020.
Mr CresswellTurner will then be required to hold any shares acquired on the exercise of the nilcost option for a period of one year i. to the end of December 2021.
Awards under the NSF LTI vest on 31 December 2020 and participants are then required to hold their shares for a period of one year i. end of December 2021.
As Mr CresswellTurner holds an award under the NSF LTI which was made during 2017  the total value of the shares that may vest to Mr CresswellTurner under the ELG LTI and the NSF LTI at the end of December 2020 will be restricted to the greater of the value of the shares that can potentially vest under the NSF LTI and the value of the shares that can potentially vest under the ELG LTI.
This is to prevent any element of double counting as the NSF LTI is based on the increase in the value of the NSF Group as a whole including the value of ELG.
If Mr CresswellTurner were to cease employment on or before 31 December 2019 his award will either lapse or be restricted in value depending on the reason for his employment ceasing.
The Committee will have an overriding discretion to limit the amount payable under the awards or claw back awards that have been made if it considers that the ELG results have been achieved in an inappropriate manner.
We consider it appropriate for Mr CresswellTurner in his role as Chief Executive of ELG to participate in the ELG LTI along with the other senior management of ELG with appropriate restrictions on his award to reflect his participation in the NSF L TI.
Shareholder approval for the revised Policy will be sought at the AGM to be held at 11.00 am on Monday 14th May 2018.
We have also taken this opportunity of revising the Policy to include within the Policy the ability to deliver NonExecutive Directors fees in NSF shares and the provision of reasonable travel and subsistence expenses to the NonExecutive Directors in respect of their duties.
Business context and Committee decisions on remuneration As described in the 2017 Financial Review and Divisional Overview on pages 39 to 49 the Group delivered against a number of operational and financial objectives including annual loan book growth of more than 20% in all three business divisions.
The fact that this growth was achieved whilst maintaining a tight control on impairment was particularly encouraging and reflects the strength and skill of the senior management team as well as the effectiveness of the Groups risk management framework.
The significant investment made in supporting infrastructure during 2017 not only derisked the achievement of strong loan book growth in 2017  it has also underpinned the Groups current and future growth plans.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 66
FTSE All Share Index  Financial Services tel160 Directors remuneration report continued This significant investment in 2017  as well as in 2016 has resulted in sustained growth for the Group.
This is demonstrated in the chart below showing the Total Shareholder Return performance of the Group against the FTSE All Share Index  Financial Services from 1 January 2017 .
We consider this Index to be the most appropriate broadbased equity market for the Group to compare itself.
The business has developed rapidly since it was incorporated as a small startup cash shell and especially in 2017 .
It is now at a key point where it can start to maximise the benefit of the acquisitions it has made and seek further opportunities by building upon the firm foundations it has established and drawing upon the Groups considerable experience and reputation.
While we continue to maintain a policy of minimising fixed costs the size and complexity of the business has meant a substantial change and increase in responsibility of the Executive Directors.
We therefore feel we need to reposition the Directors base salaries to ensure that these remain competitive and fairly reflect their contribution to this larger and more complex business as well as the additional responsibilities that they have each taken on as a result of Miles CresswellTurner becoming Chief Executive of ELG.
This repositioning involves the increase of the base salary of John van Kuffeler to 325000 Nick Teunon to 280000 and Miles CresswellTurner to 280000.
During the year the Committee considered carefully Mr Cresswell Turners responsibilities as acting and now permanent Chief Executive of ELG.
Having taken advice we concluded that his salary should be increased by 50000 from 230000 to 280000 in September 2017 to reflect his new position.
In addition a further 50000 was paid to Mr CresswellTurner in respect of the period from May to September 2017 when he took on additional responsibilities as acting Chief Executive of ELG following the departure of Danny Malone without at the same time reducing his NSF responsibilities.
The increases to the base salary for the CEO and CFO were effective from 1 January 2018.
We have conducted benchmarking against a comparator group of companies in the same industry and of similar size and despite the increase in salaries the Executive Directors remuneration continues to fall within the lower quartile of these comparator companies.
Turning to bonuses for 2017  the Executive Directors had a maximum annual bonus opportunity of 100% of salary.
For each Executive Director the 2017 annual bonus determination was based on the achievement of financial and nonfinancial targets.
The financial target which equated to 70% of the maximum potential bonus was 20.1m based on the profit of the Group before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items including temporary additional commission and other expansion related costs at Loans at Home and tax.
The actual profit on this basis was 18.5m being 92% of target and above the 90% threshold for payment of the minimum 25% of the financial element of the bonus.
The next 50% of the financial element accrued on a straightline basis between 90% and 100% of target.
Therefore the financial element of the bonus vested at 35% of the maximum financial element of 70% i.
24.5% of maximum bonus.
The nonfinancial target was based on five key component targets equating to 30% of maximum potential bonus.
These components were that i and ii for each of the trading entities within the Group positive reports from KPMG the Groups outsourced internal audit provider on lending practices including affordability assessment and policies for dealing with vulnerable customers and collection practices including forbearance and policies for dealing with vulnerable customers iii a minimum cashundrawn headroom being achieved of 5m at 31 December 2017 with a dividend payment policy of 50% of posttax profit before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items iv full FCA authorisation being granted to Loans at Home not later than 31 December 2017 and v no material breaches of the Companys Risk Appetite Policy.
I am pleased to say that 87% of the nonfinancial targets vested i.
26% of maximum bonus reflecting the importance the Executive Directors place on ensuring that the Group conducts its business in a compliant and responsible manner.
The Remuneration Committee has therefore determined that the bonus vested at 50.5% giving rise to bonuses awarded to the Executive Directors of 145190 for John van Kuffeler 116150 for Nick Teunon and 123800 for Miles CresswellTurner 50.5% of maximum applied to his base salary of 245000 for 2017 but not to the additional salary of 50000 paid in respect of his additional responsibilities when he was acting Chief Executive of ELG.
The 2017 bonuses will be paid in cash.
No part of the bonus will be subject to deferral.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 67 The Committee has determined that Mr CresswellTurners maximum bonus potential for 2018 will remain at 100% of salary but the performance measures should include financial and nonfinancial targets in relation to ELG.
Awards to Executive Directors were made during the year under the NSF LTI.
Awards were also made during the year under the ELG LTI for key employees of ELG.
A similar longterm incentive plan has been introduced and awards made at Loans at Home LAH so that key employees can participate in the growth in value of LAH.
Awards were also made including to Executive Directors under the allemployee Sharesave Plan SAYE.
Finally in respect of the fees for the NonExecutive Directors these are unchanged apart from those of the Chairman.
The Board without the Chairman present decided that a repositioning was required to the fees paid to the Chairman in order to keep them competitive and to fairly reflect the increased scale and complexity of the Group as well as to ensure an appropriate balance given the relative positioning of the fees paid to the other NonExecutive Directors.
The Board without the Chairman present concluded that the Chairmans fees should be increased to 125000 with effect from 1 January 2018.
Format of this report and matters to be approved at our Annual General Meeting in May 2018 The remainder of this report is split out into the following three sections Part B Our remuneration at a glance page 68.
Part C Directors Remuneration Policy pages 69 to 76.
Part D Annual Report on Remuneration providing details of the payments made to Directors in 2017  as well as other statutory disclosures pages 76 to 82 and which complies with the disclosure requirements of the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority and the UK 2016 Corporate Governance Code.
At our 2018 AGM resolutions to approve the new Directors Remuneration Policy and the Annual Report on Remuneration and this letter will be put to shareholders for approval.
I ask for your support on both resolutions.
The Committee and I are keen to hear and actively take note of your views as shareholders on our remuneration strategy.
On behalf of the Remuneration Committee and Board Charles Gregson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 March 2018 Governance NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 68 Directors remuneration report continued Part B Our remuneration at a glance Ahead of the detailed Directors Remuneration Policy and the Annual Report on Remuneration we have below summarised how key elements of the Remuneration Policy will be implemented for 2018 and the key decisions taken by the Committee in relation to base pay and incentives for the Executives in respect of 2017 .
2018 Executive Director Remuneration Policy John van Kuffeler Nick T eunon Miles Cresswell T urner Base salary 325000  280000  280000 Annual bonus Maximum 100% of salary 100% of salary 100% of salary Ontarget 75% of salary 75% of salary 75% of salary Threshold 25% of salary 25% of salary 25% of salary Operation for 2018  Performance measures are weighted as to 70% financial profit before tax and 30% nonfinancial including conductbased measures which seek to reward the delivery of good customer outcomes through appropriate affordability assessments and appropriate treatment of vulnerable customers together with appropriate collections arrears and forbearance practices.
Threshold vesting will be set at 90% of target with ontarget vesting at 100% and maximum vesting at 110% with vesting on a sliding scale between these points.
As Miles CresswellTurner is Chief Executive of ELG onethird of his performance measures will be based on Group targets and twothirds will be based on performance measures for ELG.
The measures relating to ELG will carry the same weighting as for the Group measures i.
70% on the financial performance of ELG and 30% on nonfinancial targets for ELG.
Bonus is payable in cash following the end of the financial year.
Malus and clawback Malus and clawback provisions will apply under the annual bonus at the discretion of the Committee in appropriate circumstances such as a participants material underperformance material misstatement of the accounts gross misconduct and fraud regulatory and similar failures or such other reason as determined by the Committee.
John van Kuffeler Nick T eunon Miles Cresswell T urner ELG LTI % of growth in value of ELG above 267m Nil Nil 0.75% Operation for 2018  Miles CresswellTurner will receive an award in the form of a nilcost option which he will hold during the performance period ending on 31 December 2019.
Restrictions on the award will apply during the performance period and the ability to exercise the option will be deferred for a period of one year after the end of the performance period.
There will then be a holding period of one year for the NSF shares acquired.
The value total attributable to the award will be 0.75% of the growth in equity value market capitalisation of ELG above 267m subject to a cap of 900000 measured at the end of the performance period.
At the end of the performance period participants awards will vest and the number of NSF shares available to be acquired under the option will be determined.
However the ability to exercise the option will be deferred for a year.
Mr CresswellTurner must hold any NSF shares acquired for a further one year before being able to sell them.
Malus and clawback Malus and clawback provisions will apply under the ELG LTI at the discretion of the Committee in appropriate circumstances such as a participants material underperformance material misstatement of the accounts gross misconduct and fraud regulatory and similar failures or such other reason as determined by the Committee.
John van Kuffeler Nick T eunon Miles Cresswell T urner Pension 10% of salary 10% of salary 10% of salary Shareholding requirement 100% of salary over 5 years 100% of salary over 5 years 100% of salary over 5 years 2017 yearend decisions made John van Kuffeler Nick T eunon Miles Cresswell T urner 2018 salary review 13% increase to 325000 per annum from 1 January 2018 22% increase to 280000 per annum from 1 January 2018 22% increase to 28000 per annum from 12 September 2017 2017 bonus outcome Value 145190 116150 123800 % of salarymaximum 50.5% of salary 50.5% of salary 50.5% of salary Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 69 Part C Directors Remuneration Policy This section of the report contains details of the Directors Remuneration Policy that will govern the Companys future remuneration payments.
The
Policy is intended to apply for three years from the approval of the Policy.
The Policy described in this part is subject to approval by shareholders at the Companys AGM on 14 May 2018.
The Policy will be displayed on the Companys website in the Investors section immediately after the 2018 AGM.
The Directors Remuneration Policy contains two changes from the Policy that was approved at the 2017 AGM.
These changes are to allow one of the Executive Directors to become eligible to receive an award under the ELG LTI and for NonExecutive Directors the ability to receive fees in the form of NSF shares and the provision of travel and subsistence expenses.
The Committee has established the Policy on the remuneration of the Executive Directors and the Chairman.
The Board has established the Policy on the remuneration of the other NonExecutive Directors.
Executive Director Remuneration Policy Remuneration strategy The Companys remuneration strategy is to provide a remuneration framework based on the following principles Attract motivate and retain Executive and senior management in order to deliver the Companys strategic goals and business outputs Encourage and support a culture that delivers good customer outcomes and which adheres to FCA best practice Reward delivery of the Companys business plan and key strategic goals Adhere to the principles of good corporate governance and appropriate risk management Align employees interests with the interests of shareholders and other external stakeholders and encourage widespread equity ownership across the Group We believe that the current and proposed remuneration structure will continue to support and motivate our Executive Directors in furthering the Companys longterm strategic objectives including the creation of sustainable shareholder returns.
Furthermore the Committee is satisfied that the composition and structure of the remuneration package is appropriate and does not incentivise undue risktaking or reward underperformance.
The table below sets out the key elements of the Policy for Executive Directors Remuneration Policy table Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures and assessment Base salary To provide competitive fixed remuneration that will attract and retain key employees and reflect their experience and position in the Group.
Salaries are reviewed annually and any changes normally take effect from 1 January.
When determining the salary of the Executives the Committee takes into consideration the levels of base salary for similar positions with comparable status responsibility and skills in organisations of broadly similar size and complexity the performance of the individual Executive Director the individual Executive Directors experience and responsibilities pay and conditions throughout the Group including the level of salary increases awarded to other employees and the level of incentive compensation provided to the Executives under the annual bonus.
Annual percentage increases are generally consistent with the range awarded across the Group.
Percentage increases in salary above this level may be made in certain circumstances such as a change in responsibility or a significant increase in the roles scale or the Groups size and complexity.
The salaries payable to the Executive Directors from 1 January 2018 are disclosed on page 78.
A broad assessment of individual and business performance is used as part of the salary review.
No recovery provisions apply.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 70 Directors remuneration report continued Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures and assessment
To provide competitive benefits and to attract and retain highcalibre employees.
Reviewed periodically to ensure benefits remain market competitive.
Benefits currently include Company car for John van Kuffeler.
Life private medical and income protection insurance.
Other minor benefits as provided from time to time.
Benefit values vary yearonyear depending on premiums and the maximum potential value is the cost of the provision of these benefits.
No recovery provisions apply.
Pension
To provide a competitive Company contribution that enables effective retirement planning.
Pension is provided by way of a contribution to a personal pension scheme or cash allowance in lieu of pension benefits.
The maximum contribution to a personal pension scheme or cash in lieu is equal to 10% of base salary.
No performance or recovery provisions apply.
Annual bonus
Groups shortterm performance goals and protects longer term interests of the
Bonus awards are granted annually following the signing of the Annual Report and Accounts usually in March of the year following the reporting period in question.
Performance period is one financial year with payout determined by the Committee following the year end based on achievement against a range of financial and nonfinancial targets.
Malus and clawback provisions apply at the discretion of the Committee where the Committee considers such action is reasonable and appropriate such as a participants material underperformance material brand or reputational damage material misstatement of the accounts gross misconduct and fraud regulatory and similar failures or other reason as determined by the Committee.
Maximum awards under the annual bonus are equal to 100% of salary.
Ontarget bonus 75% of salary.
Threshold bonus 25% of salary.
Performance targets will be set annually by the Committee based on a range of interdependent financial and nonfinancial measures.
Financial targets govern the majority of bonus payments which may include those related to profit before tax.
Nonfinancial measures will include conductbased measures which ensure delivery of good customer outcomes through appropriate affordability assessments and appropriate treatment of vulnerable customers together with appropriate collections arrears and forbearance practices.
The Committee has the discretion to adjust targets or performance measures for any exceptional events that may occur during the year.
As well as determining the measures and targets the Committee will also determine the weighting of the various measures to ensure that they support the business strategy and objectives for the relevant year.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 71 Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures and assessment LongTerm Incentive
Finance LTI for Executive Directors and senior management.
The LongTerm Incentives support the longterm strategic objectives of the Group.
Participants will receive awards which may be structured as awards or options over Ordinary Shares in the Company which may then be exchanged for Ordinary Shares in the Company shortly after the end of the performance period on 31 December 2020.
In each case participants will then be required to hold such shares in the Company for a period of one year.
The number of Ordinary Shares required to settle all such awards together with any Ordinary Shares issued in connection with the Founder Shares see below will be subject to a cap on the maximum dilution possible of 5% in 10 years.
There will also be a further cap so that together with all other share incentive plans offered by the Company the maximum dilution possible will not be greater than 10% in 10 years.
Any awards earned in excess of either cap will be satisfied through market purchase of shares by the Company.
The total value of awards at 31 December 2020 will be determined by the growth in the value of the Company to 31 December 2020 above 1.10.
If the average share price of the Company is greater than 1.10 the value of the awards in total will equate to 15% of the excess growth in value based on market capitalisation of the Company above 1.10.
Founder Shares awarded to Executive Directors on IPO.
Prior to the IPO the Executive Directors Charles Gregson and Robin Ashton were awarded Founder Shares in NonStandard Finance Subsidiary Limited.
Under the terms of these shares the holders of the Founder Shares have the option to require the Company to purchase some or all of their Founder
The purchase price for the exercise of this option may be paid by the Company in Ordinary Shares or as a cash equivalent at the Companys option.
The number of Ordinary Shares required to settle all such options is the number of shares that would have represented 5% of the Ordinary Shares of the Company on or immediately after Admission if such Ordinary Shares had been issued at the time of Admission.
A. the Group must make acquisitions with a combined value of at least 50 million and trading days.
Everyday Loans Group LTI for Miles CresswellTurner and senior management of ELG.
The LongTerm Incentives support the longterm strategic objectives of the
In recognition of Mr CreswellTurner becoming Chief Executive of ELG he will receive an award under the ELG LTI which was implemented in 2017 .
The structure of the award is a nilcost option over NSF shares.
The maximum value of the award under the ELG LTI for Mr Creswell Turner is 900000.
Under the ELG L TI participants share in a pool of 5% of the equity value above a hurdle equity value of ELG of 267m.
The pool is subject to a cap of 6m.
Mr Cresswell T urner will receive an allocation of 15% of the pool which will result in a 0.75% share of the growth in ELGs equity value above 267m at 31 December 2019  subject to a cap of 900000.
Performance will be tested against the hurdle at 31 December 2019  though the ability to exercise the option will be deferred for one year .
Shares acquired on the exercise of the option will have to be held for a further year .
Awards under the NSF L TI will vest at the end of December 2020.
As
Mr Cresswell T urner holds an award under the NSF L TI which was made during 2017  the total value of shares received by Mr Cresswell T urner under the ELG L TI and the NSF L TI at the end of December 2020 will be restricted to the greater of the value of the shares receivable under the NSF L TI and the value of the shares receivable under the ELG L TI.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 72 Directors remuneration report continued Element purpose and link to strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures and assessment
Encourage all employees to become shareholders and thereby align their interests with shareholders.
Eligible employees may participate in the Sharesave Plan andor Share Incentive Plan andor Company Share Option Plan or country equivalent.
Executive Directors are entitled to participate on those same terms.
Maximum participation levels for all staff including Executive Directors are set by relevant UK legislation or other relevant legislation.
Not applicable.
Shareholding guidelines To ensure that Executive Directors interests are aligned with those of shareholders over a longer time horizon.
The Executive Directors are required to build or maintain as relevant a minimum shareholding in the Company over a fiveyear period.
Shares included in this calculation are those held beneficially by the Executive Director and their spouse life partner.
The shareholding requirement is 100% of salary for Executive
Not applicable.
Performance measures and targets The table below sets out the rationale for performance measures chosen in respect of the annual bonus Element Performance measures Rationale How targets are set Annual bonus A range of financial and nonfinancial performance measures.
Aligns opportunity with both financial and personal targets.
The performance targets are determined annually by the Committee taking into account market conditions and forecasts.
NSF LTI Share price of the Company Aligns interests with those of shareholders and will not deliver a return to participants before investors achieve a return above the prices at which the Company raised equity.
The performance target has been set at share price of 1.10 at 31 December 2020.
ELG LTI Equity value of ELG Aligns interests with those of NSF and will not deliver a return to participants before NSF achieves a commercial return on its investment.
The performance target has been set at an equity value for ELG of 267m at 31 December 2019.
Discretion with the Directors Remuneration Policy The Committee has discretion in several areas of Policy as set out in this report.
The Committee may also exercise operational and administrative discretion under relevant plan rules approved by shareholders as set out in those rules.
In addition the Committee has the discretion to amend policy with regard to minor or administrative matters where it would be in the opinion of the Committee disproportionate to seek or await shareholder approval.
Changes from the last approved Remuneration Policy In recognition of Mr CresswellTurners appointment as Chief Executive Officer of ELG his participation in the ELG LTI has been added to the last approved Remuneration Policy.
Senior management of ELG currently hold awards under that incentive plan.
The Policy now includes the ability to deliver NonExecutive Directors fees in NSF shares and the provision of reasonable travel and subsistence expenses to the NonExecutive Directors in respect of their duties.
There have been no other changes to the last approved Remuneration Policy.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 7tel325 36% 27% 36% 35% 19% 47% 100% 20% 80% 8telMinimum Ontarget Maximum Threshold John van Kuffeler 000 40tel50tel0 Base salary Annual bonus
28tel28tel28telMinimum Ontarget Maximum Threshold Miles CresswellTurner 000 40tel50teltel28tel80 39% 22% 39% 37% 14% 49% 100% 20% 80% Base salary Annual bonus
28tel28tel28telMinimum Ontarget Maximum Threshold Nick Teunon 000 40tel50tel0 Base salary Annual bonus
28tel% 39% 37% 14% 39% 49% 100% 20% 80% Illustrations of application of Remuneration Policy The charts below seek to demonstrate how pay varies with performance for the Executive Directors based on the stated Remuneration Policy.
The charts show an estimate of the remuneration that could be received by Executives Directors under the Policy set out in this report.
Each of the bars is broken down to show how the total under each scenario is made up of fixed elements of remuneration the annual bonus and the longterm incentive.
The charts indicate that a significant proportion of both target and maximum pay is performancerelated.
Assumptions used in determining the level of payout under given scenarios are as follows Element Minimum Threshold OnTarget Maximum Fixed elements Base salary at 1 January 2018 Estimated value of benefits provided under the Policy Pension  10% of salary Annual bonus Nil 25% of maximum 75% of maximum 100% of salary NSF LTI Nil Nil 100% of the IFRS 2 value of the award 200% of the IFRS 2 value of the award ELG LTI Nil Nil As for NSF LTI As for NSF LTI Awards made under the NSF LTI and ELG LTI will be on a oneoff basis.
The ontarget value displayed in the charts represents the expected IFRS2 value of the NSF LTI award.
The maximum value displayed represents twice the expected IFRS 2 value for the NSF LTI.
The IFRS 2 value is considered to be a suitable basis for estimating the potential payouts of the NSF LTI.
The ELG LTI award for Miles CresswellTurner underpins his NSF LTI award and therefore the ontarget and maximum values of this award are effectively included within the NSF LTI award for him.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 74 Directors remuneration report continued Approach to recruitment and promotions The Company will pay total remuneration for new Executive Directors that enables the Company to attract appropriately skilled and experienced individuals but is not in the opinion of the Committee excessive.
The remuneration package for any new recruit would be assessed following the same principles as for the Executive Directors as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
For a new Executive Director who is an internal appointment the Company may also continue to honour contractual commitments made prior to the internal appointment even if those commitments are otherwise inconsistent with the Policy in force when the commitments are satisfied.
Any relevant incentive plan participation may either continue on its original terms or the performance targets andor measures may be amended to reflect the individuals new role as the Committee considers appropriate.
The table below summarises our key policies with respect to recruitment remuneration Element Policy description Base salary and benefits  The salary level will be set taking into account a number of factors including market factors the individuals experience and responsibilities and other pay structures within the Company and will be consistent with the salary policy for existing Executive Directors.
Benefits may be provided in line with the Companys benefits policy as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Pension  An Executive Director will be able to receive either a contribution to a personal pension scheme or cash allowance in lieu of pension benefits in line with the Companys Policy as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Annual bonus  An Executive Director will be eligible to participate in the annual bonus as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Awards may be granted up to the maximum opportunity allowable in the Remuneration Policy table at the Committees discretion.
Longterm incentives  An Executive Director may participate in the NSF LTI to the extent that awards are available as set out in the Remuneration Policy table.
Maximum variable remuneration The maximum annual variable remuneration that an Executive Director can receive may be up to 100% of salary i. annual bonus.
Share buyouts replacement awards The Company may where appropriate compensate a new Executive Director for variable remuneration that has been forfeited as a result of accepting the appointment with the Company.
Where the Company compensates a new Executive Director in this way it will seek to do so under the terms of the Companys existing variable remuneration arrangements but may compensate on terms that are more bespoke than the existing arrangements where the Committee considers that to be appropriate.
In such instances the Company will disclose a full explanation of the detail and rationale for such recruitment related compensation.
In making such awards the Committee will seek to take into account the nature including whether awards are cash or sharebased vesting period and performance measures andor conditions for any remuneration forfeited by the individual when leaving a previous employer.
Where such awards had outstanding performance or service conditions which are not significantly completed the Company will generally impose equivalent conditions.
The value of the buyout awards will broadly be the equivalent of or less than the expected value of the award being bought out.
Relocation policies  In instances where the new Executive is relocated from one work location to another the Company will provide compensation to reflect the cost of relocation for the Executive in cases where they are expected to spend significant time away from their home location in accordance with its normal relocation package for employees.
The level of the relocation package will be assessed on a casebycase basis but will take into consideration any cost of living differences housing allowance and schooling in accordance with the Companys normal relocation package for employees.
Legal fees  The Company may where appropriate compensate a new Executive Director for legal costs incurred as a result of termination of previous employment in order to accept the appointment with the Company.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 75 Executive Director service contracts and payment for loss of office Service contracts When setting notice periods the Committee has regard to market practice and corporate governance best practice.
Executive Directors service agreements can be terminated by not less than 12 months prior written notice given by the Executive or by the employer.
The table below summarises the service contracts and letters of appointment for our Executive Directors.
Date of contract Notice period John van Kuffeler 19 February 2015 12 months Executive and Company Nick Teunon 19 February 2015 Miles CresswellTurner 1 January 2016 All service contracts are available for viewing at the Companys registered office and at the AGM.
The Executive Directors are permitted to sit as a NonExecutive Director on the Board of another company with the Companys written consent.
Payments for loss of office When determining any loss of office payment for a departing Director the Committee will always seek to minimise cost to the Company while complying with the contractual terms and seeking to reflect the circumstances in place at the time.
The Committee reserves the right to make additional payments where such payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of an Executive Directors office or employment.
The table below sets out for each element of total remuneration the Companys policy on payment for loss of office in respect of Executive Directors and any discretion available Element Approach Discretion Base salary 12 months under contract None Annual bonus None payable Prorata bonus may be awarded dependent on reasons for leaving Founder Shares No forfeiture None NSF LTI and ELG LTI None payable if loss of office is because of resignation or gross misconduct or if the departing employee is not considered to be a good leaver.
Otherwise prorata award of shares payable at the end of the performance period and subject to the deferral period.
Prorata award of shares may be awarded dependent on the reasons for leaving.
Consideration of employee remuneration and shareholders Consideration of shareholder views The Remuneration Committee takes the views of shareholders seriously and these views are taken into account in setting remuneration policy and practice.
Shareholder views are considered when evaluating and setting remuneration strategy and the Committee commits to consulting with key shareholders prior to any significant changes to its Remuneration Policy.
Allemployee remuneration In setting the Remuneration Policy for Directors the pay and conditions of other employees of NSF are taken into account including any base salary increases awarded.
The Committee is provided with data on the remuneration structure for management level tiers below the Executive Directors and uses this information to ensure consistency of approach throughout the Company.
Formal consultation on the remuneration of Executive Directors is not undertaken with employees.
The Remuneration Policy described above applies specifically to Executive Directors of the Company.
The Committee believes that the structure of management and employee reward should be linked to the Companys strategy and performance.
The table below illustrates how the remuneration framework operates below the Executive Directors Level as at 31 December 2017
Fixed remuneration Annual bonus
Incentives
All employee share plans
Senior management 14 Heads of divisions andor functions 34 Other employees 703   Governance NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 76 Directors remuneration report continued NonExecutive Director Remuneration Policy and letters of appointment Remuneration Policy table The Board as a whole is responsible for setting the remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors.
The table below sets out the key elements of the Policy for NonExecutive Directors Purpose Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures and assessment
Core element of remuneration set at a level sufficient to attract and retain individuals with appropriate knowledge and experience in organisations of broadly similar size and complexity.
Fee levels are sufficient to attract individuals with appropriate knowledge and experience.
NonExecutive Directors are paid a base fee in cash or shares in NSF .
In exceptional circumstances fees may also be paid for additional time spent on the Companys business outside of the normal duties.
Reviewed annually with any changes generally effective from 1 January.
Any increases in fees will be determined based on time commitment and take into consideration level of responsibility and fees paid in other companies of comparable size and complexity.
NonExecutive Directors do not receive any variable remuneration element or receive any other benefits.
Current fees are set out in the
Annual Report on Remuneration
Increases in fees will be in line with the median fee levels of comparable companies.
Not applicable.
Expenses
To provide NonExecutive Directors with travel and subsistence expenses.
NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed for all reasonable travelling and subsistence expenses including any relevant tax incurred in carrying out their duties.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Letters of appointment The NonExecutive Directors do not have service contracts but are appointed under letters of appointment.
Appointments are reviewed every three years and new appointments are made following recommendation by the Nomination Committee.
Date of appointment Charles Gregson 19 February 2015 Heather McGregor 19 February 2015 Niall Booker 9 May 2017 The letters of appointment for Charles Gregson and Heather McGregor have been reviewed and extended for a further three years.
No compensation is payable in the event of early termination apart from the notice period.
All letters of appointment are available for viewing at the Companys registered office and at the AGM.
Niall Booker joined on 9 May 2017 .
Part D Annual Report on Remuneration This Annual Report on Remuneration contains details of how the Companys Remuneration Policy for Directors was implemented during the financial year ended 31 December 2017 .
Disclosures in this report have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the Regulations.
An advisory resolution to approve this report and the annual statement will be put to shareholders at the AGM on 14 May 2018.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 77 Single figure remuneration table Executive Directors  audited The remuneration of Executive Directors showing the breakdown between components with comparative figures for the prior financial year is shown below.
Figures provided have been calculated in accordance with the Regulations.
Base Salary
Bonus
LongTerm
Incentives
Pension
Other
Total
John van Kuffeler  29  498 John van Kuffeler 2016 288 34   29  351 Nick Teunon  386 Nick Teunon 2016 207 11   21  239 Miles CresswellTurner  459 Miles CresswellTurner 2016 230 12   20  262
Benefits comprise a car in the case of John van Kuffeler and life medical and income protection insurance in the case of John van Kuffeler Nick Teunon and Miles CresswellTurner  the values of which have been included in the benefits column.
The Executive Directors are entitled to receive a contribution to a personal pension scheme or cash in lieu  the value of which has been included in the Pension column.
The base salary for Miles CresswellTurner includes the temporary additional salary of 50000 paid in respect of the period when he was acting as Chief Executive of ELG as well as continuing his responsibilities as an Executive Director.
The additional salary was excluded in the determination of his bonus.
Longterm incentives were the grant of options at a 20% discount under the SAYE plan.
Awards were also made under the NSF LTI which will vest at 31 December 2020.
Annual bonus outcomes for the period ended 31 December 2017  audited For 2017 the Executive Directors had a maximum annual bonus opportunity of 100% of salary.
For each Executive Director the 2017 annual bonus determination was based on the achievement of the financial and nonfinancial targets.
The annual bonus table below provides information on the resulting bonus payment for each Executive Director.
The financial and nonfinancial targets for the 2017 annual bonus and the extent to which they were met are as follows The financial target which equated to 70% of the maximum potential bonus was 20.1m based on the profit of the Company before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items including temporary additional commission and other expansion related costs at Loans at Home and tax.
The actual profit on this basis was 18.5m being 92% of target and above the 90% threshold for payment of the minimum 25% of the financial element of the bonus.
The next 50% of the financial element accrued on a straightline basis between 90% and 100% of target.
Therefore the financial element of the bonus vested at 35% of the maximum financial element of 70% i.
24.5% of maximum bonus.
The nonfinancial element was based on five individual components representing 30% of maximum bonus in total.
These nonfinancial targets which are described below were met as follows For each of the trading entities within the Group positive reports from KPMG the Groups outsourced internal audit provider on lending practices including affordability assessment and policies for dealing with vulnerable customers.
Met as to 71%.
For each of the trading entities within the Group positive reports from KPMG on collections practices including forbearance and policies for dealing with vulnerable customers.
Met as to 71%.
A minimum cashundrawn headroom of 5m for the Company at 31 December 2017 with a dividend payment policy of 50% of posttax profit before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items.
Met in full.
The granting of full FCA authorisation to Loans at Home not later than 31 December 2017 .
Met in full.
No material breaches of NSFs Risk Appetite Policy.
Met in full.
As a result the nonfinancial element was met as to 87% i.
26% of maximum resulting in a total award for Executive Directors of 50.5% of the maximum.
The Remuneration Committee has therefore determined that the bonuses awarded to the Executive Directors are 145190 for John van Kuffeler 50.5% of maximum 116150 for Nick Teunon 50.5% of maximum and 123800 for Miles CresswellTurner 50.5% of maximum excluding the additional salary of 50000.
The 2017 bonuses will be paid in cash.
No part of the bonus will be subject to deferral.
LongTerm Incentive awards made in 2017 As stated in our Remuneration Policy awards were made during 2017 under the NSF LTI.
Under the NSF LTI participants have been awarded a right to share in a pool of 15% of the growth in value based on market capitalisation of the Company above a share price hurdle of 1.10 being 29% above the price at which the majority of the Groups shares were issued.
Performance is measured against this hurdle after four years starting from 1 January 2017 i.
31 December 2020 though delivery of shares is deferred until the end of the fifth year i.
31 December 2021.
Awards held by participants who cease employment during the fouryear performance period will either lapse or be restricted in value depending on the reason for employment ceasing.
The Committee has an overriding discretion to limit the amount payable under the awards or claw back awards that have been made if it considers that the Groups results have been achieved in an inappropriate manner.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 78 Directors remuneration report continued The pool in which participants share will be diluted and adjusted for any new issue of shares.
There is a cap on the maximum number of shares issued under the LTI such that together with any shares issued under the Founder Share scheme no more than 5% can be issued in any 10year period and that together with all other share incentive plans offered by the Company no more than 10% can be issued in any 10year period.
Any awards earned in excess of this will be satisfied through market purchase shares by the Company.
The following awards were made under the NSF LTI.
The awards for John van Kuffeler and Nick Teunon were in the form of nilcost options over NSF shares.
The award for Miles CresswellTurner was in the form of shares in an intermediate holding company these shares will be exchanged for shares in NSF on vesting subject to the share price hurdle being met John van Kuffeler Nick T eunon Miles Cresswell T urner
Miles CresswellTurner and Nick Teunon participated in the awards made under the SAYE plan during 2017  each receiving options over a maximum of 29703 shares at an exercise price of 0.606 per share being a 20% discount to the value of a share at the date of grant.
Payments to past Directors or for loss of office  audited During the year there were no payments to past Directors and no payments for loss of office.
Implementation of Remuneration Policy for the Executive Directors for 2018 Base salary In setting salary levels for the 2018 financial year for the Executive Directors the Committee considered a number of factors including individual performance and experience pay and conditions for employees across the Company the general performance of the Company pay levels in other comparable companies other elements of remuneration and the economic environment.
The salaries for 2018 and the relative increases are set out below.
Base salary tel % change John van Kuffeler 325 288 13% Nick Teunon 280 230 22% Miles CresswellTurner 280 230 22%
The increase in Miles CresswellTurners base salary in September 2017 was made to reflect his additional responsibilities as Chief Executive of ELG while continuing to be an Executive
The additional salary for Miles CresswellTurner when he was acting Chief Executive of ELG has been excluded from the calculation of the relative increase.
The increases for John van Kuffeler and Nick Teunon are to ensure that these remain competitive and fairly reflect their contribution to the larger and more complex business undertaken by the Group as well as their additional responsibilities as a result of Miles CresswellTurner becoming Chief Executive of ELG.
Despite the increase in salaries the Executive Directors remuneration continues to fall within the lower quartile of comparator companies.
Pension and benefits The maximum contribution to a personal pension scheme or cash in lieu is equal to 10% of base salary for all Executive Directors.
None of the Executive Directors had prospective rights under a defined benefit pension scheme.
Benefits will be provided to the Executive Directors in line with the Directors Remuneration Policy.
Annual bonus Consistent with the Directors Remuneration Policy the maximum and target bonus potentials for 2018 are
Ontarget
Threshold bonus % of maximum John van Kuffeler 100% 75% 25% Nick Teunon 100% 75% 25% Miles CresswellTurner 100% 75% 25% For the 2018 financial year performance measures include financial measures based on profit of the Company before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items and tax and nonfinancial measures including conductbased measures which ensure delivery of good customer outcomes through appropriate affordability assessments and appropriate treatment of vulnerable customers together with appropriate collections arrears and forbearance practices.
Financial and nonfinancial measures are split 70% financial and 30% nonfinancial.
Miles CresswellTurners performance measures will be based as to onethird on Group performance and twothirds on performance of ELG.
Threshold vesting will be set at 90% of target with ontarget vesting at 100% and maximum vesting at 110% with vesting on a sliding scale between these points.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 79 The Board is of the opinion that the precise performance targets for the annual bonus are commercially sensitive and that it would be detrimental to the interests of the Company to disclose them before the end of the financial year.
Actual targets performance achieved and awards made will be published at the end of the performance period so shareholders can fully assess the basis for any payouts.
Longterm incentive awards The following awards are to be made under the ELG LTI.
Miles CresswellTurner 5% 0.75% Consideration by the Committee of matters relating to the Directors remuneration for 2017 and 2018 The Committee seeks to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code but does not meet requirement D.2.1 of the Code as the Chairman of the Company is also the Chair of the Committee.
The Committee and the Board of the Company consider this provision to not be appropriate given the size and nature of the Company.
The Committee makes recommendations to the Board within agreed terms of reference on remuneration for the Executive Directors and has oversight of remuneration arrangements for senior management.
The Committees full terms of reference are available on the Companys website at site Members of the Committee during 2017 Independent January 2017 March 2017 August 2017 September 2017 October 2017 November 2017 Attendance Charles Gregson No 100% Heather McGregor Yes 100% Niall Booker Yes    75%
Niall Booker joined the Board on 9 May 2017 .
Niall Booker was unable to attend the meeting in September as he had a prior appointment made before he was invited to join the Board.
All Committee members attended all Remuneration Committee meetings unless otherwise stated that took place while they were members of the Committee.
The Group Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer attend meetings at the invitation of the Committee but are not present when their own remuneration is being discussed.
The Committee received external advice in 2017 from PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC during the year.
PwC were appointed by the Committee in May 2015 as advisers after a tender process.
PwC are considered by the Committee to be objective and independent.
PwC are members of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operate under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee reviewed the nature of all the services provided during the year by PwC and was satisfied that no conflict of interest exists or existed in the provision of these services.
The total fees paid to PwC in respect of services to the Committee during the year were 28200.
Fees were determined based on the scope and nature of the projects undertaken for the Committee.
PwC also provides valuation advice and assistance with implementation of the Groups longterm incentive arrangements.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 80
FTSE All Share Index  Financial Services telDirectors remuneration report continued During the financial year there were six Committee meetings.
The matters covered at each meeting are covered in the table below January 2017 March 2017 Review of Executive Directors bonuses performance targets for 2016 Discussion of the remuneration for NonExecutive Directors Discussion of the approval of NSF LTI Update on longterm incentive plans for Loans at Home and Everyday Loans Group Agreement of work plan for 2017 Consideration and approval of the making of awards under the NSF LTI to eligible participants August 2017 September 2017 The additional salary for Miles CresswellTurner in respect of his acting Chief Executive at ELG The participation of Mr CresswellTurner in the ELG LTI The approval of Miles CresswellTurners remuneration as CEO of
The approval of a longterm incentive plan to be implemented for Loans at Home October 2017 November 2017 Approval of the increased fee for Charles Gregson  Approval of the revised financial target for 2017 bonus of 20.1m based on budgeted profits before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles exceptional items including temporary additional commission and other expansionrelated costs at Loans at Home and tax Agreement that the temporary additional commission and other expansion related costs at Loans at Home would be considered exceptional for this purpose Approval of an amended budget to include George Banco from midAugust and the impact of refinancing the Groups debt facilities Group Chief Executive and employee pay The Committee believes that the current Executive Directors Remuneration Policy and the supporting reward structure provide clear alignment with the Companys performance.
The Committee believes it is appropriate to monitor the Companys performance against the FTSE All Share Index  Financial Services as this Index provides a measure of a sufficiently broad equity market against which the Company considers that it is suitable to compare itself The chart below illustrates our Total Shareholder Return performance against the FTSE All Share Index  Financial Services since the date of the IPO in February 2015 to 31 December 2017 .
Total Shareholder Return Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 81 Despite having fulfilled most of the strategic objectives set out at the time of the Groups Initial Public Offering the Groups shares have underperformed the FTSE All Share Financial Services Index during the period.
Possible reasons for this underperformance include limited liquidity in the Groups shares limited research coverage by sellside analysts softer than expected financial performance by Loans at Home in 2016 and concerns over future market and regulatory conditions in the UK consumer finance segment.
Group Chief Executivetel Single figure of total remuneration 000 498 351 473 Bonus payout % maximum 50.5% 0% 100% Longterm incentive vesting rates % maximum na na na Percentage change in the Chief Executive Officers remuneration The table below compares the percentage increase in the Group Chief Executives pay on an annual basis with the wider employee population.
The Company considers the Groups employees excluding the Executive Directors to be an appropriate comparator group.
Group Chief Executive 15% 19% See note Employee pay 2.25% 0% See note
The Group Chief Executive received a bonus of 50.5% of salary for 2017 and no bonus for 2016.
There were no changes to bonus payments at Everyday Loans including TrustTwo but bonuses were paid at Loans at Home 2016 nil.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below shows the overall spend on pay for all the Groups employees compared with returns distributed to shareholders.
Significant distributions 2017 2016 % change Employee spend 28.8m 17.8m 61.8 Distributions to shareholders including share buybacks 5.8m 0.9m
Employee spend for 2017 includes pay for the employees of George Banco following the acquisition in August 2017 .
Single figure remuneration table NonExecutive Directors  audited The remuneration of NonExecutive Directors showing the breakdown between components with comparative figures for the prior year is shown below.
Figures provided have been calculated in accordance with the Regulations.
Fees
Benefitsother
Total
Charles Gregson 2017 50  50 Charles Gregson 2016 50  50 Heather McGregor 2017 75  75 Heather McGregor 2016 75  75 Niall Booker 2017 50  50 Niall Booker 2016
Niall Booker joined the Board on 9 May 2017 .
NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed travel and subsistence expenses that are incurred for business reasons.
Any tax that arises on these reimbursed expenses is paid by the Company.
Fees to be provided in 2018 to the NonExecutive Directors The following table sets out the annual fee rates for the NonExecutive Directors 2018 2017 % change Chairmans fee Charles Gregson 125 50 150 Independent NonExecutive Director fee Heather McGregor 75 75 0 Niall Booker 75 75 0
Charles Gregson will receive 50% of his fee post tax in NSF shares.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 82 Directors shareholding and share interests Shareholding and other interests at 31 December 2017  audited Directors share interests and where applicable achievement of shareholding requirements are set out below.
In order that their interests are aligned with those of shareholders Executive Directors are expected to build up and maintain as relevant a personal shareholding equal to 100% of their base salary in the Company.
Shareholding at 31 December 2017 Interest in Founder Shares Number of beneficially owned shares % of salary held
Options held subject to service T otal number of shares options Subject to conditions Vested but unexercised Total at 31 December John van Kuffeler 2114474 465% Yes 30  30 Nick Teunon 56210 14% No 29703 85913 25  25 Miles CresswellTurner 490132 125% Yes 29703 519835 25  25 Charles Gregson 256083 10  10 Heather McGregor 61465 Niall Booker 270000 Total 3248364 59406 605748 90  90
Options
Total at 31 December John van Kuffeler  375  375 Nick Teunon  250  250 Miles CresswellTurner 250   250 Charles Gregson Heather McGregor Niall Booker
Beneficial interests include shares held directly or indirectly by connected persons.
Shareholding requirement calculation is based on the share price at the end of the year 0.715 at 31 December 2017 and base salaries at 1 January 2018.
The options held subject to service were granted under the SAYE plan.
John van Kuffeler and Nick Teunon also hold nilcost options over NSF shares under the NSF LTI.
Miles CresswellTurner also holds shares in a subsidiary company under the NSF LTI these shares will be exchanged for NSF shares on vesting.
In both cases the number of NSF shares that these Executive Directors will eventually acquire which could be nil will only be determined at the vesting date of 31 December 2020 and will be based on the growth in value of NSF above the share price hurdle of 1.10.
No changes took place in the interests of the Directors between 1 January 2018 and 22 March 2018.
Dilution
The Company funds its share incentives through a combination of new issue and market purchased shares.
The Company monitors the levels of share grants and the impact of these on the ongoing requirement for shares.
In accordance with guidelines set out by the Investment Association IA the Company can issue a maximum of 10% of its issued share capital in a rolling 10year period to employees under all its share plans and can issue a maximum of 5% of its issued share capital in a rolling 10year period under executive discretionary share plans.
NonExecutive positions held by Executive Directors John van Kuffeler retained fees of 60000 during the year from his NonExecutive position at Paratus AMC Limited.
Shareholding voting The table below shows the binding vote approving the previous Directors Remuneration Policy and the advisory vote to approve the 2017 Annual Report on Remuneration at the AGM on 31 March 2018.
Votes for % V otes against % V otes withheld Directors Remuneration Policy 255868233 96.65 8855442 3.35 13139 2016 Annual Report on Remuneration 264148890 99.78 587924 0.22 By order of the Board Charles Gregson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 March 2018 Directors remuneration report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 83 Directors report for the year ended 31 December 2017
In accordance with section 415 of the Companies Act 2006 the Directors present their report together with the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Both the Strategic Report on pages 6 to 53 and the Directors report have been prepared and presented in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 together with the UK Listing Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTRs and the Listing Rules LRs.
The liabilities of the Directors in connection with both the Strategic Report and the Directors report shall be subject to the limitations and provided by such law.
Other information required to be disclosed in the Directors report is expressly outlined in this section.
Principal activities and review of the business The Company is the UK holding company of a Group providing unsecured credit to UK adults.
The Company is incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales and is quoted on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
The Strategic Report which can be found on pages 6 to 53 of the Annual Report provides a more detailed review of business strategy and business model together with commentary on the business performance during the year and outlook for the future.
Information
Trading results and dividends The Groups consolidated loss after taxation for the financial year was 10335000 2016 loss of 7 998000.
An interim dividend of 0.5p per share was paid to shareholders on 18 October 2017 and a further final dividend of 1.7p has been recommended by the Board payable to shareholders on the share register on 18 May 2018.
If approved the final dividend would be paid on 15 June 2018.
Future business developments Information on the Company and its subsidiaries future developments can be found in the Chairmans Statement on pages 4 to 5 the Chief Executives review on pages 24 to 27 and the 2017 Financial Review and Divisional Overview on pages 39 to 49.
Share capital As at 31 December 2017 the share capital of the Company consisted of 317 049682 Ordinary Shares of 0.05 each 315181547 of which were in issue and 1868135 shares held in treasury and 100 Founder Shares.
The Companys issued Ordinary Share capital ranks pari passu in all respects and carries the right to receive all dividends and distributions declared made or paid on or in respect of the Ordinary Shares save that Ordinary Shares held in treasury are not eligible to receive dividends or other distributions declared.
Founder Shares grant each holder the option subject to the satisfaction of both the significant acquisition condition and the performance condition which can be satisfied under certain circumstances if a Founder is removed from the Board to require the Company to purchase some or all of their Founder Shares.
Further details on the Founder Shares can be found in note 23 to the Financial Statements.
There are currently no redeemable nonvoting preference shares of the Company in issue.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of Ordinary Shares or on the exercise of voting rights attached to them which are governed by the Companys Articles of Association and relevant English law.
The
Directors are not aware of any agreements between holders of the Companys shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or in voting rights.
The Company acquired 1868135 of its own shares during the financial year ended 31 December 2017 see further details below.
Further details on the Companys share capital can be found in note 21 to the financial statements.
Substantial shareholdings The Company has been notified in accordance with the Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR5 that as at 22 March 2018 the latest practicable date before the publication of this report the following investors have a substantial interest in the issued Ordinary Share capital Invesco Asset Management 28.48% Woodford Investment Management 26.75% Marathon Asset Management LLP 10.74% Aberforth Partners LLP 10.16% Quilter Cheviot Asset Management 3.58% The Directors beneficial interest in the allotted shares of the Company as at 31 December 2017 are outlined below Number of
Shares held John van Kuffeler 2114474 Nick Teunon 56210 Miles CresswellTurner 490132 Niall Booker 270000 Charles Gregson 256083 Heather McGregor 61465 As granted by shareholders at the 2017 AGM the Directors currently have the power to issue and buyback the Company shares.
The Board is seeking to renew these powers at the forthcoming 2018 AGM.
On 8 November 2017 the Group launched a share buyback programme to repurchase up to five million Ordinary Shares of five pence in the Company the Programme.
The Programme commenced on 8 November 2017 and will end no later than 7 November 2018 the Engagement Period.
Purchases may continue during any closed periods of the Company during the Engagement Period.
The aggregate purchase cost of shares purchased under the Programme will not exceed 4.25 million.
As at 22 March 2018 the Group had repurchased a total of 3401089 shares for 2406974 excluding costs.
The repurchased shares are held in treasury.
Governance
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 84 Articles of Association The Articles of Association set out the basic management and administrative structure of the Company.
The Articles regulate the internal affairs of the Company and cover matters including those relating to Board and shareholder meetings powers and duties of Directors and the transfer of shares.
The Articles may only be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders.
A copy of the Articles of Association can be requested from the Company Secretary and are also available for inspection at Companies House.
Directors
Charles Gregson NonExecutive Chairman John van Kuffeler Group Chief Executive Nick Teunon Chief Financial Officer Miles CresswellTurner Executive Director Heather McGregor NonExecutive Director Niall Booker NonExecutive Director appointed 9 May 2017 The Directors and their profiles are detailed on pages 54 to 55.
All of these Directors above served in office throughout the year under review and up to the signing of the Annual Report with the exception of Niall Booker who joined the Board on 9 May 2017 .
In accordance with the Articles of Association and the UK Corporate Governance Code each Director will offer themselves for reelection at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
During the year no Director had a material interest in any contract of significance to which the Company or any subsidiary undertaking was a party.
Powers of the Directors Subject to the Articles of Association English law and any direction granted by special resolutions the business of the Company is managed by the Board.
Directors indemnities The Companys Articles of Association permit it to indemnify the Directors of the Company or of any associated company in accordance with section 234 of the Companies Act 2006.
No indemnities were provided and no payments were made during the year.
There were no other qualifying indemnities in place during the period.
The Company has in place Directors and Officers Liability insurance which provides appropriate cover for any legal action brought against its Directors.
Employees
The skills motivation and energy of our workforce are key drivers for our success.
The organisation structures of each of our operating businesses and a new Groupwide intranet help to ensure that all staff are aware of our corporate goals and are clear on how their roles help NSF to succeed.
We seek to ensure that all employees and potential employees receive equal treatment including access to employment and training regardless of their age disability gender reassignment marital or civil partner status pregnancy and maternity race nationality ethnic or national origin religion or belief sex or sexual orientation.
This policy includes those who might become disabled during their period of employment by the Group.
As part of our commitment to treating customers fairly delivering excellent service and lending responsibly it is the Groups policy to have in place appropriate processes to offer career and job development opportunities to all employees.
The Company is committed to adopting employment practices which follow best practice and has setup an employee Save As You Earn share scheme which provides an opportunity for employees to share in the Companys future success.
It is expected that additional programmes aimed at enhancing employee engagement further will be developed as the Group expands.
Selfemployed agents Each of our selfemployed agents receive regular ongoing training to ensure that we are responsive to each customers individual needs.
The training programme includes new starter training agent monitoring call monitoring written training online training informal feedback from branch managers and colleague assessment programmes.
Related party transactions Refer to note 27 in the notes to the financial statements.
Postbalance sheet events Since 31 December 2017 there have been no events that require disclosure in or adjustment to the financial statements.
Environmental factors The Board continually considers the Companys impact on the environment and has concluded that at present due to the small size of the Company and the nature of its business it has a minimal impact.
As noted on page 53 the Group has started to capture some environmental data and will provide further updates in future reports.
Charitable and political donations The Group made charitable donations totalling 45262 to a variety of charities in the year ended 31 December 2017 .
These included The Money Advice Trust Loan Smart Great Ormond Street Hospital and Cancer Research.
The Group made no political donations in the year ended 31 December 2017 .
Health and safety Health and safety standards and benchmarks have been established in the Company and its divisions and compliance against these standards is monitored regularly by the Board.
Antibribery and corruption In accordance with the Bribery Act 2010 the Group has policies in place to comply with the requirements of the Bribery Act 2010.
Modern Slavery In accordance with the Modern Slavery Act 2015 the Group has policies and statements in place to comply with the requirements of the Modern Slavery Act 2015.
A copy of the Groups Modern Slavery Statement is available on the Group s website site Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting of the Company is to be held at The Maitland Consultancy 13 Kings Boulevard London N1C 4BU at 11.00am on 14 May 2018.
The Notice of Meeting contained in a separate letter from the Chairman includes a commentary on the business to be conducted at the General Meeting.
Directors report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 85 Disclosure of information under Listing Rule 9.8.4R For the purposes of LR 9.8.4R the information required to be disclosed can be found in the following sections of the Annual Report and financial statements.
Listing Rule requirement Location in Annual Report A statement of the amount of interest capitalised during the period under reviews and details of any related tax relief.
Not applicable Information required in relation to the publication of unaudited financial information.
Not applicable Details of any longterm incentive schemes.
Directors remuneration report pages 65 to 82 Details of any arrangements under which a Director has waived emoluments or agreed to waive any future emoluments from the Company.
Not applicable Details of any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash.
Not applicable Details of any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash by any unlisted major subsidiary undertaking.
Not applicable Details of parent participation in a placing by a listed subsidiary.
Not applicable Details of any contract of significance in which a Director is or was materially interested.
Not applicable Details of any contract of significance between the Company or one of its subsidiaries and a controlling shareholder.
Not applicable Details of any provision of services by a controlling shareholder.
Not applicable Details of waiver of dividends or future dividends by a shareholder.
Not applicable Board statements in respect of relationship agreement with the controlling shareholder.
Not applicable
Deloitte LLP  the external auditor for the Company was appointed in 2014 and a resolution proposing their reappointment will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
Directors statement as to disclosure of information to auditor Each Director at the date of approval of the Annual Report confirms that so far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware.
Each Director has taken all the steps that shehe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make herhimself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Going concern statement The Directors have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Company including those that could threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
Further information about those risks how they have changed during 2017 and how they are being managed or mitigated can be found in the Strategic Report on pages 36 to 38 and also in the Risk Committee Report on page 64.
On this basis the Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Companys financial statements.
The Directors will continue to monitor the Companys risk management and internal control systems.
Financial instruments Details of the financial risk management objectives and policies of the Group and the exposure of the Group to market interest rate credit capital management and liquidity risk are included on page 123 of the financial statements.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Each of the Directors confirms that to the best of their knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with applicable accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development or performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties.
Each of the Directors also confirms that they consider the Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017  taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 will be published on the Groups website in addition to the normal paper version.
The
Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Approved by the Board on 28 March 2018 and signed by the order of the Board.
Sarah Day Company Secretary 28 March 2018 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 86 Independent auditors report Report on the audit of the financial statements In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of NonStandard Finance plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated and parent company statements of financial position the consolidated and parent company statements of changes in equity the consolidated and parent company statements of cash flows and the related notes 1 to 29.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We confirm that the nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were acquisition accounting carrying value of goodwill provision for impairment losses against loans and receivables to customers and revenue recognition.
Within this report any new key audit matters are identified with and any key audit matters which are the same as the prior year identified with Materiality The materiality that we used for the Group financial statements was 660000 which was determined on the basis of 5% of profit before tax fair value adjustments of 11.9m amortisation of acquired intangible assets of 7 .9m and exceptional items of 6.3m.
Scoping Our Group audit scope focused on the parent company and each of the trading subsidiaries within the Group which together account for 100% of the Groups losses before tax.
Whilst consistent with prior year the current year scope includes the George Banco business acquired during the year.
Significant changes in our approach Our audit approach for the current year focuses on the additional key audit matter arising from the acquisition accounting for George Banco.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 87 Conclusions relating to going concern We are required by ISAs UK to report in respect of the following matters where the Directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the Directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least 12 months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Our audit approach for the current year focuses on the additional key audit matter arising from the acquisition accounting for George Banco.
In the prior year we identified a key audit matter arising from the acquisition accounting for Everyday Loans.
Acquisition accounting Key audit matter description In August 2017  the Group acquired the George Banco group for 18.6m.
Under IFRS 3 Business Combinations where an acquirer obtains control of a business such business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method which requires assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be measured at their fair values at the acquisition date along with the recognition and measurement of identifiable intangibles and goodwill.
The key risks of material misstatement are in the identification and valuation of intangible assets acquired and the valuation of the loan book on acquisition.
As set out in note 24 the acquisition of the George Banco group resulted in the recognition of 7 .7m of intangible assets an adjustment of 8.1m to recognise the acquired loan book at fair value and the recognition of 8.6m of goodwill being the excess of the fair value of the consideration over the fair value of the acquired assets and liabilities.
The critical judgements and estimations involved in determining these balances are the approach to identify intangible assets the valuation approaches to intangibles and the loan book and the cash flow forecasts and the discount rate.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and assumptions is set out within the Audit Committee report on pages 61 to 62 and notes 1 2 13 and 14 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We assessed the design and tested the implementation of controls relating to the identification and valuation of intangible assets.
We independently challenged managements approach against the requirements of IFRS 3 by considering a list of other potential intangibles and whether they might be applicable in the context of this business combination.
We used our valuation specialists to assist us in assessing the appropriateness of the valuation models used by management to determine the fair value of the intangible assets and the loan book at acquisition.
We independently challenged the inputs and assumptions in the valuation models used by comparing these to original loan documentation and other sources of evidence.
We also used our valuation specialists independently to calculate a range of discount rates and we used these to perform sensitivity analysis over the models to assess for evidence of management bias in the rates used.
Key observations We found managements methodology and assumptions for the recognition and valuation of intangible assets arising from the acquisition and the fair valuation of the loan book at acquisition to be appropriate and in line with accounting standards.
We found that the underlying assumptions of the models were reasonable and the models were working as intended.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 88 Carrying value of goodwill Key audit matter description The acquisitions of Everyday Loans Group Loans at Home and George Banco has led to the recognition of 140.7m of goodwill 2016 132.1m in the consolidated statement of financial position.
Under IAS 36 impairment testing for goodwill should always be carried out in the context of a cash generating unit CGU as goodwill does not generate cash flows independently of other assets.
When goodwill has been allocated to a CGU IAS 36 requires that unit to be tested for impairment at least annually and whenever there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
Management performed a goodwill impairment assessment as at 31 December 2017 by determining the recoverable amount based on fair value less cost to sell for each CGU and comparing this to the carrying value of the CGU.
Management determined that there was no indication that any impairment was required to the carrying value of goodwill.
The critical judgements and estimates involved in managements impairment assessment are forecast profit after tax for the 2020 year end the calculation and application of an appropriate priceearnings PE multiple to the forecast 2020 profit after tax and the discount rate used on future cash flows.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and assumptions is set out within the Audit Committee report on pages 61 to 62 and notes 1 2 and 13 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We assessed the design and tested the implementation of controls relating to the goodwill impairment review.
We challenged the reasonableness of managements key assumptions used in the impairment assessment and our challenge considered the appropriateness of the methodology for compliance with IAS 36.
Additionally we performed a sensitivity analysis for each of the key judgements and estimates to assess the impact on the recoverable amount of each CGU.
We focused our audit procedures on the areas to which the carrying value of goodwill is most sensitive.
In relation to managements forecast earnings we challenged the reliability of managements forecasting based on historical data reviewed the consistency of managements assumptions with managements assessment of viability and going concern and performed a sensitivity analysis over forecast and breakeven growth rates to assess these for reasonableness in light of historic performance.
In relation to the discount rate used in managements assessment we used our valuation specialists to assess the methodology used by management to determine their discount rate and used our valuation specialists to calculate a range of possible discount rates for the Group.
In relation to the PE multiple we used our valuation specialists to challenge the multiple by determining an independent benchmark.
Key observations We found managements approach for the goodwill impairment assessment to be compliant with IAS 36.
All assumptions including the discount rate the PE multiple and the forecast earnings adopted by management are within an acceptable range.
As disclosed in note 13 to the financial statements the carrying value of goodwill allocated to the CGUs is highly sensitive to future forecast earnings.
Independent auditors report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 89 Provision for impairment losses against loans and receivables to customers Key audit matter description The Group holds an impairment provision of 24.5m against gross customer receivables of 284.3m 2016 impairment provision of 24.4m against gross customer receivables of 204.8m.
The assessment of provisions for impairment losses requires management to make significant judgements in respect of the determination of loss events the quantum and timing of future cash flows and the use of historical cash collection performance to determine expected future cash flows.
Given the significant level of management judgement involved we have determined that there was a potential for fraud through possible manipulation of this balance.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and assumptions is set out within the Audit Committee report on pages 61 to 62 and notes 1 2 and 17 to the financial statements.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We assessed the design and tested the implementation of controls relating to the identification valuation and recording of impairment provisions.
For each of the Groups reportable segments we evaluated whether the methodology applied by management is compliant with the requirements of IAS 39.
We challenged the appropriateness of managements assumptions underlying the impairment provision calculations.
This involved assessing the assumptions related to the timing and quantum of cash flows for appropriateness in comparison to current and forecast external market and economic data as well as to historical experience.
We considered the appropriateness of impairment triggers under IAS 39 by comparing the Groups loss event definition to entity specific experience of asset performance as well as benchmarking to other businesses with similar asset classes.
Where relevant our IT specialists tested the IT scripts and data flows from source systems to spreadsheetbased models to test the completeness and accuracy of the models.
We also performed sensitivity analysis over the key assumptions of the models to assess the potential for management bias.
Key observations The provision models across the Group were found to be working as intended and the methodology is compliant with the requirements of IAS 39.
We found that the underlying assumptions of the model are reasonable.
We found that the expected cash collections used in the models are materially consistent with recent performance and budgeted collections.
The impairment provisions held against the loan book are in line with current collections performance.
Revenue recognition Key audit matter description The Groups main revenue stream is interest income of 107 .8m which should be recognised based on the effective interest rate EIR method in accordance with IAS 39.
The EIR method spreads directly attributable revenues and costs over the behavioural life of the loan.
The Groups EIR models are heavily reliant on the quality of the underlying data flowing into the models.
The key judgements in determining revenue recognition include the period over which forecast cash flows are modelled to determine the EIR as changes to this assumption could significantly affect the revenue recognised in any given period. manual adjustments to revenue which pose a significant risk of material misstatement.
Given the significant level of management judgement involved we have determined that there is a risk of fraud through possible manipulation of the revenue balance.
Further detail in respect of management judgements and assumptions is set out within the Audit Committee report on pages 61 to 62 and notes 1 and 3 to the financial statements.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 90 Adjusted prot before tax 13.2m Group materiality 122000 to Component materiality range Audit Committee reporting threshold Adjusted PBT Group materiality How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We assessed the design and tested the implementation of controls relating to the recording of revenue including manual adjustments.
We considered the appropriateness of the methodology for compliance with IAS 39.
We challenged managements assumptions in respect of cash flow estimates by comparing to underlying data sources and benchmarks.
We focused on the timing and level of early settlements which directly impact estimated behavioural lives.
We also challenged whether all directly attributable costs and fees were identified and appropriately included in the EIR by considering the contractual terms of the loans under IAS 39.
We independently recalculated the effective interest rates for a sample of loans and compared these to the EIRs applied in the revenue models.
Key observations We found the models to be working as intended and the underlying assumptions to be reasonable and compliant with IAS 39.
From the evidence we obtained the underlying data used were found to be complete and accurate.
Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Materiality 660000 2016 480000 219000 Basis for determining materiality We used 5% of adjusted pretax profit.
Adjusted pretax profit is before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional items as described in the financial statements.
For the year ended 31 December 2016 we used 5% of pretax profit before fair value adjustments and amortisation of acquired intangible assets.
We used 5% of adjusted pretax profit.
Adjusted pretax profit is before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangible assets and exceptional items as described in the financial statements.
Rationale for the benchmark applied Profitbased measures are the financial measures most relevant to users of the financial statements.
We considered the most relevant basis for materiality to be the profits earned from continuing business operations and have therefore excluded the fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangible assets arising on acquisitions and exceptional items as described in the financial statements.
The use of 5% is to align materiality to that of comparable listed companies.
We considered the most relevant basis for materiality to be the profits earned from continuous business operations and have therefore excluded the exceptional items.
Adjusted profit before tax 13.2m Independent auditors report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 91 We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 33000 2016 4000 for the Group as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We have increased this threshold based on our understanding of the business and the appetite of the Audit Committee.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatements at the Group level.
Based on that assessment our Group audit scope focused on the parent company and each of the principal trading subsidiaries within the Group which together account for 100% of the Groups losses before tax.
We have performed audit procedures over the Group consolidation and consolidation adjustments and we have audited all the subsidiaries using a materiality range of 122000 to 520000.
Whilst consistent with prior year the current year scope included the George Banco business acquired during the year.
All entities within the Group have the same engagement partner.
Other information The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the statement of Directors responsibilities the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 92 Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and or the parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the strategic report or the Directors report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Other matters Auditor tenure Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the Board of Directors of NonStandard Finance plc on 22 October 2014 to audit the financial statements for the period ending 31 December 2015 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments of the firm is three years covering the periods ending 31 December 2015 to 31 December 2017 .
Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the Audit Committee Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee we are required to provide in accordance with ISAs UK.
Mark Rhys FCA Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 28 March 2018 Independent auditors report continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 93 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017
Before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items Fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Revenue 3 119756 11985 107771 Other operating income 1926  1926 Impairment 28795  28795 Administrative expenses 69203 7897 77100 Operating profitloss 4 23684 19882 3802 Exceptional items 16  6342 6342 Profitloss on ordinary activities before interest and tax 23684 26224 2540 Finance cost 9 10481  10481 Profitloss on ordinary activities before tax 13203 26224 13021 Tax on profitloss on ordinary activities 11 2313 4999 2686 Profitloss for the year 10890 21225 10335 Total comprehensive loss for the year 10335 Loss attributable to Owners of the parent 10335 Noncontrolling interests Loss per share
Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017
Basic and diluted 10 3.26 There are no recognised gains or losses other than disclosed above and there have been no discontinued activities in the year.
For the year ended 31 December 2016
Before fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items Fair value adjustments amortisation of acquired intangibles and exceptional items Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Revenue 3 81099 8342 72757 Other operating income 450  450 Impairmentcost of sales 23651  23651 Administrative expenses 44074 10714 54788 Operating profitloss 4 13824 19056 5232 Exceptional items 16  626 626 Profitloss on ordinary activities before interest and tax 13824 19682 5858 Finance cost 9 3484  3484 Profitloss on ordinary activities before tax 10340 19682 9342 Tax on profitloss on ordinary activities 11 2278 3622 1344 Profitloss for the year 8062 16060 7998 Total comprehensive loss for the year 7998 Loss attributable to Owners of the parent 7998 Noncontrolling interests Loss per share
Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016
Basic and diluted 10 2.60 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 94 Financial Statements Consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017
31 Dec 2017 31 Dec 2016
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 13 140668 132070 Intangible assets 14 17205 17412 Property plant and equipment 15 9434 5459 167307 154941 Current assets Amounts receivable from customers 17 259836 180413 Trade and other receivables 17 9811 9709 Cash and cash equivalents 18 10954 5215 280601 195337 Total assets 447 908 350278 LIABILITIES AND EQUITY Current liabilities Trade and other payables and provisions 19 10353 8005 Total current liabilities 10353 8005 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liability 20 4996 5890 Bank loans 19 199316 87300 Total noncurrent liabilities 204312 93190
Share capital 21 15852 15852 Share premium 22 254995 254995 Other reserves 23 1066 Retained loss 36793 22019 232988 248828 Noncontrolling interests 255 255 Total equity 233243 249083 Total equity and liabilities 447 908 350278 These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 March 2018.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors.
John van Kuffeler Nick Teunon Group Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 95 Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share capital
Other
Retained loss
Total
At 31 December 2015 5264 92714  13070 255 85163 Total comprehensive loss for the year    7998  7998 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Dividends paid 12    951  951 Issue of shares 21 10588 162281    172869 At 31 December 2016 15852 254995  22019 255 249083 Total comprehensive loss for the year    10335  10335 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Dividends paid 12    4439  4439 Credit to equity for equitysettled sharebased payments 23   291   291 Purchase of own shares 23   1357   1357 At 31 December 2017 15852 254995 1066 36793 255 233243 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 December 2017
Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Net cash used in operating activities 25 37 000 23541 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 5536 4327 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 605 813 Acquisition of subsidiary 24 16442 230784 Net cash used in investing activities 21373 234298 Cash flows from financing activities Finance cost 7974 3484 Debt raising 77882 87300 Dividends paid 4439 951 Purchase of own shares 1357 Proceeds from issue of share capital  172869 Net cash from financing activities 64112 255734 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 5739 2105 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 5215 7320 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 18 10954 5215 NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 96 Financial Statements Company statement of financial position as at 31 December 2017
31 Dec 2017 31 Dec 2016
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 15 158 193 Investments 16 212336 212223 212494 212416 Current assets Trade and other receivables 17 60984 62089 Cash and cash equivalents 18 320 378 61304 62467 Total assets 273798 274883 LIABILITIES AND EQUITY Current liabilities Trade and other payables 19 1309 1595 Total liabilities 1309 1595
Share capital 21 15852 15852 Share premium 22 254995 254995 Other reserves 23 1079 Retained profit 2721 2441 Total equity 272489 273288 Total equity and liabilities 273798 274883 The retained profit for the financial year reported in the financial statements for the Company was 4718370 2016 10761000.
These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 March 2018.
Signed on behalf of the Board of Directors.
John van Kuffeler Nick Teunon
Group Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
Company number   Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 97 Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share capital
Other
Retained profitloss
At 31 December 2015 5264 92714  7369 90609 Total comprehensive income for the year    10761 10761 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Dividends paid 12    951 951 Issue of shares 21 10588 162281   172869 At 31 December 2016 15852 254995  2441 273288 Total comprehensive income for the year    4719 4719 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Dividends paid 12    4439 4439 Credit to equity for equitysettled sharebased payments 23   278  278 Purchase of own shares 23   1357  1357 At 31 December 2017 15852 254995 1079 2721 272489 Company statement of cash flows for the year ended 31 December 2017
Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Net cash used in operating activities 25 3093 16492 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 18 177 Acquisition of subsidiary 24  173951 Net cash used in investing activities 18 174128 Cash flows from financing activities Finance costincome 45 615 Dividends paid 4439 951 Dividend income 8894 13500 Purchase of own shares 1357 Proceeds from issue of share capital  172869 Net cash from financing activities 3053 186033 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 58 4587 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 378 4965 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 18 320 378 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 98 Notes to the financial statements General information NonStandard Finance plc is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The address of the registered office is 5th Floor 6 St Andrew Street London EC4A 3AE.
Accounting policies Basis of preparation The consolidated and Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention.
Basis of consolidation The Group financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries prepared to 31 December.
Control is achieved where the Company is exposed to or has the rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
In assessing control the Group takes into consideration the existence and effect of potential voting rights that currently are exercisable or convertible.
The results of subsidiaries acquired during the year are included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income from the effective date of acquisition.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by the Group.
All intraGroup transactions and balances and any unrealised gains and losses arising from intraGroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 from publishing its individual statement of comprehensive income and related notes.
The subsidiary Georgefinance.
394A and 448A of the Companies Act 2016 from preparing or filing accounts.
Going concern In adopting the going concern assumption in preparing the financial statements the Directors have considered the activities of its principal subsidiaries as set out in the Strategic Report as well as the Groups principal risks and uncertainties as set out in the Governance Report.
The Board of Directors has considered the Groups latest financial projection from the most recent budget including Funding levels and headroom against committed borrowing facilities Cash flow and liquidity requirements and Forecast compliance against debt covenants.
Based on these forecasts and projections the Board is satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue to operate for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Group has adopted the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Changes in accounting policies and disclosures New and amended Standards and Interpretations issued but not effective for the financial year ending 31 December 2017 At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following new and amended Standards and Interpretations are in issue but not yet mandatorily effective and are expected to have a material effect on the financial statements of the Group when they are adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments The International Accounting Standard Boards introduction of a new accounting standard covering financial instruments became effective from 1 January 2018 and replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
IFRS 9 prescribes i classification and measurement of financial instruments ii expected loss accounting for impairment and ii hedge accounting.
The only area which materially affects the Group is expected loss accounting for impairment.
Under this approach impairment provisions are recognised on inception of a loan based on the probability of default and the typical loss arising on default.
The expected credit loss impairment model has three stages 1 on initial recognition a loss allowance is recognised and maintained equal to 12 months of expected credit losses 2 if credit risk increases significantly relative to initial recognition the loss allowance is increased to cover full lifetime expected credit losses and 3 when a financial asset is considered creditimpaired the loss allowance continues to reflect lifetime expected credit losses and interest revenue is calculated based on the carrying amount of the asset net of the loss allowance rather than its gross carrying amount.
Provisions are calculated based on an unbiased probabilityweighted outcome which takes into account historic performance and considers the outlook for macroeconomic conditions.
The impairment approach under IFRS 9 differs from the current incurred loss model under IAS 39 where impairment provisions are only reflected when there is objective evidence of impairment typically a missed payment.
The resulting effect is that impairment provisions under IFRS 9 are recognised earlier.
This will result in a oneoff adjustment to receivables deferred tax and reserves on adoption and will result in delayed recognition of profits.
Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 99 The Group will adopt the standard in line with the mandatory effective date of 1 January 2018.
Based on current estimates the adoption of IFRS 9 results in an unaudited reduction in receivables of 13.2m at 31 December 2017  which net of deferred tax results in an unaudited reduction in net assets of 10.7m.
The primary impact is attributable to increases in the level of provisioning under the new impairment requirements.
Despite the adjustments required to receivables net assets and earnings it is important to note that cash flow remains unchanged and IFRS 9 only changes the timing of profits made on a loan.
There will be no change to the Groups underwriting process and our scorecards will be unaffected by the change in accounting.
The ultimate profitability of a loan is the same under both IAS 39 and IFRS 9 and the cash flows and capital generation over the life of a loan remain unchanged.
The calculation of the Groups debt covenants are unaffected by IFRS 9 as they are based on accounting standards in place at the time they were set.
Management will continue to monitor and refine certain elements of our impairment process in advance of H1 2018 reporting.
IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 replaces IAS 17 Leases and provides a single lease accounting model for the identification and treatment of lease arrangements in the financial statements of both lessees and lessors.
The standard distinguishes between services and leases on the basis of whether there is the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time.
The standard requires that upon commencement of a lease a lessee recognises a lease liability being present value of the lease payments and a rightofuse asset which is measured at the amount of the lease liability plus any initial direct costs incurred.
The Group is in the process of assessing the impact of the standard and will adopt it from the expected effective date of 1 January 2019.
The effect of all other new and amended Standards and Interpretations which are in issue but not yet mandatorily effective is not expected to be material.
Management will continue to assess the impact of new and amended Standards and Interpretations on an ongoing basis.
Revenue recognition Interest income is recognised in the statement of comprehensive income for all loans and receivables measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method EIR.
The EIR is calculated using estimated cash flows being contractual payments adjusted for the impact of customers repaying early but excluding the anticipated impact of customers paying late or not at all.
Under IAS 39 interest income on loan products continues to accrue at the EIR on all impaired capital balances throughout the life of the agreement irrespective of the terms of the loan and whether the customer is actually being charged arrears interest.
This is referred to as the grossup adjustment to revenue and is offset by a corresponding grossup adjustment to the loan loss provisioning charge to reflect the fact that this additional revenue is not collectable.
Other operating income Other operating income relates to amounts received as a result of debt sales made during the year.
Due to the size and nature of the item this has been disclosed as a separate line item in the statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 31 December 2017 .
This was included within impairment in the 2016 Annual Report however has now been shown separately for comparative purposes.
Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker as required by IFRS 8 Operating Segments.
The chief operating decisionmaker responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the Board of Directors.
The accounting policies of the reportable segments are consistent with the accounting policies of the Group as a whole.
Segment profit represents the profit earned by each segment.
This is the measure of profit that is reported to the Board of Directors for the purpose of resource allocation and the assessment of segment performance.
When assessing segment performance and considering the allocation of resources the Board of Directors review information about segment assets and liabilities.
For this purpose all assets and liabilities are allocated to reportable segments with the exception of intangible assets and current and deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Fair value of acquired loan book The fair value of the acquired loan portfolio of Loans at Home Everyday Loans and George Banco on acquisition has been estimated by discounting expected future cash flows.
The difference between fair value and carrying value of the loan portfolio on acquisition will be unwound to revenue in the statement of comprehensive income on an effective interest rate basis over the expected life of the acquired loans.
The Board of Directors will assess the fair value adjustment using the same assumptions to the remaining cash flows from the loans that were in place at the time of acquisition at each future accounting date.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are items that are unusual because of their size nature or incidence and which the Directors consider should be disclosed separately to enable a full understanding of the Groups results.
The Groups exceptional items for the year ended 31 December 2017 are costs associated with acquisitions refinancing and restructuring 2016 costs associated with acquisitions.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 100 Accounting policies continued
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and any deferred tax.
The current tax charge is based on the taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the statement of comprehensive income because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Companys liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the yearend date.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited to comprehensive income except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to other comprehensive income in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in other comprehensive income.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle on a net basis.
Business combinations and goodwill Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method as at the acquisition date which is the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
Goodwill is an intangible asset and is measured as the excess of the fair value of the consideration over the fair value of the acquired identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units CGUs for the purposes of impairment testing.
The allocation is made to those CGUs or groups of CGUs that are expected to benefit from the business combination in which the goodwill arose.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Impairment is tested by comparing the carrying value of the CGU with the discounted forecasted earnings from the relevant CGU.
Expected future earnings are derived from the Groups latest budget projections and the discount rate based on the Groups cost of equity at the balance sheet date.
Intangible assets Intangible assets include acquired intangibles in respect of the customer list and agent relationships at Loans at Home formerly Loansathome4u and acquired intangibles in respect of the customer list broker relationships and credit decisioning technology at Everyday Loans together with the Everyday Loans and TrustTwo brands.
Intangible assets also include acquired intangibles in respect of the customer list broker relationships and brand at George Banco.
The fair value of the customer lists of Loans at Home Everyday Loans and George Banco on acquisition has been estimated by calculating the Net Present Value NPV of the discounted cash flows from each new loan to be provided to this discrete set of known customers.
The Board of Directors will test the assumptions for reasonableness at each future accounting date limited to the original known customer lists.
The fair value of Loans at Homes agent relationships on acquisition has been estimated by valuing the cost to set up a similar network of trained agents.
The fair value of Everyday Loans broker relationships on acquisition has been estimated by calculating the NPV of the discounted cash flows from the cost avoided each year due to having the broker relationships in place on new loan volumes written by existing brokers.
The fair value of George Bancos broker relationships on acquisition has been estimated by calculating the NPV of the discounted cash flows from each new loan sold as a result of the strength of the broker relationship and reputation of George Banco limited to three years of loan origination from the date of acquisition.
The Board of Directors will test the assumptions for reasonableness at each future accounting date limited to the then existing brokers.
The fair value of Everyday Loans credit decisioning technology on acquisition has been estimated by assessing the likely commercial level of royalties that would be payable to a third party were the technology licensed rather than owned calculated as a percentage of forecast revenues and discounted to the date of the transaction.
The Board of Directors will assess the technology for impairment using the same methodology at each future accounting date.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 101 The fair value of Loans at Homes brand which at acquisition was loansathome4u Everyday Loans TrustTwo and George Banco brands on acquisition has been estimated by assessing the likely commercial level of royalties that would be payable to a third party were the brand licensed rather than owned calculated as a percentage of forecast revenues and discounted to the date of the transaction.
Due to rebranding the loansathome4u brand to Loans at Home the associated intangible asset was written off in 2016.
The Board of Directors will assess each of the Groups remaining brands for impairment using the same methodology at each future accounting date.
Amortisation is charged to the statement of comprehensive income over their estimated useful lives as follows Customer lists Between 3 and 7 years Agent network 3 years Broker relationships 2 to 3 years Credit decisioning technology 4 years Brand Between 1 and 5 years The useful economic life and amortisation method of intangible assets are reviewed at least at each balance sheet date.
Impairment of intangible assets is only reviewed where circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be fully recoverable.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation is provided on the cost of valuation of property plant and equipment in order to write such cost or valuation over the expected useful lives as follows Freehold buildings 2% straightline Leasehold improvements shorter of life of lease or 7 years Computer and other equipment 20% to 33% straightline Fixtures and fittings 10% straight line or 20% reducing balance Motor vehicles 25% reducing balance Software 3 to 5 years Project costs relate to capitalised IT expenditure in relation to developing software.
They are not depreciated.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
Investments
Investments in subsidiaries and associates are stated at cost less where appropriate provisions for impairment.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the statement of financial position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets Trade and other receivables are measured on initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method.
Amounts receivable from customers Customer receivables originated by the Group are initially recognised at the amount loaned to the customer plus directly attributable costs.
Subsequently receivables are increased by revenue and reduced by cash collections and any deduction for impairment.
The Directors assess on an ongoing basis whether there is objective evidence that customer receivables are impaired at each balance sheet date.
Recognition of incurred losses An impairment loss is calculated by reference to arrears stages and is measured as the difference between the carrying value of the loans and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The assumptions for estimating future cash flows are based upon observed historical data and updated as management considers appropriate to reflect current and future conditions.
All assumptions are reviewed regularly to take account of differences between previously estimated cash flows on impaired debt and the eventual losses.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 102 Accounting policies continued For Loans at Home objective evidence of impairment is based on the payment performance of loans in the previous 13 weeks as this is considered to be the most appropriate indicator of credit quality.
Loans are deemed to be impaired when between two to four contractual weekly payments depending on length of relationship with the customer have been missed in the previous 13week period.
For Everyday Loans and George Banco the criteria that the Company uses to determine that there is objective evidence of impairment loss include but are not limited to the following Delinquency in contractual payments of principal or interest Cash flow difficulties experienced by the borrower and Initiation of bankruptcy proceedings.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank.
Financial liabilities and equity Financial liabilities and equity instruments issued by the Group are classified in accordance with the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into and the definitions of a financial liability and an equity instrument.
Other financial liabilities are initially measured at fair value net of transaction costs and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the EIR method.
EIR method The EIR method is a method of calculating the amortised cost of a financial asset or liability and allocating interest income or expense over the relevant period.
The EIR is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash flows through the expected life of the financial asset or liability or where appropriate a shorter period to the net carrying amount on initial recognition.
Leases
Rental costs under operating leases are charged to the statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Sharebased payments The Group has applied the requirements of IFRS 2 Sharebased payments.
The Group grants options under employee savingsrelated share option schemes typically referred to as Save As You Earn schemes SAYE and makes awards under the LongTerm Incentive schemes.
All of these schemes are equitysettled.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equity settled sharebased payments is expensed in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The corresponding credit is made to a sharebased payment reserve within equity.
The grant by the Company of options and awards over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings is treated as an investment in the Companys financial statements.
At the end of the vesting period or upon exercise lapse or forfeit if earlier this credit is transferred to retained earnings.
Further information on the Groups schemes is provided in note 23 and in the Directors remuneration report.
Repurchase of share capital own shares Where the Company or any member of the Group purchases the Companys share capital the consideration paid is deducted from shareholders equity as treasury shares until they are sold or reissued.
Where such shares are subsequently sold or reissued any consideration received is included in shareholders equity.
Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting practice requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the yearend date and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimated are revised and in any future periods affected.
Critical accounting judgements Determination of Cash Generating Units CGUs For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows CGUs.
The Board of Directors consider Loans at Home Everyday Loans and George Banco as three CGUs.
No goodwill was attributable to TrustTwo upon acquisition of Everyday Loans.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 103 Key sources of estimation uncertainty Impairment of goodwill Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the fair value less costtosell of the CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated.
The fair value calculation requires the Group to estimate the future cash flows expected to arise from the CGU and apply a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value.
The assessment of impairment of goodwill reflects a number of key estimates each of which can have a material effect on the carrying value of the asset.
These include earnings forecasts which have been extracted from the budget which involves inherent uncertainty particularly in respect of gross loan values collections performance and the cost base of the business estimates made on the disposal costs of the business and the discount rate applied to determine the net present value NPV of future cash flows.
The nature and inherent uncertainty relating to the above judgements and estimates means that the forecast cash flows may be materially different from actual cash flows.
A material future reduction in forecast surplus cash flows would necessitate a full impairment review and the possibility of a material impairment charge in future years.
The Group has produced a threeyear forecast to 31 December 2020 and applied three valuation approaches to establish the recoverable amount of the CGU.
These were A pricetotal net asset value TNAV multiple based on the return on TNAV of the business with the multiple calculated by using a regression analysis for comparable speciality finance company valuations over the last two years.
A priceearnings multiple based on the forecast earnings growth of the business in the following two years with the multiple calculated by using a regression analysis for comparable speciality finance company valuations over the last two years.
A tenyear average priceearnings multiple for comparable speciality finance companies.
Under IAS 36 we have compared the carrying value of goodwill to the recoverable amount which is the higher of value of use or fair value less coststosell.
The lowest of the valuations was used by the Group to compare with the CGUs carrying value.
This has not resulted in any impairment of the carrying value at 31 December 2017 as the CGUs recoverable amounts exceed their carrying values.
Refer to note 13 for the sensitivities around the carrying value of the goodwill.
Amounts receivable from customers The Group reviews its portfolio of loans and receivables for impairment at each balance sheet date.
For the purposes of assessing the impairment of customer loans and receivables customers are categorised into arrears stages as this is considered to be the most reliable indication of payment performance.
The Group makes assumptions to determine whether there is objective evidence indicating that there has been an adverse effect on expected future cash flows.
Once a loan is deemed to be impaired judgement is required to determine the quantum and timing of cash flows that will be recovered which are discounted to present value based on the EIR of the loan.
Customer accounts in Loans at Home are deemed to be impaired when two to four contractual weekly payments depending on length of relationship with the customer have been missed in the previous 13 weeks.
In the weekly home credit business receivables are deemed to be impaired when the cumulative amount of two or more contractual weekly payments have been missed in the previous 13 weeks since only at this point do the expected future cash flows from loans deteriorate significantly.
Customer accounts in Everyday Loans and George Banco are impaired with reference to arrears stages and are measured as the difference between the carrying value of the loans and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The assumptions for estimating future cash flows are based upon observed historical data and updated as management considers appropriate to reflect current and future conditions.
All assumptions are reviewed regularly to take account of differences between previously estimated cash flows on impaired debt and the eventual losses.
Intangible assets  customer lists Loans at Homes Everyday Loans and George Bancos customer lists have been allocated a fair value on acquisition as the existing customer base is an important influence on the future prospects of the business.
The customer lists have been valued by calculating the NPV of the discounted cash flows from each new loan forecast to be sold to this discrete set of known customers.
The methodology is inline with the Groups existing valuation model used for budgeting purposes.
The calculation of the value of the customer lists reflects a number of key estimates which have a material effect on the carrying value of the assets.
These include cash flow forecasts which have been extracted from the budget produced by Loans at Home Everyday Loans and George Banco which involve inherent uncertainty particularly in respect of gross loan values collections performance and the cost base of the business estimates made on the propensity to reloan to the customer base and the WACC applied to determine the NPV of each new loan.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 104 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty continued The nature and inherent uncertainty relating to the above judgements and estimates means that the forecast cash flows may be materially different from actual cash flows.
A material future reduction in forecast surplus cash flows would necessitate a full impairment review and the possibility of a material impairment charge in future years.
Intangible assets  broker relationships Everyday Loans and George Bancos broker relationships have been allocated a fair value on acquisition to recognise the additional volume of new loans resulting from existing broker relationships.
The fair value of the broker relationships on acquisition for Everyday Loans has been estimated by calculating the NPV of the discounted cash flows from the cost avoided each year due to having the broker relationships in place on new loan volumes written by existing brokers.
The fair value of George Bancos broker relationships on acquisition has been estimated by calculating the NPV of the discounted cash flows from each new loan forecast to be sold as a result of the strength of the broker relationship and reputation of George Banco limited to three years of loan origination from the date of acquisition.
The calculation of the broker relationships reflects a number of key estimates which have a material effect on the carrying value of the assets.
These include Cash flow forecasts which have been extracted from the budget Everyday Loans and George Banco which involve inherent uncertainty particularly in respect of gross loan values collections performance and the cost base of the business.
Estimates made on the percentage of new loans which are as a result of the broker relationships.
The WACC applied to determine the NPV of each new loan.
Revenue
Revenue is recognised by applying the EIR to the carrying value of a loan.
The EIR is calculated at inception and represents the rate which exactly discounts the future contractual cash receipts from a loan to the amount of cash advanced under the loan plus directly attributable issue costs.
In addition the EIR takes account of customers repaying early.
Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Interest income 119756 81099 Fair value unwind on acquired loan portfolio 11985 8342 Total revenue 107771 72757 Operating profitloss for the year is stated after chargingcrediting Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Depreciation of property plant and equipment note 15 1497 690 Amortisation of intangible assets note 14 7897 10714 Staff costs note 8 32899 20287 Rentals under operating leases 1926 1110 Profit on sale of property plant and equipment 416 363 Rentals received under operating leases  28 Auditors remuneration Y ear ended 31 Dec 2017 Y ear ended 31 Dec 2016 Audit services Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Parents annual financial statements 80 70 Fees payable to the Companys auditor and their associates for the audit of the subsidiaries of the Group 329 215 Other services pursuant to legislation Other services Audit related fees 51 50 Other services relating to taxation  44 Services relating to corporate finance transactions 192 Details of the Groups policy on the use of the auditor for nonaudit services are set out in the Audit Committee Report on page 62.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 105 Segment information Management has determined the operating segments by considering the financial and operational information that is reported internally to the chief operating decision maker the Board of Directors by management.
For management purposes the Group is currently organised into four operating segments Branchbased lending Everyday Loans Home credit Loans at Home Guarantor loans TrustTwo and George Banco and Central head office activities.
The Groups operations are all located in the United Kingdom and all revenue is attributable to customers in the United Kingdom.
Branchbased lending Home credit
Loans
Central
Total
Year ended 31 December 2017 Interest income 60937 50741 8078  119756 Fair value unwind on acquired loan portfolio 11874  111  11985 Total revenue 49063 50741 7967  107771 Operating profitloss before amortisation 10780 3102 2637 4820 11699 Amortisation of intangible assets    7897 7897 Operating profitloss before exceptional items 10780 3102 2637 12717 3802 Exceptional items 5290 467 230 355 6342 Finance cost 7051 1299 2029 102 10481 Lossprofit before taxation 1561 1336 378 13174 13021 Taxation 128 179 65 2444 2686 Lossprofit for the year 1433 1515 313 10730 10335
Home credit
Loans
Central
Consolidation adjustments
Total assets 181962 62736 50819 274200 121809 447 908 Total liabilities 135837 35550 39059 1615 2604 214665 Net assets 46125 27186 11760 272585 124413 233243 Capital expenditure 2474 3012 32 18  5536 Depreciation of plant property and equipment  1497 Amortisation of intangible assets    7897  7897 1 Guarantor Loans division includes George Banco and TrustTwo.
TrustTwo is supported by the infrastructure of Everyday Loans but its results are reported to the Board separately and has therefore been disclosed within the Guarantor Loans Division above.
2 Exceptional items in 2017 comprise 4.5m related to the refinancing of the Groups debt facilities 1.0m relating to merger and acquisition activities and 0.9m related to restructuring during the year 2016 0.6m.
3 Consolidation adjustments include the acquisition intangibles of 17 .2m 2016 17 .4m goodwill of 140.7m 2016 132.1m deferred tax liability of 4.9m 2016 6.8m fair value of loan book of 12.0m 2016 15.8m and the elimination of intraGroup balances.
The results of each segment have been prepared using accounting policies consistent with those of the Group as a whole.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 106 Segment information continued The results of each segment have been prepared using accounting policies consistent with those of the Group as a whole.
Branchbased lending Home credit
Loans
Central
Total
Year ended 31 December 2016 Interest income 37080 42170 1849  81099 Fair value unwind on acquired loan portfolio 7916 426   8342 Total revenue 29164 41744 1849  72757 Operating profitloss before amortisation 6848 1431 460 3257 5482 Amortisation of intangible assets    10714 10714 Operating profitloss before exceptional items 6848 1431 460 13971 5232 Exceptional items Finance cost 2699 323 198 264 3484 Profitloss before taxation 4149 1108 262 14861 9342 Taxation 1036 27 58 2411 1344 Profitloss for the year 3113 1135 204 12450 7998
Home credit
Loans
Central
Consolidation adjustments
Total assets 136362 40258 8783 274883 108964 351322 Total liabilities 98589 14239  1595 12184 102239 Net assets 37773 26019 8783 273288 96780 249083 Capital expenditure 1764 2386  177  4327 Depreciation of plant property and equipment 226 425  39  690 Amortisation of intangible assets    10714  10714 Directors remuneration Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Shortterm employee benefits 1442 949 Postemployment benefits 73 70 Shortterm employee benefits comprise salary bonus and benefits earned in the year.
Postemployment benefits represent contributions by the Group in respect of money purchase pension schemes.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 107 Employee information a The average monthly number of staff including Executive Directors but excluding Loans at Homes network of selfemployed agents employed by the Group was as follows Average number of employees including Directors Y ear ended 31 December 2017
Y ear ended 31 December 2016
Everyday Loans staff 286 203 Loans at Home staff 305 271 Guarantor Loans staff 79 14 Central staff b Employment costs Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Wages and salaries 28824 17824 Social security costs 2983 1866 Pension costs 1092 597 32899 20287 Finance cost Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Bank charges and interest payable 10481 3541 Bank interest receivable  57 Finance cost 10481 3484 Loss per share Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Retained loss attributable to Ordinary Shareholders 000 10335 7998 Weighted average number of Ordinary Shares at year ended 31 December 316901254 307 315588 Basic and diluted loss per share pence 3.26p 2.60p The loss per share was calculated on the basis of net loss attributable to Ordinary Shareholders divided by the weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue.
The basic and diluted loss per share is the same as the exercise of share options would reduce the loss per share and is antidilutive.
Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Weighted average number of potential Ordinary Shares that are not currently dilutive 8728 5539 The weighted average number of potential Ordinary Shares that are not currently dilutive includes the Ordinary Shares that the Company may potentially issue relating to its share option schemes and share awards under the Groups longterm incentive plans and Save As You Earn schemes.
The amount is based upon the number of shares that would be issued if 31 December 2017 was the end of the contingency period.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 108
Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Current tax chargecredit Corporation tax charge 673 2103 Total current tax charge 673 2103 Deferred tax credit 3359 3447 Total tax credit 2686 1344 The difference between the total tax expense shown above and the amount calculated by applying the standard rate of UK corporation tax to the profit before tax is as follows Y ear ended 31 December 2017 Y ear ended 31 December 2016 Loss before taxation 13021 9342 Tax on loss on ordinary activities at standard rate of UK corporation tax of 19.25% 2016 20% 2507 1868 Effects of Fixed asset differences 38 103 Expenses not allowable for taxation 199 132 Sharebased payments 11 Chargeable gainslosses 33 99 Adjustment to tax charge in respect of previous periods Adjustment to tax charge in respect of previous periods  deferred tax 176 80 Deferred tax rate change 60 254 Changes in unrecognised deferred tax 142 151 Deferred tax not previously recognised 95 Total tax credit 2686 1344 1 Includes 0.5m research and development claim relating to the year ended 31 December 2016 2016 nil.
Exceptional items and costs related to longterm incentive plans are included within expenses not allowable for taxation due the nature of the transactions.
Exceptional items disallowed include costs in relation to the acquisition of George Banco totalling 0.6m 2016 0.6m in relation to the acquisition of Everyday Loans.
Longterm incentive plan items disallowed relates to setup costs and the fair value of the schemes at the date of grant totalling 0.4m 2016 nil.
Reductions in the UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
A further reduction in the rate from 19% to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
This will reduce the Companys future current tax charge accordingly.
The deferred tax liability at 31 December 2017 has been calculated based on the rate of 19% substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Dividends
A halfyear dividend of 0.5 pence per share 2016 0.3 pence per share was paid in October 2017 .
The Directors have recommended a final dividend in respect of the year ended 31 December 2017 of 1.7 pence per share 31 December 2016 0.9 pence per share which will amount to an estimated dividend payment of 5.4m.
This dividend is not reflected in the balance sheet as at 31 December 2017 as it is subject to shareholder approval.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 109
Cost and net book amount At 31 December 2015 40176 Acquisition of subsidiary Everyday Loans 91894 At 31 December 2016 132070 Acquisition of subsidiary George Banco 8598 At 31 December 2017 140668 The goodwill recognised represents the difference between the purchase consideration and the net assets acquired including intangible assets recognised upon acquisition.
Total goodwill as at 31 December 2017 comprises 40.2m related to the acquisition of Loans at Home 91.9m related to the acquisition of Everyday Loans and 8.6m related to the acquisition of George Banco refer to note 24.
The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The assessment of impairment of goodwill reflects a number of key estimates each of which can have a material effect on the carrying value of the asset.
These include earnings forecasts which have been extracted from the budget which involves inherent uncertainty particularly in respect of gross loan values collections performance and the cost base of the business the price earnings multiple applied to the cash flow forecasts estimates made on the disposal costs of the business and the discount rate applied to determine the NPV of future cash flows.
The recoverable amount has been determined based on a fair value less costtosell calculation.
That calculation uses earnings projections based on financial budgets approved by management covering a threeyear period to 31 December 2020 disposal costs have been estimated at 2% and a discount rate of 12% has been used for the Group.
The Directors have estimated the discount rate using posttax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the market.
None of the goodwill is tax deductible.
Considering the key estimates above the Group has identified that it would require a movement in all of the judgements and estimates of greater than 33% Loans at Home 10% Everyday Loans and 35% George Banco to give rise to a potential impairment charge to the carrying value of goodwill recognised for each CGU.
Furthermore it would require the following percentage decreases in 2020 forecast earnings to necessitate an impairment charge to the carrying value of goodwill 61% at Loans at Home 21% at Everyday Loans and 54% at George Banco.
The Group considers that there is no reasonably foreseeable reduction in the assumptions which would give rise to impairment and therefore no further sensitivity has been presented.
Intangible assets  Group Customer lists
Brands
Broker relationships
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2017 19362 540 1794 4233 6227 32156 Additions through acquisition 2562  211 4918  7691 At 31 December 2017 21924 540 2005 9151 6227 39847
At 1 January 2017 11725 356 497 1129 1038 14745 Charge for the year 4048 63 334 1895 1557 7897 At 31 December 2017 15773 419 831 3024 2595 22642 Net book value At 31 December 2017 6151 121 1174 6127 3632 17205 At 31 December 2016 7637 184 1297 3104 5189 17412 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 110 Property plant and equipment  Group Freehold land and buildings
Fixtures and fittings
Computer equipment Project costs
Total
Cost
At 1 January 2017 100 1848 1054 1186 1911 1797 2160 10056 Additions through acquisition   51  32  42 125 Additions  1444 363  817 2377 535 5536 At 31 December 2017  2897 1468 808 2734 4174 2737 14818
At 1 January 2017 7 127tel 1842 4597 Charge for the year  180 9tel186 1497 Disposals 7 395  282 26   710 At 31 December 2017  1055 394 336 1189 382 2028 5384 Net book value At 31 December 2017  1842 1074 472 1545 3792 709 9434 At 31 December 2016 9tel1161 1797 318 5459 Property plant and equipment  Company
Fixtures and fittings
Software
Total
Cost
At 1 January  241 Additions  1  17 18 At 31 December Depreciation At 1 January  48 Charge for the year At 31 December Net book value At 31 December At 31 December  193 Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 111 Investment in subsidiaries  Group Details of the Groups subsidiaries which are all included in the consolidated financial statements of the Group are as follows Name of company Principal place of business and country of incorporation Nature of business % voting rights and shares held SD Taylor Limited trading as Loans at Home 7 Turnberry Park Road Gildersome Morley Leeds England LS27 7LE United Kingdom Provision of consumer credit 100% of Ordinary Shares Everyday Loans Holdings Limited Secure Trust House Boston Drive Bourne End Buckinghamshire SL8 5YS United Kingdom Holding company 100% of Ordinary Shares Everyday Loans Limited As above Provision and servicing of secured and unsecured personal instalment loans 100% of Ordinary Shares Everyday Lending Limited As above Provision of secured and unsecured personal instalment loans 100% of Ordinary Shares NonStandard Finance Subsidiary Limited 5th Floor 6 St Andrew Street London EC4A 3AE United Kingdom Dormant 100% of Ordinary Shares NonStandard Finance Subsidiary II Limited As above Holding company 100% of Ordinary Shares NonStandard Finance Subsidiary III Limited As above Holding company 100% of Ordinary Shares NSF Finco Limited As above Financing company 100% of Ordinary Shares George Banco Limited The Blue Building Dairy House Farm Stubbs Lane Beckington Frome BA11 6TE United Kingdom Provision and servicing of unsecured personal instalment loans 100% of Ordinary Shares George Banco.
100% of Ordinary Shares
Held directly by the Company.
Investment in subsidiaries  Company Investment in subsidiaries 212223 212223 Sharebased payment adjustment 113 212336 212223 Amounts receivable from customers  Group Credit receivables 284316 204775 Loan loss provision 24480 24362 Amounts receivable from customers 259836 180413 The movement on the loan loss provision for the period relates to the provision at Loans at Home and Everyday Loans for the year and George Banco since the date of acquisition.
The amounts receivable from customers were recognised at fair value net loan book value at the date of acquisition see note 24 for detail.
The fair value of amounts receivable from customers is approximately 304m 2016 200m.
Amounts receivable from customers before fair value adjustments for the Group comprise 111.6m 2016 74.1m due within one year and 136.3m 2016 90.5m due in more than one year.
Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 112 Amounts receivable from customers  Group continued We have represented the 2016 comparatives to achieve comparability with the current period.
Analysis of overdue receivables from customers Not past due or impaired 226343 163777 Past due but not impaired 14508 10286 Impaired 18985 6350 259836 180413 Loans at Home past due not impaired One week overdue 8785 6278 Two weeks overdue 3468 2129 Three weeks or more overdue 2255 1879 14508 10286 1 Loans at Home make weekly collections.
Everyday Loans Rescheduled Loans 19237 14113 19237 14113 2 Everyday Loans make monthly collections.
Guarantor Loans Rescheduled Loans 2407 3 George Banco and TrustTwo make monthly collections.
There is no comparable information for George Banco as it was acquired on 17 August 2017 .
Analysis on movement on loan loss provision At 31 December 2015 1923 Provision on acquisition of Everyday Loans 6105 Charge for the year 23651 Amounts written off during the year 4828 Unwind of discount 2489 At 31 December 2016 24362 Provision on acquisition of George Banco 4252 Charge for the year 28795 Amounts written off during the year 32188 Unwind of discount 741 At 31 December 2017 24480 The average EIR used during the year ended 31 December 2017 for Loans at Home was 353% 2016 371% for Everyday Loans was 47 .5% 2016 45% and for Guarantor Loans was 40.2% 2016 na.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 113 Financial instruments The table below sets out the carrying value of the Companys financial assets and liabilities in accordance with the categories of financial instruments set out in IAS 39 as at 31 December 2017 .
Assets and liabilities outside the scope of IAS 39 are shown within nonfinancial assetsliabilities
At 31 December Loans and receivables Amortised cost
Total
Total
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 10954   10954 5215 Loans and advances to customers 259836   259836 180413 Current tax asset   455 455 Other assets   9356 9356 9709 Goodwill   140668 140668 132070 Intangible assets   17205 17205 17412 Property plant and equipment   9434 9434 5459 Total assets 270790  177118 447 908 350278
Bank borrowing  199316  199316 87300 Current tax liability     1292 Deferred tax liability   4996 4996 5890 Other liabilities  2507 7 846 10353 6713 Total liabilities  201823 12842 214665 101195
At 31 December Loans and receivables Amortised cost
Total
Total
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents 320   320 378 Other assets 60866  118 60984 62089 Property plant and equipment   158 158 193 Investments   212336 212336 212223 Total assets 61186  212612 273798 274883
Other liabilities   1309 1309 1595 Total liabilities   1309 1309 1595 Trade and other receivables  Group Other debtors 81 211 Corporation tax 455 Prepayments 9275 9498 9811 9709 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 114 Amounts receivable from customers  Group continued Trade and other receivables  Company Other debtors 1365 686 Amounts due from subsidiaries 59501 61135 Prepayments 118 268 60984 62089 Amounts owed to Group undertakings are noninterest bearing and repayable on demand.
There are no amounts included in trade and other receivables which are past due but not impaired.
The carrying value of trade and receivables is not materially different to the fair value.
Cash and cash equivalents  Group Cash at bank and in hand 10954 5215 Cash and cash equivalents  Company Cash at bank and in hand 320 378 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of these assets is a reasonable approximation of their fair value.
The credit risk on liquid funds is limited because the counterparties are banks with high credit ratings.
Trade and other payables and provisions  Group Trade creditors 139 917 Other creditors 1526 144 Current tax liability  1292 Accruals and deferred income and provisions 8688 5652 10353 8005 Trade and other payables  Company Trade creditors 120 18 Other creditors 85 75 Amounts due to subsidiaries 255 1255 Accruals and deferred income 849 247 1309 1595 The carrying value of trade and other payables is not materially different to the fair value.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 115 Provisions  Group Opening at 31 December 2015 Balance on acquisition of Everyday Loans 520 Charge during the period since acquisition 456 Utilised 6 Balance at 31 December 2016 970 Charge during the year 618 Utilised 337 Balance at 31 December 2017 1251 The Group provides for its best estimate of redress payable in respect of historical sales of PPI by considering the likely future uphold rate for claims in the context of confirmed issues and historical experience.
The likelihood of potential new claims is projected forward to 29 August 2019 which is in line with the deadline provided by the Financial Conduct Authority for customers to make claims.
The accuracy of these estimates would be affected were there to be a significant change in either the number of future claims or the incidence of claims upheld by the Financial Ombudsman Service.
Bank loans  Group Due within one year 2507 Due in more than one year 199316 87300 The Group entered into arrangements for the provision of two financing facilities during the year.
These comprised a 225m term loan provided by institutional investors and a 35m revolving loan facility provided by The Royal Bank of Scotland plc.
As at 31 December 2017  175.0m was drawn under the term loan facility and 33.1m was drawn under the revolving loan facility 2016 77 .3m drawn under the Everyday Loans banking facility and 10.0m drawn under the Loans at Home facility.
The term loan facility has a sixyear term and the revolving loan facility has a fiveyear term.
Borrowings are recognised at amortised cost.
The carrying value of other payables due in more than one year is not materially different to the fair value.
The facility arrangements have the benefit of i guarantees from and fixed and floating security granted by the following entities NSF Finco Limited NonStandard Finance Subsidiary II Limited NonStandard Finance Subsidiary III Limited S.
Taylor Limited Everyday Loans Holdings Limited Everyday Loans Limited Everyday Lending Limited George Banco Limitedsite Limited and ii a charge over the shares in and intercompany loans made to NSF Finco Limited granted by NonStandard Finance Subsidiary Limited.
Deferred tax liability At 31 December 2015 3057 Recognition of intangible assets at acquisition 2801 Recognition of fair value adjustments on amounts receivable at acquisition 4750 Adjust for changes in deferred tax rate 685 Recognition of deferred tax asset at acquisition 586 Current year credit 3447 At 31 December 2016 5890 Recognition of intangible assets at acquisition 1461 Recognition of fair value adjustments on amounts receivable at acquisition 1547 Adjust for changes in deferred tax rate 31 Charge relating to sharebased payments 13 Recognition of deferred tax asset at acquisition 530 Current year credit 3328 At 31 December 2017 4996 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 116 Deferred tax liability continued The deferred tax liability was recognised on acquisition of Loans at Home Everyday Loans and George Banco refer to note 24 in relation to intangible assets on which no tax deduction will be claimed in future periods for amortisation.
The deferred tax liability is attributable to temporary timing differences arising in respect of Accelerated tax depreciation 65 163 Recognition of intangible assets 3269 3308 Recognition of fair value adjustments on amounts receivable at acquisition 2277 3008 Capital gains  20 Other shortterm timing differences 219 258 Recognition of deferred tax relating to sharebased payments 22 Other losses and deductions 374 24 Net deferred tax liability 4996 5890 Share capital On 7 January 2016 the share capital was increased by the issuance of 188235825 Ordinary Shares of 0.05 each at a premium of 0.80 each.
Upon completion of the acquisition of the Everyday Loans Group from Secure Trust Bank plc on 13 April 2016 the share capital was further increased by the issuance of 23529412 Ordinary Shares of 0.05 each at a premium of 0.80 each to Secure Trust Bank plc.
All shares in issue are Ordinary A Shares consisting of 0.05 per share.
All shares are fully paid up.
The Companys share capital is denominated in Sterling.
The Ordinary Shares rank in full for all dividends or other distributions made or paid on the Ordinary Share capital of the Company save the Ordinary Shares held in treasury which do not rank for dividends or other distributions see note 23.
Share movements
Balance at 31 December 2015 105284445 Shares issued during 2016 211765237 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 317049682 Share premium The share premium account is used to record the aggregate amount or value of premiums paid when the Companys shares are issued at a premium.
Transaction costs of nil 2016 7 131000 directly relating to raising finance have been deducted from share premium in the year.
Total
Balance at 31 December 2015 92714 Premium arising on issue of Ordinary Shares in 2016 169412 Issue costs in 2016 7131 Balance at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 254995 Other reserves Treasury shares The treasury shares reserve represents the cost of shares in the Group purchased in the market and held by the Group to satisfy options under the Groups share options schemes.
The number of treasury shares held at 31 December 2017 was 1.9m 2016 nil.
Balance at 1 January 2017 Acquired in the year 1357 Disposed of on exercised options Balance at 31 December 2017 1357 Sharebased payments Equity settled share option schemes At 31 December 2017  the Group operated five sharebased award schemes which are all equitysettled founder shares scheme three longterm incentive schemes the NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan the Loans at Home LongTerm Incentive Plan and the Everyday Loans Group LongTerm Incentive Plan and the Sharesave Plan Save As You Earn scheme.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 117 a Movements in the period Founder Shares scheme The Founders have committed 255000 of capital in NSF Subsidiary Limited in the form of 100 Founder Shares.
The Founder Shares grant each holder the option subject to the satisfaction of both the significant acquisition condition and the performance condition which can be satisfied under certain circumstances if a Founder is removed from the Board to require the Company to purchase some or all of their Founder Shares.
The conditions which must be met in order for the participants to receive any future payout can be summarised as follows the Company must achieve an admission to the London Stock Exchange the Company must make an acquisition of at least 50 million within two years of the admission date the Ordinary Shares must achieve an internal rate of return of 8.5% per annum from the market capitalisation at the admission date and the Companys market capitalisation must increase by 25% from the market capitalisation at the admission date.
The last two conditions must both be met for a period of 20 out of 30 consecutive days during the same 30day period within five years of an acquisition.
The purchase price for the exercise of this option may be paid by the Company in Ordinary Shares or as a cash equivalent at the Companys option.
The number of Ordinary Shares required to settle all such options is the number of shares that would have represented 5% of the Ordinary Shares of the Company on or immediately after listing if such Ordinary Shares had been issued at the time of listing.
The equivalent cash value is calculated on exercise of the option as the estimated total price of the Ordinary Shares that would have been issued if the option had been settled in Ordinary Shares rather than cash based on the mean of the closing middle market quotations for an Ordinary Share on the London Stock Exchange over the 30 business days prior to the exercise of the option.
The fair value of the share options was assessed to be 255000 and therefore the Company recognised total expenses of nil relating to this share option scheme in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
No shares were issued to the Directors during the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year awards were made under the NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan.
The awards were in the form of nilcost options and the issue of C Ordinary Shares in NonStandard Finance Subsidiary Limited.
The vesting date for awards is 31 December 2020.
On vesting participants will share in a pool equal to 15% of the growth in value based on market capitalisation of the Company at 31 December 2020 above a share price of 1.10 per share.
In respect of awards made in the form of nilcost options on exercise a participant will receive shares in the Company equal in value to their proportion of the pool at vesting.
In respect of awards made in the form of shares in NonStandard Finance Subsidiary Limited on vesting a participant can exchange these shares for shares in the Company equal in value to their proportion of the pool.
Awards in the form of nilcost options Percentage of pool allocated Percentage of growth above 1.10 share price Exercise price Outstanding at 1 January 2017 Options granted 62.5% 9.4%
Exercised
Outstanding at 31 December 2017 62.5% 9.4% Exercisable at 31 December 2017 Awards in the form of C Ordinary Shares
Percentage of growth above 1.10 share price Exercise price Outstanding at 1 January 2017 Shares issued 375 5.6%
Vested
Outstanding at 31 December 2017 375 5.6% Vested at 31 December 2017    Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 118 Other reserves continued Loans at Home LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year awards were made under the Loans at Home LongTerm Incentive Plan.
The awards were in the form of nilcost options over shares in the Company.
On vesting participants will share in a pool equal to 5% of the growth in the equity value of Loans at Home measured at 31 December 2019 above 130m.
The pool is subject to an overall cap of 3m.
On exercise of the nilcost options a participant will receive shares in the Company equal in value to their proportion of the pool.
Percentage of pool allocated Percentage of growth above 130m Exercise price Outstanding at 1 January 2017 Options granted 100% 5%
Exercised
Outstanding at 31 December 2017 100% 5% Exercisable at 31 December 2017 Everyday Loans Group LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year awards were made under the Everyday Loans Group LongTerm Incentive Plan.
The awards were in the form of nilcost options over shares in the Company.
The vesting date is 31 December 2019.
On vesting participants will share in a pool equal to 5% of the growth in equity value of the Everyday Loans Group measured at 31 December 2019 above 267m.
The pool is subject to an overall cap of 6m.
On exercise of the nilcost options a participant will receive shares in the Company equal in value to their proportion of the pool.
Percentage of pool allocated Percentage of growth above 267m Exercise price Outstanding at 1 January 2017 Options granted 117.8% 5.9% Lapsed 32.7% 1.6%
Outstanding at 31 December 2017 85.1% 4.3% Exercisable at 31 December 2017 Save As You Earn scheme During the year awards were made to employees of the Group under a HMRC taxadvantaged Sharesave Plan.
Under the Sharesave Plan options have been granted in two tranches with a threeyear vesting period and with an exercise price set at a 20% discount to the share price at the date of grant.
Granted on 7 June 2017 Granted on 6 October 2017 Number Exercise price  Number Exercise price Outstanding at 1 January 2017 Options granted 1307 711 0.5606 1910278 0.606 Lapsed 29536
Outstanding at 31 December 2017 1278175 0.5606 1910278 0.606 Exercisable at 31 December 2017 b Fair value of options granted For the sharebased awards granted during the year the main assumptions in the valuations are as follows.
NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year the NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan was adopted.
Under the Plan awards can be made in the form of shares in a subsidiary company or nilcost options.
Awards will vest on 31 December 2020 based on the growth of the Company above a share price of 1.10.
The fair value of the plan is 1.61m spread over the vesting period and will be equitysettled.
A charge of 0.095m 2016 nil was recognised in the 2017 financial year.
The following information is relevant in the determination of the fair value 15 September 2017 19 September 2017 Valuation method BlackScholes BlackScholes Share price at grant date 0.75 0.78 Exercise price 1.10 1.10 Expected volatility 25% 25% Expected life 3.3 years 3.3 years Expected dividend yield 3.5% 3.5% Riskfree interest rate 0.32% 0.32% Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 119 Loans at Home LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year the Loans at Home LongTerm Incentive Plan was adopted.
Under the Plan awards can be made in the form of nilcost options.
Awards will vest on 31 December 2019 based on the growth in value of the Loans at Home Group at the vesting date above 130m.
The awards are subject to an overall cap of 3m.
Awards will be delivered in the form of shares in NonStandard Finance plc and will be equitysettled.
The fair value of the awards made in December 2017 is 0.279m spread over the vesting period.
A charge of 0.004m 2016 nil was recognised in the 2017 financial year.
The following information is relevant in the determination of the fair value 20 December 2017 Valuation method MonteCarlo Equity value at grant date 82.5m Exercise price 0.00 Expected volatility 30.9% Expected life 2.16 years Expected dividend yield 0% Riskfree interest rate 0.51% Everyday Loans Group LongTerm Incentive Plan During the year the Everyday Loans Group LongTerm Incentive Plan was adopted.
Under the Plan awards can be made in the form of nilcost options.
Awards will vest on 31 December 2019 based on the growth in value of the Everyday Loans Group at the vesting date above 267m.
The awards are subject to an overall cap of 6m.
Awards will be delivered in the form of shares in NonStandard Finance plc and will be equity settled.
The fair value of the awards made in MarchApril 2017 is 0.373m spread over the vesting period.
The fair value of the awards made in December 2017 is 0.082m spread over the vesting period.
A charge of 0.109m 2016 nil was recognised in the 2017 financial year.
The following information is relevant in the determination of the fair value 6 March and 4 April 2017 4 December 2017 Valuation method MonteCarlo MonteCarlo Equity value at grant date 182.1m 182.1m Exercise price 0.00 0.00 Expected volatility 25% 34% Expected life 2.82 years 2.1 years Expected dividend yield 0.0% 0.0% Riskfree interest rate 0.14% 0.48% Sharesave Plan During the year the NonStandard Finance plc Sharesave Plan was adopted.
Under the Plan options can be made with a threeyear vesting period and at an exercise price not more than a 20% discount to the share price at the date of grant and will be equitysettled.
The fair value of the awards made in June 2017 is 0.213m spread over the vesting period.
The fair value of the awards made in October 2017 is 0.378m spread over the vesting period.
A charge of 0.070m 2016 nil was recognised in the 2017 financial year.
The following information is relevant in the determination of the fair value 7 June 2017 6 October 2017 Valuation method BlackScholes BlackScholes Share price at grant date 0.7038 0.7700 Exercise price 0.5606 0.6060 Expected volatility 28.3% 29.9% Expected life 3 years 3 years Expected dividend yield 1.71% 1.30% Riskfree interest rate 0.13% 0.51% NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 120 Financial Statements Acquisition of subsidiary George Banco On 17 August 2017  the Group obtained control of the George Banco Group which consists of George Banco Limited George Banco. and GeorgeFinance. om Limited.
The Group obtained control through the purchase of 100% of the share capital.
The acquisition of George Banco is in line with the Groups strategy to be a leader in each of its chosen business segments.
The fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities of George Banco as at the acquisition date were as follows
Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets Property plant and equipment 125 Amounts receivable from customers Trade receivables 50 Cash and cash equivalents 2137 Trade and other payables 380 Loans and borrowings 34134  34134 Deferred tax liabilities 2478 2478 3373 13354 Goodwill 8598 Total consideration Satisfied by
Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 18579 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 2137 1 2561791 has been attributed to the fair value of George Bancos customer list 4917 977 to the broker relationships and 210844 to the George Banco brand refer to note 14.
2 An adjustment to receivables of 8141189 has been made to reflect the fair value of the receivables book at the acquisition date.
3 Deferred tax liability of 2477 875 has been recognised on the intangibles and the fair value adjustment of the receivable book at acquisition refer to note 20.
George Banco contributed 4.5m to the Groups revenue and 0.5m profit before tax before fair value adjustments for the period from the date of acquisition to 31 December 2017 .
Reported revenue was 4.4m and profit before tax was 0.4m after fair value adjustments for the period from the date of acquisition to 31 December 2017 .
Assuming George Banco was acquired on 1 January 2017  reported revenue was 10.8m and profit before tax was 0.9m after fair value adjustments.
Everyday Loans On 13 April 2016 the Group obtained control of the Everyday Loans Holdings Limited Group which consists of Everyday Loans Holdings Limited Everyday Loans Limited and Everyday Lending Limited.
The Group obtained control through the purchase of 100% of the share capital.
The
Everyday Loans Group acquisition satisfied the strategic objective of entering two of NonStandard Finance plcs target sectors branchbased unsecured lending Everyday Loans and guarantor loans TrustTwo.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 121 The fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities of Everyday Loans as at the acquisition date were as follows
Fair value adjustments
Intangible assets 14006 14006 Property plant and equipment 563  563 Amounts receivable from customers 115563 23749 139312 Trade receivables 4259  4259 Cash and cash equivalents 1807  1807 Trade and other payables 7342  7342 Corporation tax liability 1949  1949 Deferred tax liabilities 112901 30204 143105 Goodwill 91895 Total consideration 235000 Satisfied by Cash and shares 235000 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 215000 Share consideration 20000 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 1807 Corporation tax credit 1864 Other acquired asset 545 1 2050000 has been attributed to the fair value of Everyday Loans customer list 4233000 to the broker relationship 1447 000 to the Everyday Loans brand and 49000 to the TrustTwo brand and 6227 000 to technology refer to note 14.
2 An adjustment to receivables of 23749000 was made to reflect the fair value of the receivables book at the acquisition date.
3 Deferred tax liability of 7 551000 was recognised on the intangibles and the fair value adjustment of the receivable book at acquisition refer to note 20.
The fair value measurement of acquired assets is based upon financial forecasts which are categorised as Level 3 within the IFRS 13 fair value hierarchy.
Net cash used in operating activities  Group Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Operating loss 2540 5858 Taxation paid 2226 1341 Depreciation 1497 690 Sharebased payment charge 291 Amortisation of intangible assets 7897 10714 Fair value unwind on acquired loan book 11985 8342 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 416 363 Decrease in inventories  3 Increase in amounts receivable from customers 54437 21039 Increase in receivables 51 7737 Increasedecrease in payables 1000 6952 Cash used in operating activities 37 000 23541 Financial Statements NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 122 Net cash used in operating activities  Group continued Net cash used in operating activities  Company Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Operating loss 5174 3883 Depreciation 53 39 Sharebased payment charge 165 DecreaseIncrease in receivables 2149 3123 Decrease in payables 286 9526 Cash used in operating activities 3093 16492 Operating lease commitments  Group At 31 December 2017  the outstanding commitments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due are as follows Y ear ended 31 December Y ear ended 31 December Within one year 1572 1158 In the second to fifth years inclusive 3175 2419 After five years 99 263 4846 3839 Related party transactions Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
There have been no related party transactions in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
Three Directors are members of the NonStandard Finance plc LongTerm Incentive Plan as detailed in note 23.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited part of the Directors remuneration report on pages 77  78 81 and 82.
Notes to the financial statements continued Corporate Governance Financial Statements Overview Strategic Report NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 123 Financial Instruments  Group The Groups operations expose it to a variety of financial risks including credit risk liquidity risk and interest rate risk.
The Directors have delegated the responsibility of monitoring financial risk management to the Risk Committee.
The Group s objectives are to maintain a wellspread and qualitycontrolled customer base by applying strong emphasis on good credit management both through strict lending criteria at the time of underwriting and continuously monitoring the collection process.
The average effective interest rate on financial assets of the Group at 31 December 2017 was estimated to be 109% 2016 111%.
The average effective interest rate on financial liabilities of the Group at 31 December 2017 was estimated to be 7% 2016 4%.
Market risk Market risk is the risk of loss due to adverse market movements caused by active trading positions taken in interest rates foreign exchange markets bonds and equities.
The Group does not undertake position taking or trading books of this type and therefore market risk is not a concern.
Interest rate risk The Group has an exposure to interest rate risk arising on changes in interest rates.
The Group monitors interest rates but has not chosen to hedge this item given the much greater effective interest on financial assets as compared to the effective interest rate on financial liabilities.
A 1% movement in the interest rate applied to financial liabilities during 2017 would not have had a material impact on the Groups result for the year.
Credit risk The Groups credit risk inherent in amounts receivable from customers is reviewed under impairment as per note 17 .
This risk is minimised by the use of credit scoring techniques which are designed to ensure the Group lends only to those customers who we believe can afford the repayments.
It should be noted that the credit risk at the individual customer level is managed by strict adherence to credit control rules which are regularly reviewed.
No individual customer contributed more than 10% of the revenue for the Group.
Trade and other receivables and cash at bank are not considered to have a material credit risk as all material balances are due from highly rated banking counterparties.
Capital risk management The Board of Directors assess the capital needs of the Group on an ongoing basis and approve all capital transactions.
The Groups objective in respect of capital risk management is to maintain a conservative loan to value ratio level with respect to market conditions whilst taking account of business growth opportunities in a capitalefficient manner.
Liquidity risk This is the risk that the Group has insufficient resources to fund its existing business and its future plans for growth.
The Groups shortterm loans to customers provide a natural hedge against mediumterm borrowings.
The Group has in place sufficient longterm committed debt facilities which are sourced from a number of different providers.
Cash and covenant forecasting is conducted on a monthly basis as part of the regular management reporting exercise.
The risk of not having sufficient liquidity resources is therefore low.
The Group monitors its levels of working capital to ensure that it can meet its debt repayments as they fall due.
Subsequent events Since 31 December 2017 there have been no events that require disclosure in or adjustment to the financial statements.
NonStandard Finance plc Annual Report 2017 124 Additional information Company information Company details Registered office and contact details 5th Floor 6 St Andrew Street
EC4A 3AE Website site Company number Independent auditor Deloitte LLP Hill House 1 Little New Street
EC4A 3TR
Brokers
J.
Morgan Cazenove Floor 29 25 Bank Street Canary Wharf
E14 5JP Shore Capital Bond Street House 14 Clifford Street
W15 4JU
Slaughter and May One Bunhill Row
EC1Y 8YY Walker Morris LLP Kings Court 12 King St
LS1 2HL Financial communications The Maitland Consultancy 13 Kings Boulevard
