Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 In 2017 the Company has been preparing the groundworks to significantly increase production once the additional machinery is in place in 2018 .
Altyn Plc LSE ALTN is an exploration and development company which listed on the standard segment of the London Stock Exchange in December 2014.
To read more about Altyn Plc please visit our website site At a glance Altyns main asset is its 100% interest in the Sekisovskoye gold mine in North East Kazakhstan with probable reserves of 2.26Moz.
The Company is continuing to develop the underground mine at Sekisovskoye and its exploration asset at Karasuyskoye.
The Company spent US1.4m in relation to exploration costs at Karasuyskoye in the current year.
The mining licence for Sekisovskoye is valid until 18 July 2020 with an automatic preemptive contractual right to extend after this period.
The Company was awarded the subsoil exploration contract for the Karasuyskoye ore field for a 6year term in 2016 with the right to extend for another 4 years if there is a commercial discovery of resources.
The site encompasses an area of approximately 198km and geological data purchased by the Company indicates that there are several mineralised zones each with the potential to contain significant gold resources.
Throughout 2014 the Company worked on a Competent Persons Report CPR in relation to the Sekisovskoye mine site and the results of the findings were announced in November 2014.
The significant highlights are summarised in the mineral resources statement on page 12.
It is the intention of the Company to update the CPR in the near future to also incorporate the site at
The Companys principal shareholders the Assaubayev family through their investment vehicle African Resources Limited have provided strong financial support and commitment to the current development of the Company.
The familys shareholding currently stands at 69.8%.
Our focus During the current year the underground mine and infrastructure have been prepared to ramp up production once the necessary equipment is in place.
In the current year the focus was on the development of access and preparation of the ore bodies.
The key highlights are documented below Underground development and exploration The transport decline was taken from the developmental level of 225masl down to 150masl.
Access portal for the second transport decline was completed during H2 2017.
The processing plant was overhauled involving a number of replacement partsequipment to ensure efficient working at higher volume levels.
Capital investment of US2.6m 2016 US5.6m which included a new loadhauldumper LHD and drilling machine at
Exploration work continued on the prospective Karasuyskoye site with extensive drilling in a number of areas on the site in order to better define the ore bodies and grade content.
Financial highlights Turnover increased in the year to US21.6m 2016 US15.9m.
16747oz of gold sold 2016 12602oz an increase of 4145oz.
Average gold price achieved including silver as a byproduct US1293oz 2016 US1259oz.
Adjusted EBITDA Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation and excluding impairment of US3.7m 2016
EBRD loan was repaid in the year in the current year capital and interest amounting to US3.5m was repaid.
In February 2018 the Company converted US9.7m of the US10m bond issued to African Resources into 233333333 new ordinary shares.
It is the intention to convert the remaining shares and interest into ordinary shares in Q3 2018.
Operational highlights Gold poured 16717oz 2016 10970oz a 52.4% increase yearonyear the production was constrained by the closure of the processing plant for maintenance and availability of the necessary equipment.
Operating cash cost US774oz 2016 US846oz.
Gold recovery rate 83.54% 2016 80.20% improvements in processing production techniques.
WELCOME TO ALTYN PLC To read more about Altyn plc please visit our website site Sekisovskoye The Sekisovskoye deposit is the Companys flagship asset and is located close to the village of Sekisovka approximately 40km from the North East Kazakhstan regional capital Ust Kamenogorsk.
The mineral rights at Sekisovskoye are held by a 100% owned subsidiary of the Company DTOO GRP Baurgold  and the processing plant is owned by the 100% owned subsidiary of the Company TOO GMK Altyn MM.
The Sekisovskoye deposit was discovered in 1833 with surface mining taking place during the periods 1833 to 1847 1932 to 1935 and 1943 to 1946.
From 1975 to 1986 a range of exploration work was carried out.
Between 1978 and 1982 AltaiZoloto of the Ministry of NonFerrous Industry KazSSR mined the oxidised area of the ore body.
In
2003 under Hambledon Minings ownership subsequently renamed to Altyn Plc further exploration work was undertaken and gold production from the mine and processing plant commenced in 2008.
In 2014 the Company released the findings of the mining consultant Venmyn Deloittes Competent Persons Report on the mine which demonstrated JORC reserves of 2.26Moz JORC resources of 5.14Moz and a development plan to increase annual gold production to 100000oz.
This is to be achieved by accessing higher grade reserves through the continued development of the underground mine and by increasing the processing plants throughput capacity from the current 850000t per year to 1 million tonnes per year.
The extraction of the gold reserves is now undertaken solely from the underground mine.
The
Company is in the process of enhancing the production from the underground mine gradually increasing production with the aim to achieve upto 1000000t in the future.
Karasuyskoye Ore Fields In May 2016 the Company was awarded the subsoil exploration contract to conduct further testing at the site Karasuyskoye ore field for the 6 year term with the right to extend for another 4 years in case of commercial discovery of resources.
The geological data that the Company acquired indicates that there are several mineralised zones at Karasuyskoye and this leads the Company to believe that this project has the potential to contain significant gold resources.
The Company is validating the geological data by twinning previous drill holes and undertaking additional metallurgical test work.
The initial results are very encouraging and this work will facilitate the preparation of an independent Competent Persons Report CPR to international standards it is to be completed in the near term.
On completion of the CPR the Company envisages progressing towards mining from the Karasuyskoye Ore Fields initially using cash generated from existing operations external funding will be considered as the project progresses and the cost of development is considered.
Strategic report At a glance  IFC Areas of exploration 01 Chairmans statement  02
Chief Executive Officers review  03
Market review and share price performance  05 Our strategy and business model  06 Financial performance  07 Key performance indicators  07 Principal risks and uncertainties 08 Corporate social responsibility  10 Mineral resources statement  12
Board of Directors  14 Directors report 16 Statement of the Directors responsibilities  20 Audit Committee report  21 Statement of the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee  22 Annual remuneration report  23 Remuneration policy report 26 Independent auditors report to the members of Altyn plc  27 Financial statements Consolidated statement of profit or loss  31 Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income  31 Consolidated statement of financial position  32 Company statement of financial position 33 Consolidated statement of changes in equity  34 Company statement of changes in equity 35 Consolidated statement of cashflows  36 Company statement of cashflows  37 Notes to the financial statements  38 Notice of Annual General Meeting  59 Explanation of resolutions 64 Company information  65 Glossary of terms  66 1 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
Strategic report Governance Financial statements
Russia
Russia
Areas of exploration During the year the Company maintained tight control of costs to conserve working capital .
Dear shareholders We were expecting to be moving forward towards the targets set in the prior year in terms of production however our progress was held back by the lack of equipment.
Positive progress was made in developing the underground mine in relation to the ore bodies and infrastructure.
However the lack of equipment had a direct effect on the level of output and grade achieved.
During the year in order to move the project forward which requires capital investment a great deal of work was done with investment advisors and potential lenders.
The potential offers were carefully vetted and assessed to ensure that the finance to be provided was the correct fit for the
This necessarily involved additional time and resources and the time lines were extended to those originally envisaged.
The management are working to ensure that the current funding being accessed for the required investment in equipment is at a competitive price for the shareholders and affordable for the Company.
To this end they have identified two sources that will provide the necessary funding required to move the project forward and are currently in the final stages of confirming the funding.
During the year the Company maintained tight control of costs to conserve working capital with further savings being made in 2018 both at head office and at subsidiary Company level in
At Head Office the administrative costs have been reduced by cutting office and professional fees.
In the subsidiaries rent travel and other overheads have been reduced.
In Q1 2018 these have been further reduced.
Employment costs have been reduced with a rationalisation of the workforce principally at the mine site.
During the year the Company met its commitment to repay the balance of the EBRD loan which was settled in October 2017.
The consequent finance cash flows in relation to servicing of this debt will prove useful in meeting its obligations on any new financial liability.
The decline has now progressed down to 150masl and a number of ore bodies are now accessible to progress 2018 production.
Underground development 150masl The decline is now at 150masl and a number of ore bodies are now accessible to progress production in We are confident from the work conducted so far that the mine will generate a very good return to the shareholders.
The underground asset and infrastructure have been developed so that it can deliver the production required via the new range of equipment to be purchased.
This is expected to quickly transform the productive capacity and move towards the targeted output levels.
The recent drilling undertaken at Karasuyskoye has delivered promising results and the Company are expecting to move the project forward to the CPR stage in the near term.
I would like to thank the shareholders for their patience as I am aware that the gold price was trending up whilst our share price was trending down.
Based on the fundamentals and our understanding of the asset we see the longterm future of the Company in a positive light and the patience of shareholders will be rewarded.
With the ore bodies ready for exploitation and infrastructure in place including the refurbished processing plant.
The additional equipment will now provide the necessary feed stock to the processing plant to see the results of all the hard work come to fruition.
Finally may I once again thank all our employees and our Management team for their hard work and we look forward to an exciting and fruitful year ahead for Altyn.
Kanat Assaubayev
30 April 2018 2 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
3 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW
Strategic report Governance Financial statements With the financing for the equipment almost in place the Company will be ready to move to the next phase of its development plan.
Overview
The Company is very close to securing the finance to purchase the equipment necessary to increase the output from its current levels to its initial target of 40000t a month moving to 70000t in 2019.
Infrastructure enhancements and progress of the underground decline have been continuing in the year.
This will provide a good springboard for increasing the output once the available equipment is in situ.
In terms of expected timelines the production is planned to increase from Q3 2018 once the equipment is commissioned and delivered.
Current developments The following progress was achieved in developing the underground mine in the year Development of the decline was taken down to 150masl this gave access to ore bodies 10 38 and ore body 5.
There is no further requirement in the short term to develop the decline as this together with the original decline giving access to ore body 11 will provide sufficient mineable ore for the current planned production.
Ore bodies have continued to be prepared for production however the lack of equipment has been a hindrance in this regard.
In addition it has been difficult to target the ore bodies in a precise manner in order to extract the grade of ore as indicated by the exploration drilling resulting in a higher than expected dilution in the grade.
The actual overall processing grade achieved in the FY17 was 1.89 gt 2016 1.66gt.
As explained this was due to two factors a dilution issue and because lower grade ore stockpiled ore was mixed with the highergrade ore to maintain operational efficiency in the processing plant.
In the year the Company did not have the necessary equipment for contouring and drilling the ore bodies in order to maximise the extraction of the higher grade ore without dilution.
The underground ore grade fell to 2.08gt from 2.70gt in 2016.
The expectation is that these issues will be settled once the new equipment is in place.
Refurbishment of the processing plant and the preparation of the ore bodies together with the completion of tailings dam 4 in early 2017 now allows for the rapid increase in production once the equipment is in situ expected to be in Q3 2018.
The tailings dam will provide sufficient storage for at least three years.
During the year the company purchased a LHD Fambition loadhauldumper used to fill the underground trucks with ore and a prospect drilling machine CSK Sondaj  C400 used to define and contour the ore bodies to target and extract the highergrade ores.
In addition the costs of exploration at Karasuyskoye were capitalised in accordance with the accounting policy this amounted approximately US1.4m 475mKzt which was principally invoiced by third party consultants to conduct detailed geological testing and project documentation.
Underground development Looking forward The decline was developed to the 150masl during the year further development of the decline will be limited as there is sufficient access to the ore bodies at this level which can be prepared for production.
Ore body 11 contains on average highergrade ore and is expected to be mined during 2018.
Preparatory works will be undertaken to include horizontal shaft development to access ore bodies 385 and 10 down to this level.
With the new equipment to come on stream in Q3 2018 the production is expected to increase from this point gradually increasing to the run rate of 70000t a month.
Capital requirements An update to the current projected development capital requirements is given in the table to the right.
In summary part of the capex requirement was met in 2017 from the Companys own resources of the total amount shown above the external funding being sourced is in the range of US30m US35m the balance will be funded from the Companys operations.
The Company has entered into an agreement with Freedom Finance to raise US15m of the external funding requirement.
The
Company is also in discussions with another party to provide direct equipment financing.
Taken together this will enable the Company to progress its development plans.
Sekisovskoye operational update The operational performance of the Companys Sekisovskoye gold mine during 2017 against the prior year is shown in the tables to the right.
In the year to December 2017 the ore mined has increased substantially from last year as extensive preparation work was done on the ore bodies in the prior year and is continuing in to the current year.
The underground gold grade is lower than in 2016 and has dropped from 2.70 to 2.08 this is principally due to the lack of currently available mining equipment to target the ore body in the most efficient way.
This led to a higher than anticipated dilution and a lower grade of ore recovered lower grade ore was being mined from around the targeted ore zone.
It is anticipated that the gold grade will increase as more targeted drilling is undertaken once the necessary equipment is available.
During the year the company gold mining grades ranged from a low of 1.50 to a high in a particular month of 2.59.
This was a reflection of the amount of development ore that was included within the ore mined.
This is not an ideal situation and is expected to be remedied as noted above as further drilling equipment is deployed.
The mineral processing has increased significantly however it should be noted that the actual 4 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW continued
Projected capital expenditures underground operations
USm USm USm USm Prospect drilling 3.7 0.7 1.5 1.5 Underground development 5.6 2.0 1.6 2.0 Infrastructure 3.4 3.4 Ore handling facilities 19.2 12.0 4.9 2.3 Process plant and paste plant 8.6 1.7 4.5 2.4 Karasuyskoye  exploration 4.7 0.9 1.9 1.9 Contingency 3.5 2.1 0.7 0.7 Mining  open pit 2017 2016 Ore mined T  107586 Gold grade gt  0.91 Silver grade gt  1.60 Contained gold oz  3065 Contained silver oz  5361 Mining  underground 2017 2016 Ore mined T 287389 100763 Gold grade gt 2.08 2.70 Silver grade gt 2.80 3.76 Contained gold oz 19243 8757 Contained silver oz 25909 12182 Mining  processing 2017 2016 Crushing T 332502 258206 Milling T 332947 262546 Gold grade gt 1.88 1.66 Silver grade gt 2.56 2.88 Gold recovery % 83.54 80.20 Silver recovery % 73.85 73.45 Contained gold oz 20040 13679 Contained silver oz 27138 22491 Gold poured oz 16717 10970 Silver poured oz 19989 16519 The mining processing relates to nine months as the processing plant was closed for three months for upgrade works. recovery rates are being maintained at current levels.
As in the prior year the processed ore was a mixture of lower grade ore from the stock piles and the developmental ore from the higher grade underground ore bodies.
The ore grade was at a low level from the stock piles and was only used in order to keep the plant operational.
This process of mixing the ores will be discontinued once sufficient feed stock is generated from the underground sources. refurbishment in 2017.
However there is a significant uplift in production for the period which is encouraging moving up to 16717oz of gold poured in comparison to 10970 in the prior year.
The gold production increased from H1 of 7327oz to 9390oz in H2 production will only build significantly from this point once the new equipment is deployed.
We are very pleased with the recovery rate of 83.54% 2016 80.20% the upgrades in the plant processing equipment and revised working 5 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 MARKET REVIEW AND SHARE PRICE PERFORMANCE The share price of the Company has been trading at a low level and is a disappointment to the Directors who are of the opinion it does not reflect the true value and potential of the Company.
The Board has worked hard in order to ensure that the Company is set up and restructured to be operationally efficient and to be cost efficient.
It has taken time to move to this stage and the next stage of development is dependent on further funding being made available.
The current share range has seen a drop from the prior year and in the region of 1.01.3p 2016 The Directors feel that this is not a true reflection of the value of the Company and expect the share price to improve significantly as production improves and the potential of the Company is realised.
In addition to the current site which is producing at Sekisovskoye the Company is pressing ahead with the development of the resources at Karasuyskoye.
It is hoped that 2018 will see a significant improvement in the share price as production and profitability improves with a stable gold price.
It is expected that the gold price would continue to trade in the range US1250US1300 an ounce similarly no significant impact is expected in exchange rate fluctuations in the forthcoming year the Tenge is currently trading at 329 to the US
Jan17
Feb17
Mar17
Apr17
May17
Jun17
Jul17
Aug17
Sep17
Oct17
Nov17
Dec17
FTSE 350 Mining Index
Feb17
Mar17
Apr17
May17
Jun17
Jul17
Aug17
Sep17
Oct17
Nov17
Dec17
ALTN p per share
Feb17
Mar17
Apr17
May17
Jun17
Jul17
Aug17
Sep17
Oct17
Nov17
Dec17
Gold price USoz
Feb17
Mar17
Apr17
May17
Jun17
Jul17
Aug17
Sep17
Oct17
Nov17
Dec17
KZTUSD Our strategy is to grow and develop by continuing to upgrade our underground mine at Sekisovskoye targeting annual gold production of 100000oz.
Beyond this the highly prospective Karasuyskoye Ore Fields adjacent to the Sekisovskoye mine has the potential to enable us to grow significantly beyond our core asset.
In addition to growing our production and asset base our progression to the Main Board of the London Stock Exchange in December 2014 represented not only a natural step in our growth strategy but also our commitment to the London investor base and regulatory environment and we remain committed to meeting best practice governance standards.
Our business model is simple  we intend to generate profits for our Company and value for our shareholders through the mining and sale of gold at our flagship operation the Sekisovskoye mine in North East Kazakhstan.
In order to ensure longterm success in this regard we plan to continue developing the high grade underground mine.
This should result in gold production increasing to 100000oz annually in the future once the necessary equipment is in place.
The acquisition of the adjacent Karasuyskoye Ore Fields geological data and imminent conclusion expected of subsoil user rights should ensure gold production growth into the future.
This is now progressing to development of the site with extensive drilling to confirm the mineral resources with the next step to progress with a CPR.
The Company is continually looking to complement existing operations with other targeted acquisitions.
We have four pillars to our business Mining  In prior years we have demonstrated our cost effective open pit production track record at Sekisovskoye to our shareholders and stakeholders.
We intend to demonstrate our capabilities once again with the development of the underground mine.
Development  In ensuring our longterm future we are in the process of developing the underground mine at Sekisovskoye in order to access the significant deeper ore reserves.
Accessing these reserves should add significantly to the life of mine and increase our annual gold production to 100000oz.
Exploration  The Company has been conducting extensive drilling at the Karasuyskoye site with positive results.
Geologically we see potential for this area to contain multiple mineralised zones that could potentially host future mines.
We believe our efforts are well focused in this highly prospective land package that has obvious synergies with our current production facilities.
Growth and Evaluation  We are committed to adding value for our shareholders and believe the best approach to achieve this is to set the foundations in place for future production growth.
As we intend to focus our efforts on production development exploration and evaluation we are confident that we can deliver increased gold production for the long term.
We frequently evaluate investment opportunities which are presented to us both in Kazakhstan and in the wider Central Asia area and as part of our longterm business development plan we will continue to evaluate other potential opportunities going forwards.
Development Exploration Growth and
Mining
Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 OUR STRATEGY AND BUSINESS MODEL
Continue to develop our high grade underground mine at Sekisovskoye
Production and asset base growth via the highly prospective Karasuyskoye Ore Fields
Continue to grow Strategic report Governance Financial statements Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Key performance indicators KPIs The gold poured increased to 16717oz this is a significant increase from last year.
In terms of production and revenue generation there is expected to be a significant step up once the Company is able to purchase further equipment.
As the Company is still in the process of obtaining the equipment it is expected this will only have the effect of uplifting production significantly in Q3 2018.
However production with the current capex levels is also budgeted to increase from 2017 levels but not by a significant amount.
Gold prices are budgeted to remain stable at current levels and there is not expected to be any change in the principal customer purchasing the gold.
As in the prior year the Company has made use of low grade ore from that remaining in the stock piles this has again led to the low levels of grade and recovery rates as it was principally used to maintain the operation of the processing plant at efficient levels.
As the low grade ore will be used in 2018 a write back has been made to the profit and loss account of US374000 to reflect the fact that this stock will be utilised in 2018.
The total cash cost of production which includes administrative costs but excludes depreciation and provisions amounted to US1075oz 2016
The operating cash cost amounts to US774oz 2015 US832oz.
This is based on the above but excluding administrative expenses.
The cash cost of production has fallen as costs have been controlled in both consumables and the number of workers used to generate the increased level of production.
As the level of production increases with tight control over costs it is anticipated that the cash cost of production will continue to fall to the targeted level of US540.
The Company has reported a net loss of US1.9m 2016 US6.4m with a gross profit of US4.2m 2016 US2.3m.
The operational loss is US484000 2016 loss US4.1m.
The reduction in the loss is a reflection of tighter production costs as noted above and partly a result of head office savings which are budgeted to reduce further in 2018.
In
Q1 2018 the Company has also further restructured the work force in Kazakhstan by outsourcing the transportation department and reducing the buildingmaintenance department.
The EBITDA is US3.6m 2016 US0.3m after adjusting the operating loss of US484000 2016 US4.1m for depreciation of US4.5m 2016 US3.3m and impairment gain of US374000 2016 loss
During 2017 the Company sold 16747oz of gold 2016 12602oz.
The average price achieved per oz in 2017 was US1293 similar to last year which achieved an average price of US1259.
The prices are budgeted to stay at similar levels in 2018 and there are no changes anticipated to the sales offtake agreement currently in place to the Kazakh national refinery.
The current cash position and anticipated trading is sufficient for the budgeted capex with no expansion and budgeted production for the next year.
The principal shareholders have agreed to provide monetary support as necessary in order to provide any short term financing that may be required.
Cash at yearend was US704000 2016 US2.2m.
Resources are sufficient to meet the current working capital requirements.
The Company generated an EBITDA of US3.6m 2016 US0.3m.
Financing commitments can be met from the cash generation of the Company and are expected to be at a reduced level from the prior year being principally interest commitments on the US2m convertible loan and repayment of short term borrowings in total these are expected to amount to approximately US1m in 2018.
At the start of the year the Company had convertible bonds amounted to US12m.
In February 2018 US9.7m of the US10m issued to the principle shareholder African Resources Limited was converted to 233333333 ordinary shares at a conversion price of 3p.
The principal shareholders have agreed to defer any loan repayments in addition it is anticipated that the remaining amounts due under the convertible bond due to African Resources to include accrued interest will be converted into new ordinary shares in Q3 2018.
As stated in the CEO report the Company is in the final stages of obtaining the finance to purchase further capital equipment in order to increase the processing output.
Until this is in place costs including further capital investment will be kept at low levels and it is budgeted to be in line with 2017 at approx.
US3m to include further exploratory work at the Karasuyskoye site.
The consolidated net assets of the Company are US33.2m 2016 US33.9m no significant changes from the prior year.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE Revenue USm
Annual gold poured oz 16717oz 2017 16717 15tel Cash production cost USoz
832tel Adjusted EBITDA USm
Net assets USm
Fiscal changes in Kazakhstan Given that Altyn operates solely in Kazakhstan the Company is naturally at risk of adverse changes to the fiscal regime in the country.
Kazakhstan is a relatively young country and there have been fiscal changes in recent years in some cases related to the mining industry.
However the country is outward looking and committed to attracting direct foreign investment.
Kazakhstan has hosted international exhibitions and sporting events and is positively encouraging investment including relaxing visa requirements We therefore believe that the Kazakh government is aligned with potential foreign investors and would be very cautious in implementing any fiscal changes which could deter investment.
Recent tax audits of the subsidiary companies have not revealed any material discrepancies the Company has consulted with the tax authorities and provided all necessary information as and when required and will seek expert tax advice as and when necessary.
No access to capital  funding Sekisovskoye In order to continue with the underground development at Sekisovskoye the Company must incur additional capital expenditure.
Currently the Company does not have the funds available to complete the capital work programme.
The Company is therefore dependent on cash from external sources and therefore its future is at risk if funds from these external sources are unavailable.
While the required level of funding has not been secured the Assaubayev family which owns 69.8% of the Altyn shares through its vehicle African Resources has invested in and lent to the Company in the past and is keen to see the Company succeed.
However without further external funding to complete the underground mine production would proceed at a much slower pace than that currently planned.
The
Company is currently in the process of seeking further investment and has engaged brokers and other consultants to market the Company to potential investors.
Commodity price risk The Company generates its revenue from the sale of gold and silver that it has produced.
While the Company has no control over commodity prices it is in a fortunate position to have a very robust mine and development project in Sekisovskoye that can withstand prolonged weak precious metals prices.
Given the higher grades expected to be processed and the low cash cost of production the Company has a significant buffer and will remain profitable at lower gold prices.
Currency risk The US Dollar has remained stable during 2017 against the Kazakh Tenge.
As at 31 December 2017 1 US Dollar equated to approximately 330KZT and is expected to remain in this range in the foreseeable future.
As the revenue is generated in US Dollars any strengthening of the US Dollar against the Kazakh Tenge will favour the Company in addition as the Company has a relatively low cost of production local price inflation is not expected to have a significant impact.
Reliance on operating in one country Currently all of the Companys mining assets are in Kazakhstan.
The Company believes that Kazakhstan has significant future mineral potential hence the choice of jurisdiction.
The
Company makes it its business to be well informed of any incountry changes which may adversely affect the business.
While the Company knows and understands Kazakhstan well and hence has a strong position incountry it has stated that it would look at other opportunities in the future within the Central Asia region and this may mitigate risk.
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES 8 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 9 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Strategic report Governance Financial statements Risk Mitigation Altyns reliance on one operation Currently the Company only generates revenue from one mine  Sekisovskoye.
The Group is actively exploring its adjacent property Karasuyskoye and is now developing this asset for future production.
Encountering technical difficulties in further developing the underground mine at Sekisovskoye would be negative for the future of the Company.
To mitigate this the Company uses external consultants to provide validate the work which has been undertaken to date.
The Company is in discussions with international consultants to ensure that the most appropriate development methods are utilised.
Failure to achieve production estimates Failure to achieve production estimates could arise due to various circumstances not the least mining issues processing plant issues and breakdowns and political and other disruptions.
Given that Company revenues are dependent on producing gold and silver from the Sekisovskoye mine failure to achieve production targets would adversely affect the Companys profitability and ability to generate cash.
The Company mitigates this risk by careful operational planning and detailed technical appraisal work as well as regular maintenance work The Companys management has analysed the risks and uncertainties and has in place control systems that monitor daily the performance of the business via key performance indicators.
Certain factors are beyond the control of the Company such as the fluctuations in the price of gold and possible political upheaval.
However the Company is aware of these factors and tries to mitigate these as far as possible.
In relation to the gold price the Company is pushing to achieve a lower cost base in order to minimise possible downward pressure of gold prices on profitability.
In addition it maintains close relationships with the Kazakhstan authorities in order to minimise bureaucratic delays and problems.
Technical difficulties developing the underground mine at Sekisovskoye CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 10 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Each of the Companys facilities is subject to external environmental checks on a quarterly basis.
Human resources The Company has maintained a strong commitment to equality of opportunity in its employment policies practices and procedures.
It is continually looking at proactive ways to manage the work force and introduce measures that will benefit the work force.
The accompanying table shows their current employees and gender.
In December 2017 after a thorough review of the employment requirements of the Company it was decided that a number of the functions could be better fulfilled by outsourcing certain activities.
As a result a number of the workforce particularly in transport and construction were outsourced and approximately 180 people made redundant.
The
Company are conscious of their social responsibilities and have ensured that the employees have been dealt with in a fair and responsible way.
Human rights Whilst the Company does not have a specific human rights policy it does have policies such as Equal Opportunities and an Antibribery policy that adhere to internationally proclaimed human rights principles.
Employment policies and diversity The Company is in the process of implementing and developing its diversity policy and communicating it to its employees in a formal manner after consultation with the local authorities it is fully supported by senior management and employee representatives Once formally in place the policy will be monitored and reviewed annually to ensure that equality and diversity is continually promoted in the workplace.
Based on the movement of employees one female left the Company on a net basis.
The Company is currently reviewing in particular the number of senior women managers with an aim to increase numbers if justified.
The Company currently does adopt high standards in diversity and is dedicated to encouraging a supportive and inclusive culture amongst the whole workforce this now needs to be formally put in place.
The aim is to ensure that all employees and job applicants are given equal opportunity and that our organisation is representative of all sections of society.
Each employee will be respected and valued and able to give their best as a result.
This policy reinforces our commitment to providing equality and fairness to all in our employment and not provide less favourable facilities or treatment on the grounds of age disability gender reassignment marriage and civil partnership pregnancy and maternity race ethnic origin colour nationality national origin religion or belief or sex and sexual orientation.
We are opposed to all forms of unlawful and unfair discrimination.
All employees no matter whether they are parttime fulltime or temporary will be treated fairly and with respect.
The Company will enforce current work practice and work within the spirit of the law.
When selecting candidates for employment promotion training or any other benefit it will be on the basis of their aptitude and ability.
The policy will aim to create an environment in which individual differences and the contributions of all team members are recognised and valued.
To create a working environment that promotes dignity and respect for every employee.
To not tolerate any form of intimidation bullying or harassment and to discipline those that breach this policy.
To make training development and progression opportunities available to all staff.
To promote equality in the workplace.
To encourage anyone who feels they have been subject to discrimination to raise their concerns so we can apply corrective measures.
To encourage employees to treat everyone with dignity and respect.
To regularly review all our employment practices and procedures so that fairness is maintained at all times.
Employee involvement Members of the management team regularly visit subsidiaries and discuss matters of current interest and concern with members of staff.
Gender diversity Male Female Total The table above shows the staff employment by gender.
The Company places a great deal of emphasis on gender equality and diversity.
At present there are 17 women in senior management positions 2016 23 male senior managers in 2017 were 14 2016 35 as last year no women Directors to 6 male Directors 2017 6 other employees female 89 84 male 503 2016 482.
Environment
During 2017 each of the Companys facilities was environmentally monitored on a quarterly basis by accredited outsourced companies.
This included the following checks Checks were made on the water at surface and subsurface levels to ensure that it was within safe limits within both the production site and the tailings dump site.
Checks were regularly made on the air quality at the production site to include testing of the air extraction systems at the crushing and grinding plant laboratory and transfer conveyors.
Appropriate repairs were carried out in the year if there was any deviation from the accepted norms.
Awaiting
High Resolution
Awaiting
High Resolution Graphic 11 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements Soil samples were analysed at the tailings dumps to ensure that there was no adverse effects on the environment.
Of primary importance to the Company is to ensure that the tailings dam and water discharges are within environmentally safe limits.
The facility has a system in place that provides treatment and discharge of mine water into the surface reservoir quarterly testing is done to ensure all required standards are met.
This is reported to the authorities on a quarterly basis.
The Company has introduced systems to control the processing of waste in a controlled and environmentally compliant manner.
All household waste produced is disposed of to specialised landfill sites.
Tyres are temporarily stored prior to removal to a specialised site.
Hazardous waste such as Mercury is carefully sent for recycling as are plastic waste from plastic packaging and other plastic waste from pipes cutting sand geomembrane to reduce the amount being sent to the landfill sites.
Metal scraps and exhausted oils are recycled as far as possible on the production site.
In 2017 an energy saving system was used in the production facilities to reuse the heat being generated from the compressor plant.
The energy saving system allowed the heat previously wasted to be recycled with the facility resulting in fuel savings and lower gas emissions.
It is in the Companys plans to further refine and develop its environmental management systems.
Further development of the tailings dump and future ways of dealing with this waste in the most efficient and environmentally manner remain a key objective of the Company.
Our approach to the environment The Companys policies outline our commitment to environmental responsibility.
Safeguarding the environment and training our employees to minimise the environmental impact of our activities are important aspects of our business.
We remain committed to achieving the highest environmental standards.
Greenhouse gas reporting Greenhouse gas emissions GHG are classified as either direct or indirect and which are divided further into Scope 1 Scope 2 and Scope 3 emissions.
Direct GHG emissions are emissions from sources that are owned or controlled by the Company.
Indirect GHG emissions are emissions that are a consequence of the activities of the Company but that occur at sources owned or controlled by other entities.
Scope 1 emissions Direct emissions controlled by the Company arising from plant.
Scope 2 emissions Indirect emissions attributable to the Company due to its consumption of purchased electricity.
Scope 3 emissions Other indirect emissions associated with activities that support or supply towards the Companys operations.
Health and safety Altyn is pleased to report that during 2017 there were no accidents at the Sekisovskoye mine.
The
Company maintains its first aid rooms to the highest standards and ensures that rescue contracts are in place for employees in the event of an emergency.
Our community The support of the local community is key to the success of the Company and the various initiatives and projects have been undertaken to ensure that the success of the mine is of a benefit to all parties.
This is regarded as an ongoing commitment by the Company to the local community and has been formalised in a memorandum of cooperation by the Company with the authorities of the rural district.
The company regularly contributes to local projects and participates in local events.
The Companys emissions by scope The Companys emissions by scope Tonnes CO Tonnes CO Scope Source 2017 2016 Scope 1 Plant 3301 3382 Scope 2 Electricity 2835 2195 Scope 3 Other equipment 399 390 Total 6535 5tel Intensity 1 Tonnes CO e produced per Dollar of revenue 0. el 0.
Intensity 2 Tonnes CO e produced per oz of gold produced 0.
12 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Our November 2014 Competent Persons Report identified JORC compliant indicated and inferred mineral resources which total 5.14Moz and a further 3.3Moz have been identified as an exploration result.
In 2014 a Competent Persons Report CPR commissioned by the Company was completed to assess the mineral resources and provide a valuation of the potential of the underground mine.
The
Competent Persons Report was prepared in compliance with and to the extent required by the 2012 Australasian Code for Reporting of Exploration Results Mineral Resources and Ore Reserves JORC.
Venmyn Deloitte Deloitte are Competent Persons and Competent Experts as defined by the JORC Codes as well as other international Reporting Codes.
The mineral resource statement was prepared for the Sekisovskoye underground deposit.
The Company also acquired mining data in relation to the Karasuyskoye concession adjacent to Sekisovskoye and this is currently being developed with a view to obtaining the subsoil user licence in the near future.
For clarity the resources in relation to the Karasuyskoye site are not included in the analysis below and will be subject to an independent Competent Persons Report in the future.
The Company has a 100% shareholding in the Sekisovskoye Project and holds the Mining Licence covering a total area of 85.5ha valid until 2020 and expected to renew until 2033.
The Sekisovskoye Project is located at the village of Sekisovka approximately 40km north of the town of Ust Kamenogorsk the capital city of the East Kazakhstan region.
The current operation is exploiting two open pits where the nearvertical deposits extended to surface.
The ore body has been mined in the open pit environment since 2008 and the relationship between ore and waste is well understood.
The Sekisovskoye Project is set to be a selective mining underground operation which requires a level of confidence to be developed to support the new input and output parameters.
Venmyn Deloitte conducted a review of the exploration drilling metallurgical testing geological modelling and the GKZ Reserve and Resource prepared by the Company and has used this information to estimate the JORC  compliant gold and silver Mineral Resources.
These are shown in the following tables.
Subsequent to estimating the Indicated Resource Venmyn Deloitte applied the appropriate modifying factors including dilution and mining losses and has estimated a Probable Reserve of 2.26Moz of gold.
Altyn has not updated its mineral resources since 2014.
JORC Indicated and Inferred Mineral Resources total 5.14Moz.
In addition a further 3.30Moz have been identified as an Exploration Result below the 800masl.
While these will require further exploration drilling to be potentially upgraded to Mineral Resources this result does highlight the potential for a larger Mineral Resource than is currently estimated.
Assuming that this potential were to be realised Sekisovskoye would contain in excess of 8Moz of gold.
Geologically the Sekisovskoye Project is suitable for mining of underground extensions of the deposit which is shown to extend almost vertically below the currently exploited open pits.
Geological features MINERAL RESOURCES STATEMENT
High Resolution Graphic 13 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial statements in the underground area are expected to be similar in nature to those in the near surface portion of the deposit.
The exploration method is systematic and appropriate for the style of mineralisation and the targeted resources and reserves are of sufficient quantity to support an expanded mining operation.
The risks for underground production are reduced by the following the Sekisovskoye Project has operated successfully for a number of years in the open pit environment the Company has created an extensive drilling database for geological modelling of the breccia zones and mineralised ore bodies the underground mining method is based upon a block model that has identified important breccia zones that can be selectively mined the underground ore body is a natural extension of the open pit ore the mining metallurgical plant power water and tailings facilities are all established including the main underground ramp ways and the ore reserve and mineral resource estimates have been based on a very substantial exploration programme which represents more than 170083m of drilling.
The strategic report was approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Aidar Assaubayev
Chief Executive Officer
30 April 2018 MINERAL RESOURCES STATEMENT continued The following tables show the reserves resources and exploration results as at November 2014
JORC Tonnes Pay limit grade grade gold silver classification Mt gt gt gt Moz Moz
Gold cut Gold Contained Silver Contained JORC off grade grade gold grade silver Level classification gt Tonnes gt Moz gt Moz Surface to Indicated Surface to Inferred 400m 2.00 3500 4.21 0.48 No estimation Surface to Inferred 800m 2.00 14700 4.21 1.99 No estimation Total average JORC resources 2.46 33900 4.72 5.14 6.99 3.52
Gold cut Gold Contained Silver Contained JORC off grade grade gold grade silver Level classification gt Tonnes gt Moz gt Moz 800m to Exploration 1500m 2.00 24400 4.21 3.30 No estimation Total average JORC resources 2.00 24.400 4.21 3.30 No estimation Altyn plc has a highly experienced Board of Directors with a commitment to driving profitability and longterm shareholder value.
Chairman
Kanat Assaubayev
Kanat Assaubayev was appointed to the Board as Chairman on 23 October 2013.
Experience
Kanat Assaubayev is one of Kazakhstans leading entrepreneurs in the natural resources sector.
Mr.
Assaubayev was the first Kazakh to get a doctorate in metallurgy.
His early career was in academia where he was the Chairman of the Metallurgy and Mining Department of Kazakh National Polytechnic
He subsequently began his business career in the 1990s and has led a number of natural resources enterprises to national and international success.
Chief Executive Officer
Aidar Assaubayev
Aidar Assaubayev was appointed to the Board as Chief Executive Officer on 25 February 2013.
Experience
Aidar Assaubayev is an Executive Director of AltynGroup Kazakhstan LLP .
He was formerly Executive Vice Chairman of KazakhGold Limited the gold mining corporation and he was also formerly Vice President and a director of JSC MMC Kazakhaltyn.
Mr.
Assaubayev graduated from the Kazakh National Technical University in Almaty and he also holds a degree in Economics from the Institute of Systemic Analysis in Moscow.
Executive Director Sanzhar Assaubayev
Sanzhar Assaubayev was appointed to the Board as Executive Director on 29 February 2016.
Experience
Sanzhar Assaubayev was formerly Director of International Affairs of JSC MMC Kazakhaltyn and an Executive Director of KazakhGold Group Limited the gold mining corporation.
He is also a member of the board of directors of AltynGroup plc.
He was educated at the Leysin American School in Switzerland where he specialised in management and the American University in the United
Sanzhar Assaubayev is the son of Kanat Assaubayev.
14 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS NonExecutive Director Neil Herbert
Neil Herbert was appointed to the Board as NonExecutive Director on 29 February 2016.
On 2 February 2017 he was subsequently appointed as Executive Deputy Chairman and stepped down from this role on November 2017 back to a Non Executive role.
Experience
Neil Herbert has a wealth of experience managing advising and investing in growth companies through business expansion MandA and IPOs.
Prior to Polo Resources where he worked until 2013 he was Finance Director of Galahad another investment company which achieved an average IRR of 66%pa over its four year existence.
Neil became Finance Director of its most successful investment which he took from start up to a US2.5bn takeover with Galahad achieving an annualised return of 167%.
He has worked with natural resources since joining Antofagasta during its 1990s transformation into a major copper producer with the US1.3bn Los Pelambres and US0.3bn El Tesoro mines taken into production.
Following that he was CFO of gold explorer Brancote until its US0.4bn acquisition.
Neil began his career working with PwC he is a Fellow of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants and has a BA Joint Honours degree in Economics and Economic History.
He has served as a director of companies on the AIM ASX LSE JSE and TSX.
Today Neil works with growth companies across sectors and he is a founder and chairman of Siderian Resource Capital HeliumOne and Anglo African
NonExecutive Director Ashar Qureshi
Ashar Qureshi was appointed to the Board as NonExecutive Director on 7 December 2012.
Experience
Ashar Qureshi is a London based US qualified lawyer.
He was formerly the Vice Chairman of Renaissance Group where his position was a senior investmentbanking role and prior to that he worked with international firm Cleary Gottlieb Steen and Hamilton LLP .
Mr.
Qureshi holds a Juris Doctorate and is a graduate of Harvard Law School and Harvard
NonExecutive Director Vladimir Shkolnik
Vladimir Shkolnik was appointed to the Board as NonExecutive Director on 21 November 2017.
Experience
Vladimir Shkolnik has held a number of high profile positions in the Kazakhstan government and is currently advising the Kazakhstan government on industrial and energy matters.
His previous positions included the office of Minister of Energy Minister of Trade and Industry and also Deputy Head of Presidential administration reporting directly to the President.
He is an academic with a doctorate in physics and has written a number of papers and books in the field of energy natural resources and other scientific fields.
He has been influential in setting up academic institutions in the areas of mineral processing and also nuclear power in Kazakhstan working with a number of leading Companies from Japan France and Russia in setting up joint enterprises.
Go to page 65 to view our Company details 15 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report Governance Strategic report Financial statements The Directors present their Annual Report together with the audited financial statements on pages 31 to 64.
Principal activities and business review The principal activity of the Company is that of a holding company and a provider of support and management services to its operating subsidiaries.
Together with its subsidiaries it is involved in the production of gold dore from the Sekisovskoye gold and silver deposits and the development of further suitable investment opportunities.
A review of the activities of the business throughout the year and up to 30 April 2018 is set out in the Strategic report on pages 1 to 13 which includes information on the Companys risks uncertainties and performance indicators.
The Company accounts are prepared on a going concern basis.
However reference should be made to factors affecting the ability of the Company to continue trading as noted on page 38 note 2.
Results and dividends The Companys loss for the year after taxation amounts to US1.9m 2016 loss US6.4m.
The results of the year are set out on page 31 in the consolidated statement of profit or loss.
The Directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend for the year 2016 nil.
Financial instruments At the start of the year the Company had convertible bonds amounting to US12m.
In February 2018 US9.7m of the US10m issued to the principal shareholder African Resources Limited a company controlled by the Assaubayev family was converted to 233333333 ordinary shares at a conversion price of 3p.
African
Resources Limited have indicated that the balance of the convertible bond and accrued interest amounting to US1.4m will be converted into new ordinary shares in the company in Q3 2018.
The convertible bonds of US2m issued to institutional investors in 2016 at a redemption price of 2.1p are redeemable in February 2021.
The convertible bonds have a coupon rate of 10% with interest payable biannually.
At the start of the year the Company had loans including accrued interest at an average interest rate of 13% totaling US1739000 from Amrita Investments Limited  a company controlled by the Assaubayev family  of this amount US924000 was repaid in the year the balance of loans and accrued interest amounting to US937000 has an average interest rate of 7% and are repayable in 2019  see note 22.
The Company also received a loan of US724000 during the year for working capital purposes this amount is repayable in 2018.
The company made the final repayment in respect of the EBRD loan in October 2017 the capital and interest repaid in the year amounted to US3.5m.
The main risks arising from the Companys financial instruments are liquidity risk credit risk foreign exchange risk and interest rate risk.
Further details are provided in note 26 on pages 55 to 57 of the Companys financial statements.
Share capital details of the Companys issued share capital are set out in note 24.
The Company has one class of ordinary share and they carry no right to fixed income.
Each ordinary share carries the right to one vote at the general meetings of the Company.
All issued ordinary shares are fully paid.
There are no specific restrictions on the size of the holding or on the transfer of the ordinary shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the articles of association and prevailing legislation.
The Directors are not aware of any agreements between holders of the Companys ordinary shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
Certain Directors have an interest in the ordinary shares in the Company and these are disclosed in the related party note 29 on page 58.
Share options awarded to one Director in February 2017 as part of his remuneration package with options over 46686843 shares at an exercise price of 2.125p per share were forfeited during the year as he stepped down from an executive to a nonexecutive Director role.
Qualifying indemnity provision The Company has entered into an insurance policy to indemnify the Directors of the Company against any liability when acting for the Company.
Directors
The following Directors served during the year and up to 31 December 2017.
Kanat Assaubayev Chairman
Aidar Assaubayev Chief Executive Officer
Sanzhar Assaubayev Executive Director Ashar Qureshi NonExecutive Director Neil Herbert NonExecutive Director Alain Balian NonExecutive Director resigned 29 December 2017 Vladmir Shkolnik NonExecutive Director appointed 21 November 2017 Neil Herbert was appointed as Executive Deputy Chairman on 2 February 2017 and stepped down from this role to a NonExecutive role on 21 November 2017.
Directors shareholdings The interests of the Directors in the shares of the Company are shown below
No of shares % owned Ashar Qureshi The interest of the Assauabyev family who own their interest in the shares of the Company via their shareholding of African Resources Limited is shown in the table of substantial shareholdings below.
16 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT Substantial interests The following have advised that they have an interest in 3 per cent or more of the issued share capital of the Company as at 27 April 2018.
Shareholder
No of shares % owned African Resources Limited Goldman Sachs International State Street Nominees Limited Kanat Aidar and Sanzhar Assaubayev are Directors and shareholders of African Resources Limited.
Auditor
All Directors that are in office at the date of this report being approved have confirmed that they are aware that there is no relevant audit information of which the auditor is unaware.
Each of the Directors has confirmed they have taken all reasonable steps they ought to have taken as Directors to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that it has been communicated to the auditor.
BDO LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditors and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed in the forthcoming Annual General
Corporate governance Details of the Companys diversity policy are contained within the corporate responsibility statement on page 10.
The Board acknowledges the importance of the guidelines set out in the Quoted Companies Alliance QCA published Corporate Governance Code for Small and Midsize Quoted Companies 2013 and complies with these as far as is appropriate having regard to the size and nature of the Company.
The paragraphs below set out how the Company has applied this guidance during the year.
Principles of corporate governance The Companys Board appreciates the value of good corporate governance not only in the areas of accountability and risk management but also as a positive contribution to business prosperity.
The Board endeavors to apply corporate governance principles in a sensible and pragmatic fashion having regard to the circumstances of the Groups business.
The AntiBribery and Corruption Policy and The AntiBribery and Corruption Policy and Procedure the AntiBribery Policy forms part of our Ethics Policy and represents a commitment to doing what is right.
The Group expects its employees to demonstrate honesty integrity and fairness in all aspects of their business dealings and exercise appropriate standards of professionalism and ethical conduct in all their activities.
The Group expects the same approach to doing business from its business partners and suppliers.
Pursuant to this the Group will not tolerate bribery1 or corruption2 in any form and has a zero tolerance approach to any breach of this policy.
Application This means that the Group and its employees will never seek accept or give a bribe facilitation payment kickback or other improper payment.
It will ensure that it operates with appropriate transparency in our business dealings.
The Company will take appropriate steps to ensure that p directly or indirectly offer promise give accept or demand a bribe or other undue advantage including excessive gifts and hospitality in order to obtain or retain business or gain any other improper advantage. anybody else that we do business with. p engage and remunerate agents and other third parties only for legitimate services and adopt appropriate transparency in our approach. procedures including disciplinary procedures policies and training programmes on induction and subsequently. establishment of off the books secret accounts or the creation of documents which do not properly and fairly record the transactions to which they relate. p make illegal or inappropriate contributions to candidates for public office or to political parties or to other political organisations. contractual provisions and support initiatives designed to reduce the risk of bribery and corruption.
1 Definition The receivingofferinggivingprovidingrequestingaccepting of a financial or other advantage in order to seek to induce a person or to induce a person to give improper assistance in breach of their duty or to otherwise influence someone with the underlying purpose of obtainingretaining business or an advantage in the course of business.
Bribery for this purpose includes socalled facilitation or grease payments defined as nondiscretionary payments made to government or public officials to speed up routine administrative processes even if such payments are nominal in amount.
2 Definition The misuse of entrusted powerbreach of duty for personal gain.
Board structure The Board is comprised of the Executive Chairman the CEO an Executive Director and three NonExecutive Directors.
During the year Alain Balian resigned from the Board and Vladimir Shkolnik was appointed as a NonExecutive Director.
17 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Strategic Report Governance Financial statements Their details appear on pages 14 to 15.
The Board is responsible to shareholders for the proper management of the Company.
The statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the accounts is set out on page 20.
The NonExecutive Directors have a particular responsibility to ensure that the strategies proposed by the Executive Directors are fully considered.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties all Directors have full and timely access to all relevant information and there is a procedure for all Directors in furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice if necessary at the expense of the Company.
The Board has a formal schedule of matters reserved to it and meets on a regular basis.
The Board is responsible for overall Group strategy approval of major capital expenditure projects and consideration of significant financing matters.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee is currently comprised of Ashar Qureshi and Neil Herbert Alain Balian resigned in December 2017.
Audit Committees prime tasks are to review the scope of the external audit to receive regular reports from the Companys auditor and to review the halfyearly and annual accounts before they are presented to the Board focusing in particular on accounting policies and areas of management judgment and estimation.
The Committee is responsible for monitoring the controls which are in force to ensure the integrity of the information reported to the shareholders.
The
Committee acts as a forum for discussion of internal control issues and contributes to the Boards review of the effectiveness of the Companys internal control and risk management systems and processes.
The Audit Committee also undertakes a formal assessment of the auditors independence each year which includes p a review of nonaudit services provided to the Company and related fees p discussion with the auditors of a written report detailing all relationships with the Company and any other parties that could affect independence or the perception of independence p a review of the auditors own procedures for ensuring the independence of the audit firm and partners and staff involved in the audit including the regular rotation of the audit partner and p obtaining written confirmation from the auditors that in their professional judgement they are independent.
An analysis of the fees payable to the external audit firm in respect of both audit and nonaudit services during the year is set out in Note 10 on page 45 of the financial statements.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee currently comprises of two Directors  Ashar Qureshi and Neil Herbert Alain Balian resigned in December 2017.
The Committee which meets as required is responsible for determining the contract terms remuneration and other benefits of the Executive Directors.
The remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Board within the limits set out in the articles of association.
None of the Committee members has any personal financial interest in the matters to be decided other than as shareholders potential conflicts of interest arising from crossDirectorships or any daytoday involvement in running the business.
The Committee has access to professional advice from inside and outside the Company at the Companys expense.
There were no Remuneration Committee meetings held during the year there were no changes in the remuneration of the Executive Directors from the prior year.
Board and Board committee meetings The number of meetings during 2017 and attendance at regular Board meetings and Board committees was as follows
Meetings held attended Kanat Assaubayev Board Aidar Assaubayev Board Sanzhar Assaubayev Board Neil Herbert Board Audit committee Ashar Qureshi Board Audit committee Alain Balian Board Audit committee Alain Balian resigned on 29 December 2017 Internal control The Directors are responsible for the Groups system of internal control and review of its effectiveness annually.
The Board has designed the Groups system of internal control in order to provide the Directors with reasonable assurance that its assets are safeguarded that transactions are authorised and properly recorded and that material errors and irregularities are either prevented or would be detected within a timely period.
The key elements of the control system in operation are p The Board meets regularly with a formal schedule of matters reserved to it for decision and has put in place an organisational structure with clearly defined lines of responsibility and with appropriate delegation of authority p There are established procedures for planning approval and monitoring of capital expenditure and information systems for monitoring the Groups financial performance against approved budgets and forecasts p UK Financial reporting is closely monitored by members of the Board to enable them to assess risk and address the adequacy of measures in place for its monitoring and control.
The Kazakh operations are closely supervised by the Board reviewing monthly half yearly and annual financial reports from the 18 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT continued Directors and senior officers in Kazakhstan.
This is supplemented by regular visits of the UK based finance officer to Kazakh operations which include checking the integrity of financial information supplied to the UK.
The financial officer is ultimately responsible for the preparation of the consolidated financial statements that are then reviewed by the Directors.
During the period the Audit Committee has reviewed the effectiveness of internal controls as described above.
There are no significant issues disclosed in the Annual Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 and up to the date of approval of the report concerning material internal control issues.
The Directors confirm that the Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the system of internal control as described during the period.
Communications with shareholders Communications with shareholders are considered important by the Directors.
The Directors regularly speak to investors and analysts during the year.
Press releases have been issued throughout the year the Companys website site is regularly updated and contains a wide range of information about the
Enquiries from individuals on matters relating to their shareholdings and the business of the Company are dealt with informatively and promptly.
The
Directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the financial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the Companys website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the Companys website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
Corporate social responsibility The Corporate Social Responsibility performance of the Company is detailed on pages 10 to 11.
Takeover directive The Company has one class of share capital which are ordinary shares.
Each ordinary share carries one vote.
All the ordinary shares rank pari passu.
There are no securities issued in the Company which carry special rights with regard to control of the Company.
The identity of all substantial direct or indirect holders of securities in the Company and the size and nature of their holdings is shown under the Substantial interests section of this report above.
A relationship agreement the Relationship Agreement was entered into between the Company and African Resources Limited in regard to the arrangements between them whilst African Resources Limited is a controlling shareholder of the Company.
There are no restrictions on voting rights or on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company.
The rules governing the appointment and replacement of Directors alteration of the articles of association of the Company and the powers of the Companys Directors accord with usual English company law provisions.
The
Directors are reelected on a rotational basis each year.
The Company is not party to any significant agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between holders of its ordinary shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of its ordinary shares or on voting rights.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Greenhouse emissions Information on greenhouse emissions is shown on page 11.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held at the offices of BDO LLP at 55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU United Kingdom on Friday 29 June 2018 at 11.00am.
The details of the resolutions are given on page 59.
The Directors consider that all of the resolutions to be put to the meeting are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole.
The Board recommends that shareholders vote in favour of all resolutions.
Donations
The Company has made no charitable or political donations during the year 2016 Nil.
Future development and availability of project financegoing concern To progress the mine to the full projected capacity the Company requires further funding which the Company has made good progress in putting in place.
It is currently in the advanced stages of finalising funding for new equipment from two parties.
It is seeking bond finance from one party and direct equipment purchasing from another party in order to secure the necessary investment.
The Company is continuing to develop its underground mine production is continuing at a steady pace with gold sold in the current year of 16747 oz.
From the operating cash flows generated the Company paid the balance of the EBRD loan which with interest amounted to US3.5m.
In order to preserve cash flow savings have been made in overhead costs at both head office and subsidiary level.
In January 2018 African Resources Limited converted US9.7m of the US10m convertible loan debt into new ordinary shares.
No interest was paid in relation to this loan in the year and it is expected that the balance of the bond to include accrued interest will be converted into new ordinary shares in Q3 2018.
The Directors have reviewed the cash flows for 15 months from the date of approval of the financial statements based on the projected trading.
The Directors are confident that should the fund raising not be successful to provide the funds in the expected timeframe the Company will be able to adapt its operational plans such that it continues to operate.
Furthermore the major shareholder has confirmed their intention to provide further funding to enable the Company to continue its planned operations for at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
On this basis the Directors have therefore concluded that it is appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis.
Subsequent events Details of events after the end of the financial year are set out in note 28 on page 58 of the financial statements.
19 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Directors responsibilities The directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors are required to prepare the group financial statements and have elected to prepare the company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the group and company and of the profit or loss for the group and company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to p select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently p make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent p state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements p prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company will continue in business p prepare a directors report a strategic report and directors remuneration report which comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for ensuring that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the groups performance business model and strategy.
Website publication The directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the financial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the companys website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the companys website is the responsibility of the directors.
The directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
Directors responsibilities pursuant to DTR4 The directors confirm to the best of their knowledge p The group financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit and loss of the group. together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
On behalf of the Board Aidar Assaubayev 30 April 2018 20 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 STATEMENT OF THE DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Committees terms of reference have been approved by the Board and follow published guidelines which are available from the Company Secretary.
The Audit Committee comprises the NonExecutive Directors Ashar Qureshi and Neil Herbert.
Alain Balian resigned in December 2017.
The Audit Committees prime tasks are to p review the scope of external audit to receive regular reports from the auditor and to review the halfyearly and annual accounts before they are presented to the Board focusing in particular on accounting policies and areas of management judgment and estimation p monitor the controls which are in force to ensure the integrity of the information reported to the shareholders p assess key risks and to act as a forum for discussion of risk issues and contribute to the Boards review of the effectiveness of the Groups risk management control and processes p act as a forum for discussion of internal control issues and contribute to the Boards review of the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems and processes p consider each year the need for an internal audit function p advise the Board on the appointment of external auditors and rotation of the audit partner every five years and on their remuneration for both audit and non audit work and discuss the nature and scope of their audit work p participate in the selection of a new external audit partner and agree the appointment when required p undertake a formal assessment of the auditors independence each year which includes a review of nonaudit services provided to the Group and related fees discussion with the auditors of a written report detailing all relationships with the Company and any other parties that could affect independence or the perception of independence a review of the auditors own procedures for ensuring the independence of the audit firm and partners and staff involved in the audit including the regular rotation of the audit partner and obtaining written confirmation from the auditors that in their professional judgement they are independent.
Meetings
The Committee meets prior to the annual audit with the external auditors to discuss the audit plan and again prior to the publication of the annual results.
These meetings are attended by the external audit partner and Company Secretary.
Prior to bimonthly Board meetings the members of the Committee meet on an informal basis to discuss any relevant matters which may have arisen.
Additional formal meetings are held as necessary.
During the past year the Committee p met with the external auditors and discussed their report to the Audit Committee p approved the publication of annual and halfyear financial results p considered and approved the annual review of internal controls p decided that due to the size and nature of operation there was not a current need for an internal audit function p agreed the independence of the auditors and approved their fees for both audit and notaudit services as set out in note 10 on page 45 of the financial statements.
External auditors BDO LLP held office throughout the year and are assisted by a local office in Kazakhstan.
Ashar Qureshi Chairman  Audit Committee 30 April 2018 21 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Governance Strategic report Financial statements The Remuneration Committee presents its report for the year ended 31 December 2017 which is presented in two parts.
The first part is the annual remuneration report which details remuneration awarded to Directors and NonExecutive Directors during the year.
The shareholders will be asked to approve the annual remuneration report as an ordinary resolution as in previous years at the Annual General Meeting in June 2018.
At the last AGM 100% of the votes cast confirmed the remuneration report and remuneration policy of the Company.
The second part is the remuneration policy report which details the remuneration policy for Directors.
The policy is very much in line with the previous policy.
The Remuneration Committee reviewed the existing policy and deemed no changes necessary to the current arrangements the policy will be confirmed at the AGM in 2018.
Both of the above reports have been prepared in accordance with The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
The Companys auditors BDO LLP are required by law to audit certain disclosures and where disclosures have been audited they are indicated as such.
Ashar Qureshi Chairman  Remuneration Committee 30 April 2018 22 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
STATEMENT OF THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee currently comprises of two Directors  Ashar Qureshi and Neil Herbert.
Alain Balian resigned in December 2017.
The Committee which meets as required is responsible for determining the contract terms remuneration and other benefits of the Executive Directors.
The remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Board within the limits set out in the articles of association.
None of the Committee members has any personal financial interest in the matters to be decided other than as shareholders potential conflicts of interest arising from crossDirectorships or any daytoday involvement in running the business.
The Committee has access to professional advice from inside and outside the Company at the Companys expense.
There were no Remuneration Committee meetings held during the year.
Details of the remuneration paid in the year are shown below.
Approach to recruitment remuneration All appointments to the Board are made on merit.
The components of a new Directors remuneration package who is recruited within the life of the approved remuneration policy would comprise at present a base salary.
As outlined above the approach to such appointments are detailed within the future policy table below.
The Company will pay such levels of remuneration to new Directors that would enable the Company to attract appropriately skilled and experienced individuals that is not in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee excessive.
Service contracts All Executive Directors have fulltime contracts of employment with the Company.
NonExecutive Directors have contracts of service.
No Director has a contract of employment or contract of service with the Company its joint venture or associated companies with a fixed term which exceeds three years.
Directors notice periods see page 24 of the financial statements are set in line with market practice and of a length considered sufficient to ensure an effective handover of duties should a Director leave the Company.
All Directors contracts as amended from time to time have run from the date of appointment.
Service contracts are kept at the registered office.
Policy on payment for loss of office There are no contractual provisions agreed that could impact on a termination payment.
Termination payments will be calculated in accordance with the existing contract of employment or service contract.
It is the policy of the Remuneration Committee to issue employment contracts to Executive Directors with normal commercial terms and without extended terms of notice which could give rise to extraordinary termination payments.
Consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Group In setting this policy for Directors remuneration the Remuneration Committee has been mindful of the Companys objective to reward all employees fairly according to their role performance and market forces.
In setting the policy for Directors remuneration the Remuneration Committee has considered the pay and employment conditions of the other employees within the Group.
No formal consultation has been undertaken with employees in drawing up the policy.
The
Remuneration Committee has not used formal comparison measures.
Consideration of shareholder views Shareholder views have been taken into account when formulating this policy and was approved at the Annual General Meeting in 2015 and will be reconfirmed this year at the Annual General Meeting.
Remuneration
The following information has been audited.
US
US
Executive Directors Kanat Assaubayev Aidar Assaubayev Sanzhar Assaubayev Ken Crichton NonExecutive Directors Ashar Qureshi William Trew Neil Herbert Vladimir Shkolnik Alain Balian resigned 29 December 2017
The total amount remaining unpaid with respect to Directors remuneration amounted to US127000 2016 US79444.
The total directors remuneration for 2017 and 2016 includes only salaries and fees.
The change in the year was due to Neil Herbert being appointed as an Executive Director in February 2017 a position he subsequently stood down from in November 2017.
As it was an Executive position it was at a higher remuneration level the share options previously issued under the term of his role as Executive Director in February 2017 were forfeited.
The remuneration levels will be in the range of US400000 in the forthcoming year.
23 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
ANNUAL REMUNERATION REPORT
Governance Strategic report Financial statements Performance targets There are no performance measures targets associated with the Directors Remuneration.
Summary of Directors terms
Notice period Date of contract term months Executive Directors Kanat Assaubayev 23 October 2016
Aidar Assaubayev 20 February 2013
Sanzhar Assaubayev 29 February 2016
NonExecutive Directors Ashar Qureshi 7 December 2015
Neil Herbert 29 February 2016
Vladimir Shkolnik 21 November 2017
Pension schemes and incentives The Company does not operate a pension scheme.
Share option schemes There are no share option schemes currently in the company.
Payments to past Directors No payments were made to past Directors in the year ended 31 December 2017.
Payments for loss of office No payments for loss of office were made in the year ended 31 December 2017.
Statement of Directors shareholding and share interest The interests of the Directors in the shares of the Company including family and trustee holdings are disclosed on page 17 of the Accounts.
Performance graph The following information is unaudited.
ALTYN against FTSE 350 Mining Index 0% 50% 100% 150% 200% 250% 300% FTSE 350 Mining Index Altyn plc 24 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 ANNUAL REMUNERATION REPORT continued Remuneration of the Chief Executive Officer over the last ten years Aidar Assaubayev was appointed on 20 February 2013 replacing Timothy Daffern who was appointed on 5 November 2010 replacing Nicholas Bridgen who resigned on that date.
Included in the remuneration of Timothy Daffern for the year 2013 is an amount of US307432 relating to a payment in respect of a change of control of the Company.
The table below demonstrates the remuneration of the CEO for the last ten years.
Total remuneration
Chief Executive Officer
US000
Aidar Assaubayev Aidar Assaubayev Aidar Assaubayev Aidar Assaubayev Timothy Daffern Timothy Daffern Timothy Daffern Nicholas Bridgen Nicholas Bridgen Nicholas Bridgen Percentage change in remuneration of Director undertaking the role of Chief Executive Officer There has been no increase in the base salary of the Chief Executive Officer during the year whose salary remains at 156000 US201000 as agreed in May 2016.
The change from the prior year of US215000 is the effect of foreign exchange .
In relation to UK based staff in the period there were no pay increases but the leavers accounted for the significant part of the decrease in salary costs.
Chief Executive Officer
UK based employeestel
US000 % change
US000 % change Base salary The comparison used is that of all UK based employees as the remuneration committee believe this provides the most accurate comparison of underlying increases.
Relative importance of spend on pay The total expenditure of the Company on remuneration to all employees in shown in note 7 to the financial statements and in the table below.
Remuneration
US000
US000
Directors emoluments Employee salaries Employer social tax and national insurance
Statement of implementation of remuneration policy in the following year The policy was approved at the Annual General Meeting in June 2015 and is subject to approval by shareholders in the Annual General Meeting to be held in 2018.
The vote on the remuneration policy is binding in nature.
The Company may not then make a remuneration payment or payment for loss of office to a person who is is to be or has been a Director of the Company unless that payment is consistent with the approved remuneration policy or has otherwise been approved by a resolution of members.
Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to Directors remuneration The Remuneration Committee considered the Executive Directors remuneration and the Board considered the NonExecutive Directors remuneration in the year ended 31 December 2017.
No increases were awarded and no external advice was taken in reaching this decision.
Shareholder voting At the Annual General Meeting in June 2018 there will be a vote on the resolution to approve the remuneration report.
Members of the Remuneration Committee The following Directors are members of the Remuneration Committee Ashar Qureshi and Neil Herbert 25 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements The remuneration policy of the Company was approved by a binding vote at the 2015 Annual General Meeting and will be reaffirmed at the 2018 Annual General
At present the only remuneration payable to the Directors is that of a base salary in setting the policy the Remuneration Committee has taken the following into account p the need to attract retain and motivate individuals of a calibre who will ensure successful leadership and management of the Company p the Companys general aim of seeking to reward all employees fairly according to the nature of their role and their performance p remuneration packages offered by similar companies in the same sector p the need to align the interests of the shareholders with the long term growth and interests of the Company p the need to be flexible and adjust with operational changes throughout the term of the policy.
The remuneration of the NonExecutives Directors is determined by the Board and takes into account additional remuneration for services outside the scope of the ordinary duties of the NonExecutive Directors.
26 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT Opinion
We have audited the financial statements of Altyn Plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of profit or loss the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income the consolidated statement of financial position the parent company statement of financial position the consolidated statement of changes in equity the parent company statement of changes in equity the consolidated statement of cash flows the parent company statement of cash flows and notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group and parent company financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion p the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended p the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union p the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and p the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the parent companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the parent company and the parent companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where p the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or p the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
27 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Governance Strategic report Financial statements Matter Carrying value of intangible assets As detailed in note 13 the Groups intangible assets represent historical geological data of 8.6m and exploration and evaluation costs of 3.3m pertaining to the Karasuyskoye ore fields adjacent to the Groups current mining licence area production facilities at Sekisovskoye which are significant assets and total 11.9m at 31 December 2017.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 management was required to assess whether there was any indication that this asset may be impaired in accordance with accounting standards.
Management have carried out an assessment of impairment indicators during the year and concluded that no adjustment is required for impairment.
There are a large number of estimates and judgements used by the management in assessing the indicators of impairment including nonfinancial and financial data.
Therefore given the subjectivity involved in determining whether an impairment provision is required and quantifying this the carrying value of the intangible assets is considered to be a key audit matter.
Our Response We reviewed managements assessment of the impairment indicators in accordance with accounting standards.
We read the correspondence contracts and other documents regarding the license to confirm that the Group has a contractual right for exploration in the Karasuyskoye area.
We obtained the exploration results to date and discussed with management who confirmed that the area remains prospective We reviewed managements plans and budgets which show that the Group is committed to the progressing the project and We assessed the Groups amortisation policy and useful life assessment against the length of legal title to the project area.
Matter Carrying value of property plant and equipment As detailed in note 14 the Groups property plant and equipment represent its most significant assets and total 35.2m at 31 December 2017.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 management was required to assess whether there was any indication that an asset may be impaired in accordance with accounting standards.
Management have carried out an assessment of impairment indicators during the year and concluded that no adjustment is required for impairment.
Managements assessment of the impairment indicators contain a number of key assumptions that require significant estimation and judgements including gold prices gold reserves and production level gold grade exchange rates cost assumptions and discount rates.
Given the subjectivity involved the carrying value of property plant and equipment is considered to represent a key audit matter.
Our Response We reviewed in detail the key assumptions and judgements exercised in managements assessment of the indicators of impairment challenged the managements judgements by reference to the results from the operations and those that would be expected given the stage of development.
We compared the actual performance with the economic model provided previously and investigated any material deviations and considered whether these represent an indicator of impairment.
The main deviations were noted in gold grade and levels of production.
We visited the Sekisovskoye mine observed and discussed the operations operational results and mining processes with the mine management and the chief geologist.
During the visit to the Sekisovskoye mine we discussed the mine plan with the chief geologist and confirmed the main reason of underperformance in 2017 was lack of funds available for investments in mining equipment which affected the volume and grade mined.
We assessed the reasonableness of factors explained above and confirmed that in the ore bodies where there was a sufficient targeting and drilling equipment in place the operational results met the expectations and supported the model in place.
Additionally we considered if the operational results in the period would invalidate the latest independent technical report issued by Venmyn Deloitte and noted that despite the operational difficulties mentioned above the assumption regarding mineable reserves continued to be valid.
Our work did not indicate that managements assessment that there are no indicators of impairment in respect of the carrying value of property plant and equipment was unreasonable.
28 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT continued
We apply the concept of materiality both in planning and performing our audit and in evaluating the effect of misstatements.
We consider materiality to be the magnitude by which misstatements including omissions could influence the economic decisions of reasonable users that are taken on the basis of the financial statements.
Importantly misstatements below this level will not necessarily be evaluated as immaterial as we also take account of the nature of identified misstatements and the particular circumstances of their occurrence when evaluating their effect on the financial statements as a whole.
Performance materiality is the application of materiality at the individual account or balance level set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality for the financial statements as a whole.
Performance materiality was set at 480000 for the Group and at 360000 for the parent company 2016 500000 for the Group and 360000 for the parent company which represents 60% 2016 60% of the above materiality levels.
Whilst materiality for the financial statements as a whole was 800000 each significant component of the Group was audited to a lower level of materiality ranging from 400000 to 600000.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 40000 2016 40000 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
There were no misstatements identified during the course of our audit that individually or in aggregate were considered to be material in terms of their absolute monetary value or on qualitative grounds.
An overview of the scope of our audit Our group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group its environment and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Our group audit scope focused on the Groups principal operating locations being the Sekisovskoye and Karasuyskoye exploration project held in DTOO Gornorudnoe Predpriatie Baurgold and revenue recognised in TOO GMK Altyn MM which were subject to a full scope audit with the audit work performed by overseas component auditors under our direction and supervision.
Together with the parent company and its group consolidation which was also subject to a full scope audit these represent the significant components of the Group.
These locations represent the principal business units and account for 100% of the Groups revenue 2016100% and 100% of the Groups total assets 2016100%.
The remaining component of the Group Hambledon Mining Company Limited was considered nonsignificant and we completed analytical procedures for this intermediate holding company on an entity only basis to confirm there are no significant risks of material misstatements within this entity.
The audits of each of the components were principally performed in Kazakhstan and the United Kingdom.
All of the audits were conducted by BDO LLP and BDO member firms.
As part of our audit strategy the audit partner and a senior member of the audit team visited each of the principal operating locations in the year.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Group Parent company Group 800000 2016 850000 600000 2016 600000 Basis for determining materiality 1.3% of total assets 2016 1.5% of total assets 1.3% of total assets 2016 1.5% of total assets capped at 75% of group materiality 2016 1.5% of total assets capped at 75% of group materiality Rationale for the benchmark applied We have determined an assets based measure is appropriate as the Group is currently developing an underground mining project that requires significant capital expenditure.
It is consistent with our approach adopted in previous years.
29 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit p the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and p the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion p adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or p the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or p certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or p we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Other matters which we are required to address Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the Board of directors on 26 March 2013 to audit the financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2012 and subsequent financial periods.
This is the 6th year of our engagement as auditor.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Company and we remain independent of the Company and the Group in conducting our audit.
Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee.
Scott McNaughton Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of BDO LLP  Statutory Auditor
United Kingdom 30 April 2018 BDO LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number OC.
30 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT continued
Annual Reporttel
US000
US000
Revenue
Cost of sales Gross profit Administrative expenses Impairments  reversedImpairment Operating loss Foreign exchange Finance expense Loss before taxation Taxation chargecredit Loss attributable to equity holders of the parent Loss per ordinary share Basic and diluted CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME year ended 31 Decembertel
US000
Loss for the year Currency translation differences arising on translations of foreign operations items that may be reclassified to profit or loss Currency translation differences arising on translations of foreign operations relating to taxation Total comprehensive loss attributable to equity holders of the parent The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS year ended 31 December 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Governance Strategic report Financial statements 32 Altyn plc Annual Reporttel Company number
US000
US000
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Property plant and equipment Trade and other receivables Deferred tax asset Restricted cash Current assets
Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total assets Current liabilities Trade and other payables Other financial liabilities Current tax payable
Borrowings
Net current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities Other financial liabilities Other payables
Convertible bonds
Total liabilities Net assets
Calledup share capital Share premium Merger reserve Other reserve Currency translation reserve Accumulated losses Total equity The financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 30 April 2018 and signed on its behalf by Aidar Assaubayev Chief Executive The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION year ended 31 December 2017 33 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
Company number
US000
US000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment
Loans to subsidiaries Current assets Other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total assets Current liabilities Trade and other payables Net current liabilitiesassets Noncurrent liabilities Convertible bonds Total liabilities Net assets
Called up share capital Share premium Currency translation reserve Other reserve Accumulated losses Total equity The Company made a profit of US2.8m in the year 2016 restated US1.45m.
The financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 30 April 2018 and signed on its behalf by Aidar Assaubayev Chief Executive The accompanying notes are an integral part of these company financial statements.
COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 31 December 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Governance Strategic report Financial statements 34 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
Share
Share
Merger translation
Accumulated capital premium reserve reserve reserve losses
Note US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
1 January 2016 3886 Loss for the year Other comprehensive loss Total comprehensive profit Equity component of loans received 31 December 2016 3886 Loss for the year Other comprehensive income Total comprehensive loss 31 December 2017 3886 Group Reserves Description Share capital Amount of the contributions made by shareholders in return for the issue of shares.
Share premium Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value.
Merger reserve Reserve created on application of merger accounting under a previous GAAP .
Currency translation reserve Gainslosses arising on retranslating the net assets of overseas operations into US Dollars Other reserve Amount of proceeds on issue of convertible debt relating to the equity component.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY year ended 31 December 2017 35 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017
Share Share translation Other
Total
US000 US000 US000 US000
US000
1 January 2016 as previously reported 3886 141918 16338 Restatement note 15 1 January 2016  restated 3886 141918 16338 Profit for the year  restated Total comprehensive profit  restated Equity component of loans received   333 31 December 2016  restated 3886 141918 16338 333 Profit for the year Total comprehensive profit 31 December 2017 3886 141918 16338 333 Company Reserves Description Share capital Amount of the contributions made by shareholders in return for the issue of shares.
Share premium Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value.
Currency translation reserve Gainslosses arising on retranslating the net assets of overseas operations into US Dollars.
Other reserve Amount of proceeds on issue of convertible debt relating to the equity component.
Accumulated losses Cumulative net gains and losses recognised in the Company statement of financial position.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these company financial statements.
The Company has taken advantage of S408 of the Companies Act 2006 and not presented the individual Company profit and loss account.
COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY year ended 31 December 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Governance Strategic report Financial statements 36 Altyn plc Annual Reporttel
US000
US000
Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment Exploration costs Net cash used in investing activities Financing activities Loans received Borrowings repaid Interest repaid Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents Foreign currency translation Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASHFLOWS year ended 31 December 2017 37 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements
US000
US000
Net cash outflow from operating activities Investing activities Loans to subsidiaries Net cash used in investing activities Financing activities
Finance expenses paid Net cash outflowinflow from financing activities Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year The accompanying notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASHFLOWS year ended 31 December 2017 38 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS year ended 31 December 2017 1 General information Altyn Plc the Company is a Company incorporated in England and Wales under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of its registered office and place of business of the Company and its subsidiaries is set out within the Company information on page 65 of this annual report.
The principal activities of the Company and subsidiaries are set out on page 16 and the strategic review within this annual report.
2 Basis of preparation The annual report is for the year ended 31 December 2017 and includes the consolidated and parent companys financial statements prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial statements have been prepared using accounting policies set out in note 4 which are consistent with all applicable IFRSs and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRSs.
For these purposes IFRSs comprises the standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board and interpretations issued by the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee that have been endorsed by the European Union.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention except for the adjustment in relation to the fair value of the derivative element included in the US10m bond raised with African Resources and on a going concern basis.
Going concern To progress the mine to the full projected capacity the Company requires further funding which the Company has made good progress in putting in place.
It is currently in the advanced stages of finalising funding for new equipment from two parties.
It is seeking bond finance from one party and direct equipment purchasing from another party in order to secure the necessary investment.
The Company is continuing to develop its underground mine production is continuing at a steady pace with gold sold in the current year of 16747 oz.
From the operating cash flows generated the Company paid the balance of the EBRD loan which with interest amounted to US3.5m.
In order to preserve cash flow savings have been made in overhead costs at both head office and subsidiary level.
In January 2018 African Resources Limited converted US9.7m of the US10m convertible loan debt into new ordinary shares.
No interest was paid in relation to this loan in the year and it is expected that the balance of the bond to include accrued interest will be converted into new ordinary shares in Q3 2018.
The Directors have reviewed the cash flows for 15 months from the date of approval of the financial statements based on the projected trading.
The Directors are confident that should the fund raising not be successful to provide the funds in the expected timeframe the Company will be able to adapt its operational plans such that it continues to operate.
Furthermore the major shareholder has confirmed their intention to provide further funding to enable the Company to continue its planned operations for at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
On this basis the Directors have therefore concluded that it is appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis.
3 Accounting standards issued but not adopted At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following standards and relevant interpretations which have not been applied in these financial statements were in issue but not yet effective and some of which were pending endorsement by the EU lFRS 9 Financial Instruments lFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts IFRS 16 Leases The only standard that is anticipated to be significant or relevant to the Group is IFRS 9 Financial Instruments .
The new standard will replace existing accounting standards.
It is applicable to financial assets and liabilities and will introduce changes to existing accounting concerning classification measurement and impairment introducing an expected loss method.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers is not expected to have a material impact on the Group at this stage of the Groups operations.
The revenue contracts held by the Group usually contain a single performance criteria that is satisfied at a point in time.
The Group will adopt the above standards at the time stipulated by that standard.
The Group does not at this time anticipate voluntary early adoption of any of the standards.
IFRS 16 will require the recognition of an asset and liability with respect to the material operating lease commitments that the group have.
Management are currently considering the impact that this will have on the financial statements.
39 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 4 Accounting policies Basis of consolidation Where a company has control over an investee the investee is classified as a subsidiary.
A company controls an investee if all three of the following elements are present power over the investee exposure to variable returns from the investee and the ability of the investor to use its power to affect those variable returns.
Control is reassessed whenever facts and circumstances indicate that there may be a change in any of these elements of control.
The consolidated financial statements present the results of the company and its subsidiaries the Group as if they formed a single entity.
Intercompany
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the results of business combinations using the acquisition method.
In the statement of financial position the acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities are initially recognised at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The results of acquired operations are included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income from the date on which control is obtained.
They are deconsolidated from the date on which control ceases.
Revenue recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts received for goods provided in the normal course of business net of VAT and any other sales related taxes.
The Companys revenue is generated entirely from the sale of the gold and silver Precious Metal content of gold dor.
Gold dor was delivered to a precious metal refiner based in Kazakhstan during 2017 and 2016 which also purchased all precious metal that was refined.
Title of the Precious Metal passes upon acceptance of the delivery from the Company to the refiner.
Sales of Precious Metal are only recognised when the delivery has been accepted and title for the Precious Metal has accordingly been passed to the refiner.
The Company does not hedge or otherwise enter into any derivatives in respect of its sales of gold dor.
Sales are recorded at the actual selling price of the gold dor which is based on current market prices.
Foreign currencies The Company has prepared its financial statements in United States Dollars US.
The functional currency of the companies in Kazakhstan is the Kazakhstan Tenge
The functional currency of the Company and Hambledon Mining Company Limited is the United States Dollars US.
The rates used to convert Pound Sterling and Kazakhstan Tenge into United States Dollar in these financial statements are as follows
Average
Closing
Average
US
US  KZT The year end and average rates used for the Kazakh Tenge have been obtained from the National Bank of Kazakhstan.
Transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of each respective entity are recorded at the rate of exchange prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities are translated into the relevant functional currency at the closing rates of exchange at the reporting date.
Exchange differences arising from the restatement of monetary assets and liabilities at the closing rate of exchange at the reporting date or from the settlement of monetary transactions at a rate different from that at which the asset or liability was recorded are dealt with through the statement of profit or loss.
On consolidation the results of overseas operations are translated into US dollars the presentation currency at rates approximating to those ruling when the transactions took place.
All assets and liabilities of overseas operations are translated at the rate ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences arising on translating the opening net assets at the opening rate and the results of overseas operations at the actual rate are recognised directly in the consolidated statement of other comprehensive income.
The intercompany loans form a part of the Companys investment in a foreign operation.
The exchange difference arising on the intercompany loans is recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in a separate component of equity until disposal of the foreign operation.
Intangible assets Externally acquired intangible assets are initially recognised at cost and subsequently amortised on a straightline basis over their expected economic life.
In the Directors opinion this was initially estimated to be over the expected useful life of the data being 20 years this has been revised down to 10 years from 10 May 2016 being the minimum period over which the exploration licenses have been awarded.
40 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 4 Accounting policies continued Exploration and evaluation costs All costs incurred prior to obtaining the legal right to undertake exploration and evaluation activities on a project are written off as incurred.
All costs associated with mineral exploration and investments are capitalised on a project by project basis pending determination of the feasibility of the project.
Costs incurred include appropriate technical and administrative expenses.
If an exploration project is successful and the project is determined to be commercially viable the related costs will be transferred to mining assets and amortised over the estimated life of the mineral reserves on a unit of production basis.
Where a project is relinquished abandoned or is considered to be of no further commercial value to the Group the related costs are written off.
Impairment reviews performed under IFRS 6 Exploration for and evaluation of mineral resources are carried out on a project by project basis with each project representing a potential single cash generating unit.
An impairment review is undertaken when indicators of impairment arise typically when one of the following circumstances applies p sufficient data exists that render the resource uneconomic and unlikely to be developed p title to the asset is compromised p budgeted or planned expenditure is not expected in the foreseeable future p insufficient discovery of commercially viable resources leading to the discontinuation of activities.
Property plant and equipment mining properties and leases Mining properties comprise previously capitalised exploration evaluation and development expenditure incurred during the exploration and development stages of the Companys mining projects.
Other items of property plant and equipment are initially recognised at cost.
As well as the purchase price cost include directly attributable costs and estimated present value of any future unavoidable costs of dismantling and removing items.
The corresponding liability is recognised within provisions.
Assets under construction represent assets under development that are not at the stage that can be used commercially to generate revenues no depreciation is applied to these assets.
Depreciation
Depreciation of property plant and equipment is calculated on a straight line or units of production basis as appropriate.
Assets are fully depreciated over their economic lives or over the remaining life of the mine if shorter.
Buildings 810 per cent.
Equipment fixtures and Fittings 1040 per cent.
Plant machinery and vehicles 730 per cent.
Mining properties and leases Unit of production based on the proven reserves Assets under construction are not depreciated.
Impairment of noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment and intangible assets are assessed for impairment at each reporting date when events or a change in circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of an asset may exceed the recoverable amount.
Where there has been an indication of a possible impairment management assesses the recoverability of the carrying value of the asset by comparing it with the estimated discounted future net cash flows generated by the asset based on managements expectation of future production and selling prices.
Any identified impairment is charged to the statement of profit or loss.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but such that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
A reversal of impairment loss is recognised in the profit or loss immediately.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realisable value.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition are accounted for as follows Spare parts and consumables  Purchase costs on a first in first out basis Ore stockpiles work in progress and finished gold  Dependent on the current stage in the production cycle the cost will reflect cost of direct materials power labour and a proportion of overhead to bring the product to its current state 41 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 4 Accounting policies continued
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The tax currently payable is based on the taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the statement of profit or loss because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The
Companys liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for by using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates and interests in joint ventures except where the Company is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement except when it relates to items charged to other comprehensive income or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt within equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Indirect tax balances are not discounted.
Financial instruments Financial assets The Company classifies its financial assets only as loans and receivables.
These are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers trade receivables but also incorporate other types of contractual monetary assets other receivables.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised costs using effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Financial assets are assessed for indicators of impairment at reach reporting date.
Financial assets are impaired where there is objective evidence that as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the financial asset the estimated future cash flows of the asset have been impacted.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of less than three months and which are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of change in value for the purposes of statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents also include bank overdrafts.
Investments and loans to subsidiaries Investment in subsidiaries are included at cost less amounts written off.
Loans to subsidiaries are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised costs.
Financial liabilities The Group classifies its financial liabilities into one of two categories discussed blow depending on the purpose for which the liability was acquired.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss comprise only the conversion option related to 10m loan note classified as derivative financial liability.
They are carried in the consolidated statement of financial position at fair value with changes in fair value recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Other than these derivative financial instruments the Group does not have any liabilities held for trading nor has it designated any other financial liabilities as being at fair value through profit or loss.
Other financial liabilities Other financial liabilities comprise borrowings trade payables and other shortterm monetary liabilities.
These are initially measured at fair value and subsequently recognised at amortised cost using effective interest rate method.
Derecognition of financial liabilities Financial liabilities are derecognised when and only when the Groups obligations are discharged cancelled or they expire.
42 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 4 Accounting policies continued Financial liabilities continued Fair value measurement hierarchy The Group classifies its financial assets and financial liabilities measured at fair value using a fair value hierarchy that reflects the significance of the inputs used in making the fair value measurement note x.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels p quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 1 p inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. as prices or indirectly i. value measurement.
Compound instruments The component parts of compound instruments convertible notes and loans with detachable warrants issued by the Company are classified separately as financial liabilities and equity in accordance with the substance of the contractual arrangements and the definitions of a financial liability and an equity instrument.
A conversion option that will be settled by the exchange of a fixed amount of cash for a fixed number of the Companys own equity instruments is an equity instrument.
At the date of issue the fair value of the liability component is estimated using the prevailing market interest rate for similar non convertible instruments.
This amount is subsequently recorded as a liability on an amortised cost basis using the effective interest method until extinguished upon conversion or at the instruments maturity date.
The conversion option or detachable warrant classified as equity is determined by deducting the amount of the liability component from the fair value of the compound instrument as a whole.
This is recognised and included in equity net of income tax effects and is not subsequently remeasured.
No gain or loss is recognised in profit or loss upon conversion or expiration of the conversion option.
Transaction costs that relate to the issue of the compound instruments are allocated to the liability and equity components in proportion to the fair value of the debt and equity components.
Transaction costs relating to the equity component are recognised directly in equity.
Transaction costs relating to the liability component are included in the carrying amount of the liability component and are amortised over the lives of the compound instruments using the effective interest method.
Share capital Financial instruments used by the Group are classified as equity only to the extent that they do not meet the definition of a financial liability or financial asset.
The Companys ordinary shares are classified as equity instruments and are recorded at proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
US10m Convertible bond As further discussed in the note 20 the Group entered into a 10m loan arrangement with African Resources PLC.
The loan can be converted into ordinary shares of the Company at a price of 3p per share any time prior to maturity.
The conversion feature has been classified as derivative given there is an obligation to issue a variable number of shares as the amount of liability to be settled depends on the foreign exchange rate at the date of settlement.
The Company engaged Global View Limited as a third party expert to update the value of the embedded derivative liability.
Their fair value of derivative liability on the grant date and the reporting date was determined using a MonteCarlo simulation.
For each iteration of the simulation the simulated share price was analysed to determine the value.
The fair value was based on the following assumptions p share price at the 31 December 2017 0.0124 2016  0.0185 p GBPUSD exchange rate at 31 December 2017  0.7407 2016 0.8109 p volatility of share price at 31 December 2017  55.3% 2016 63.8% p volatility of the forex rate at 31 December 2017  7.0% 2016 13.5% and p time period at 31 December 2017 3.2 years 2016 4.2 years.
43 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 4 Accounting policies continued Level 3 fair value measurements The derivative liability has been deemed to be Level 3 liability under the fair value hierarchy as fair value measures of these liabilities are not based on observable market data.
The movement in their fair values is shown in the table below
As at 1 January 2016 Value at the date of the issue of the issue of the convertible Fair value movements recognised through profit or loss Foreign exchange movements As at 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Fair value movements recognised through profit or loss Foreign exchange movements As at 31 December 2017 The amount of derivative as at 31 December 2017 has been included in the value of Convertible bond in Note 22.
Provision for commitments and contingencies Provisions are recognised when the Company has a present obligation at the reporting date which occurred as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Company will be required to settle that obligation and the amount of the obligation can be reliably estimated.
Possible obligations that are less than probable and commitments to make purchases and incur expenditure in future periods are not recognised as provisions but are disclosed as commitments and contingencies.
Provision for site rehabilitation and decommissioning costs and the associated asset is recorded at the present value of the expected expenditure required to settle the Companys future obligations.
Actual outcomes may vary.
Details regarding the provision for site rehabilitation and decommissioning costs are set out in note 21 to the financial statements.
Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty In the application of the Companys accounting policies the Directors have made judgments and estimates that may have a significant effect on the amount recognised in the financial statements.
These include p carrying value of property plant and equipment including estimates made in respect of reserves and resources discount rate and future gold prices note 14 p recoverability of inventories note 16 p carrying value of provisions note 21 p recognition of deferred taxation assets note 23 p carrying value of intangible assets note 13 p recognition of derivatives note 22 and p carrying value of indirect taxes  the Directors consider that it is appropriate to carry these balances without the need for provision based on the legal right and the mechanism for recovery.
The balances are not discounted in accordance with the accounting policy.
44 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 5 Revenue An analysis of the Companys revenue is as follows
US000
Sale of gold and silver Included in revenues from sale of gold and silver are revenues of US21294000 2016 US15862000 which arose from sales of precious metals to one customer based in Kazakhstan.
Other sales amounted to US355000 2016 US5000 and related to sale of surplus materials and consumables.
6 Segmental information Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments and making strategic decision has been identified as the Board of Directors.
The Board of Directors consider there to be only one operating segment the exploration and development of mineral resources and only one geographical segment being Kazakhstan.
The majority of sales were made in Kazakhstan and therefore no additional segmental information is presented.
7 Staff number and costs of the Group The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was
Administration
10telTheir aggregate remuneration comprised
US000
Directors emoluments Employee wages and salaries Employer social tax and national insurance Staff number and costs of the Company The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was
Their aggregate remuneration comprised
US000
Directors emoluments Employee wages and salaries Employer social tax and national insurance Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 8 Impairments
US000
Impairments reversedprovided  low grade ore Impairments  other The reversal of impairment for low grade ore in 2017 relates to ore that is less than 1gt and is being used in processing for operational reasons and was previously provided.
The other impairment relates to a provision made against an advance payment where recovery of the moniesservices is uncertain.
9 Finance income and finance expense
US000
Finance expense Foreign exchange gain on EBRD loan Foreign exchange lossgains other Interest paid Fair value adjustment on convertible loan Unwinding of discount other financial liabilities Unwinding of discount on provisions 10 Loss before taxation The loss on ordinary activities before taxation is stated after charging
US000
Staff costs note 7 Depreciation of tangible assets Amortisation of intangible net of amortisation capitalised Cost of inventories recognised as expense Impairment of receivables Reversal of impairmentimpairment of inventory Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the Company and Group financial statements Fees payable to the auditors of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 11 Taxation
US000
Current year tax charge Adjustment in relation to prior years Deferred taxation note 23 Total taxation charge 278 46 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 11 Taxation continued A reconciliation between the accounting profit and the total taxation benefit from continuing operations is as follows
US000
Loss before taxation Loss for the year multiplied by the standard rate of corporation tax of 19.25% 2016 20% Expenses not deductible for tax purposes Current year tax losses Adjustments relating to different tax rates of subsidiaries Total charge The taxation rate used for taxation on loss on ordinary activities is the standard rate for United Kingdom corporation tax currently 19.25% 2016 20% being the average applicable rate for the Company in 2017.
The rate applicable to the Companys subsidiaries in Kazakhstan is 20%.
12 Loss per ordinary share The calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations is based upon the retained loss from continuing operations for the financial year of US1.9m 2016 loss of US6.4m.
The weighted average number of ordinary shares for calculating the basic loss in 2017 and 2016 is shown below.
As the Company was loss making in 2017 the impact of the potential ordinary shares outstanding from the conversion of the Convertible loan notes would be antidilutive and as such the basic and diluted earnings per share are the same.
The total number of all nondilutive potential shares related to the issue of the convertible loans is disclosed in Note 22.
Basic and diluted 13 Intangible assets
Exploration and geological data evaluation costs
Cost
1 January 2016 Translation difference
Amortisation capitalized 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Translation difference
Additions
Amortisation capitalized 31 December 2017
1 January 2016 Charge for the year Translation difference 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Charge for the year Translation difference 31 December 2017 Net book value 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 31 December 2017 The intangible assets relate to the historic geological information pertaining to the Karasuyskoye ore fields.
The ore fields are located in close proximity to the current open pit and underground mining operations of Sekisovskoye.
The Company obtained a contract for exploration and evaluation on the site in May 2016 from the Kazakh authorities.
The contract is valid for a period of 6 years which is a right to extend for a minimum period of 4 years.
47 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 13 Intangible assets continued The directors took the view that initially a 20 year write off was appropriate in relation to the absorption of the costs given the current development of the site this has been revised to write off the geological data over the period the licence expires being with the minimum extension to May 2026 a period of 10 years.
The costs amortised are capitalised in line with the Companys accounting policy.
The effect is to increase the amortisation charge from US522000 to US1021000 there is no effect on the income statement as the amortisation costs are capitalised as part of exploration and evaluation costs.
Based on results of further work performed during the year the Directors do not consider there to be any indicators of impairment and consider the project to remain prospective.
14 Property plant and equipment  Company
Equipment
Total
US000
US000
US000
Cost
1 January  December 2016 and Accumulated depreciation 1 January Charge for the year December Charge for the year 31 December Net book value 1 January  December 2016 31 December 2017 14 Property plant and equipment  Group
Freehold
Equipment
Plant properties land and fixtures and machinery and Assets under and leases buildings fittings vehicles construction
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
Cost
1 January 2016
Disposals
Transfers
Transfers to inventories Currency translation adjustment December 2016 and 1 January 2017
3tel2602
Transfer to exploration and evaluation costs
Currency translation adjustment December 2017 59774 48 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 14 Property plant and equipment  Group continued
Freehold
Equipment
Plant properties land and fixtures and machinery and Assets under and leases buildings fittings vehicles construction
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
Accumulated depreciation 1 January 2016 Charge for the year
Currency translation adjustment 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Charge for the year
Transfers
Currency translation adjustment 31 December 2017 Net book value 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 31 December 2017 Capitalised cost of mining property and leases are amortised over the life of the licence from commencement of production on a unit of production basis.
This basis uses the ratio of production in the period compared to the mineral reserves at the end of the period.
Mineral reserves estimates are based on a number of underlying assumptions which are inherently uncertain.
Mineral reserves estimates take into consideration estimates by independent geological consultants.
However the amount of mineral that will ultimately be recovered cannot be known until the end of the life of the mine.
Any changes in reserve estimates are for amortisation purposes treated on a prospective basis.
The recovery of the capitalised cost of the Companys property plant and equipment is dependent on the development of the underground mine.
The Directors are required to consider whether the noncurrent assets comprising mineral properties leases plant and equipment have suffered any impairment.
In determining if there any indicators of impairment the Directors have considered the operational performance in the period and do not consider that there is an indicator of impairment.
Should an indicator of impairment have been identified the recoverable amount would have been determined based on value in use calculations.
The use of this method requires the estimation of future cash flows and the choice of a discount rate in order to calculate the present value of the cash flows.
The directors have concluded that no adjustment is required for impairment.
15 Subsidiaries
Country of registration
Directly held Hambledon Mining Company Limited British Virgin Islands TOO GMK Altyn MM
Indirectly held DTOO Gornorudnoe Predpriatie Baurgold
The principal activity of all companies relates to gold mining and production with the exception of Hambledon Mining Company Limited which is an investment holding Company and is currently dormant its registered address is Palm Grove House P O Box 438Road Town Tortola British Virgin Islands.
Both companies trade from 10 Novostroyevsaya Street Glubokovskoye district Sekisovka village East Kazakhstan.
Investments and loans to subsidiaries  Company
Subsidiaries
Shares adjustment loans
US000
US000
US000
US000
1 January 2016  restated 74747 82603 Net cash movements 7856 7856
Management charges and interest 4372 4372 31 December 2016  restated 85401 94831 Net cash movements Management charges and interest 4892 4892 31 December 2017 90425 99855 49 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 15 Subsidiaries continued Investments and loans to subsidiaries  Company continued The investments together with the loans which are denominated in US Dollars represent the investments into the subsidiaries and in the opinion of the directors the aggregate value of the investments in the subsidiaries is not less than the amount shown in these financial statements.
The directors review the intercompany borrowings on a regular basis together with the associated cash flows of each company and consider that no impairment is required.
The historic loans are shown within fixed assets as quasiequity investments and represent the initial funding to the subsidiaries.
The recent loans to subsidiaries are charged at a fixed interest rate of 5% and are repayable in 2019 or on a three year rolling evergreen facility repayment to be made three years from the date of any formal request for repayment from Altyn Plc these are included within fixed assets.
The Directors have reassessed the fair value market rate applicable to the loans advanced to the subsidiaries which has resulted in an adjustment to the interest receivable in the prior periods.
Restatement
The Directors have reconsidered the terms of the inter company loans in the context of the requirements of IAS 39 and do not consider that this is representative of the rate of interest that would be applied to such loans from a third party.
As such they have discounted the contractual cash flows at a market rate of interest and restated the prior year reported figures.
The impact of this has been to Company statement of financial position As previously reported Adjustments As restated 31 December 2016 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 1 January 2016
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
Investments
Loans to subsidiaries Accumulated losses The Company made an adjustment of US1581000 to increase previously reported profit for 2016 of US132000 to restated profit of US1449000.
16 Inventories
US000
Current
Spare parts and consumables Work in progress Finished goods The value of inventories above is stated after a reversal of an impairment for low grade ore of US374000.
In 2016 a provision was made against and low grade ore and write downs in respect of spare parts of US1091000.
The total cost of inventory recognised as an expense is shown in note 10.
17 Trade and other receivables
Company
Company
Group
Grouptel
US000
US000
US000
US000
Other receivables and prepayments Other receivables included within noncurrent assets for 2017 and 2016 relate to an amount recoverable in relation to Value Added Tax this is expected to be recovered by offset against VAT payable in future periods.
Current
Company
Company
Group
Grouptel
US000
US000
US000
US000
Trade receivables
Other receivables  recoverable provision
The trade receivables are stated at full carrying value and their ageing is less than 30 days old.
The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade receivables approximates to their fair value.
50 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 18 Trade and other payables
Company
Company
Group
Grouptel
US000
US000
US000
US000
Trade creditors Other payables and accruals Trade creditors and accruals principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases of goods and services.
The majority of the trade creditors relate to the Companys trading subsidiaries in Kazakhstan.
It is not practical to calculate the average credit period taken in respect of trade purchases for these creditors due to current business practices in the former Soviet Union.
For most suppliers interest is not charged on these trade payables.
The Company regularly reviews all outstanding payables to ensure they are paid within the appropriate timeframe.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade payables approximates to their fair value.
19 Other financial liabilities 2017 2016 US000 US000 Liability for historic cost
Noncurrent
The subsoil use contract the Contract under which TOO Sekisovskoye holds the exploration and mining rights to the Sekisovskoye deposit stipulates that it must pay a total of US3312000 to the Kazakhstan Government for historic costs.
From 1 January 2009 the balance of the historical costs is being paid on a quarterly basis and the final payment is due to be paid on 21 December 2018.
The future historic costs have been discounted to their net present value.
This discounted value has been capitalised as Property plant and equipment note 14 and will be amortised over the productive period.
Any changes in estimated costs and discount rate are dealt with prospectively and result in a corresponding adjustment to property plant and equipment.
20 Related party transactions Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the Directors who are the key management personnel of the Company is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories specified in IAS 24  Related Party Disclosures .
The total amount remaining unpaid with respect to remuneration of key management personnel amounted to US127000 in the current year 2016 US79000.
Further information about the remuneration of the individual directors is set out in the audited section of the report on directors remuneration on page 23.
US
US
Short term employee benefits Social Security costs The transactions between the Company and the subsidiaries are disclosed in Note 15.
During the year the following transactions were connected with the companies controlled by the Assaubayev family p Purchases rental payments and other payments amounting to USNil 2016US330000 were made to Asia Mining Group AMG a company controlled by the Assaubayev family for the supply of equipment and spares.
At the year end an amount of US824000 2016 US824000 is due to AMG and is included within other trade payables p Of the amount due to Amrita Investments Limited of US1739000 from the prior year an amount of UD924000 was repaid in 2017 interest on the balance is accruing at an average interest rate of 7%.
The total outstanding at 31 December 2017 amounts to US 937000 and includes interest accruals of US303000.
The loans are repayable by 31 December 2019 see note 22 p In 2016 the Company issued US10m of convertible bonds to African Resources Limited a company controlled by the Assaubayev family.
The Bonds carry a coupon of 10% per annum payable semiannually in arrears on 29 July and 28 February each year.
In January 2018 the bond holders elected to convert US9.7m of the bond into ordinary shares of the Company at the conversion price of 3p per share  resulting in the issue of 233333333 new ordinary shares being issued to African Resources Limited see note 28.
The balance includes accrued interest payable of US1347000 2016 US561000.
It is the intention of African Resources Limited to convert the balance of the principal and interest outstanding into ordinary shares of the Company once the necessary administrative procedures have been completed.
51 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 21 Provisions
Holiday pay
US000
US000
US000
1 January 2016 Change in estimate of provision Unwinding of discount Paid during the year Currency translation adjustment December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Change in estimate of provision Unwinding of discount Paid during the year Currency translation adjustment December 2017 31 December 2017
Noncurrent
31 December 2016
Noncurrent
Abandonment and restoration costs In accordance with the provisions of the subsoil use contract the Contract DTOO GRP Baurgold is liable for site restoration costs upon completion of production activities.
It is not possible to predict accurately the amount which might ultimately be payable for site restoration as it includes assumptions such as inflation in Kazakhstan over the life of the Contract which are inherently uncertain.
An estimate of the future cost of restoration has been discounted and a provision recognised.
The discounted amount for cost of restoration has been capitalised as a tangible fixed asset note 14 and will be amortised using the unit of production method over the life of the mine.
In accordance with the subsoil use agreement DTOO GRP Baurgold has established a cash fund to pay for the cost of restoration.
The cash fund is maintained in a separate bank account in the name of DTOO GRP Baurgold.
DTOO GRP Baurgold is required to contribute each year an amount equal to 1% of its operating expenses to this fund.
Any transfers from the bank account require the authorisation of the Government of Kazakhstan.
This fund will be used to pay for the costs of restoration as and when they become due.
If the funds in the account are insufficient to pay for the costs DTOO GRP Baurgold will be required to pay any deficit.
If there are funds surplus to those required for restoration these will be returned to DTOO GRP Baurgold.
During 2017 it was agreed with the Kazakh authorities that the amount of US125 000 that had been accrued in the restricted deposit account would be used to settle outstanding tax liabilities no contributions were made in the year.
It is the intention of the Company to repay this amount in to the restricted cash fund. the relevant authorities in Kazakhstan in relation to the timing and exact amount of funds to be transferred.
52 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 22 Borrowings Secured borrowings at amortised cost
Current liabilities
US000
Due within one year Bank loan  EBRD Related party loans Amrita see note 20 Other loans Noncurrent liabilities Due within one  two years Related party loans  Amrita see note 20 Due two  five years Convertible bonds 10m convertible loan see note 20 2m convertible loan
Noncurrent liabilities Due two  five years Convertible bonds EBRD Bank loan In 2012 two of the Companys subsidiaries TOO GMK Altyn MM GAM and DTOO GRP Baurgold entered into a loan agreement with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD.
The principal terms of the loan was as follows p The loan of US10m was on a joint and several basis and repayable in twelve quarterly instalments commencing on 10 January 2015.
The final installment of the loan was repaid on the 10 October 2017 in total an amount including interest of US3.5m was repaid in the year p Interest was charged at a rate of three months London Inter Bank Rate LIBOR plus 7% per annum.
The effective interest rate on the loan in the period was 7.5% 2016 7.5%.
Convertible bonds US10m convertible bond In 2016 the Company secured a total of US10m proceeds from a convertible loan with the major shareholder African Resources Limited.
The loan bears a coupon of 10% per annum payable semiannually and was due for repayment in 2021.
In January 2018 the bond holders elected to convert US9.7m of the bond into ordinary shares of the Company at the conversion price of 3p per share  resulting in the issue of 233333333 new ordinary shares being issued to African Resources Limited see note 28.
As further discussed in the note 4 the total value of the conversion option was determined at fair value as at 31 December 2016 to be US1.9m as at 31 December 2017 the fair value of the conversion option has fallen to US0.5m and the difference recognised in the profit and loss statement.
The residual value was assigned to the debt host liability and accounted for at amortised cost using the effecting interest rate of 17% the total liability is US10.7m and includes accrued interest 2016 US9.6m.
The balance includes accrued interest payable of US1347000 2016 US561000 net of withholding taxes.
It is the intention of African Resources Limited to convert the balance of the principal and interest due into ordinary shares of the Company once the necessary administrative procedures have been completed.
US2m convertible bond In 2016 the Company entered into US2m convertible loan with institutional investors.
The loan bears a coupon of 10% per annum payable semiannually and is due for repayment in 2021.
The Notes can be converted into Ordinary Shares of the Company at a price of 2.15p per share any time prior to maturity.
The exchange rate of US1.466 for 1 shall be used to determine the number of conversion shares.
The potential number of shares to be issued is 136372093.
The conversion option meets the fixedforfixed criteria and therefore has been classified as equity instrument in the other reserves.
On initial recognition Management have assessed the value of the contractual cash flows discounted at the interest rate of 15% being the market interest rate for the similar instruments without a conversion feature.
The value of liability component was determined to be US1.8m 2016 US1.7m with the remaining balance of 0.3m allocated to the residual equity component.
The balance includes US27000 2016 US27000 accrued interest payable.
Other Loans Other loans comprise amounts that were received from Amrita Investments Limited see details in note 20 and an amount received from a third party amounting to US724000 for short term financing requirements no interest is payable on this amount.
53 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 23 Deferred taxation Deferred taxation assetliability
Taxation taxation losses depreciation
Total
US000
US000
US000
US000
1 January 2016 Credit to income Credit to other comprehensive income Currency translation 31 December 2016 and 1 January 2017 Credit to income Credit to other comprehensive income Currency translation 31 December 2017 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset were they arise within the subsidiaries in Kazakhstan.
The Group has recognised the deferred tax asset only to the extent that it is probable that the taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary difference can be utilised.
The future tax profits are expected to derive from the gold mining operations in Kazakhstan.
The tax losses arising in the prior periods will reduce the Companys and its subsidiaries future tax liabilities.
Deferred tax assets are recognised as the Directors believe that sufficient taxable profits will be made against which the carried forward losses can be utilised.
Unutilised taxation losses arising in Kazakhstan of US56.8m 2016 US60.2m are available to carry forward for a maximum of 10 years.
It is estimated that the tax losses available to carry forward will be utilised by 2025.
Unutilised tax losses arising in the UK amount to US3m 2016 US3m.
Unrecognised deferred taxation asset The unrecognised deferred taxation asset is as follows
US000
US000
Temporary differences Taxation losses Included within the unrecognised taxable losses above is an amount of US0.6m 2016 US0.7m in relation to the Company and US4.7m 2016 US6.9m in relation to the Kazakh subsidiaries.
This amount has been carried forward as the Directors do not believe there will be sufficient taxable profits in the foreseeable future to offset the losses incurred.
24 Calledup equity share capital Issued and fully paid
US000
At 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017  Ordinary shares of 0.01 each In January 2018 233333333 new ordinary shares were issued at 3 pence a share to African Resources Limited in connection with the partial conversion of the bond see notes 22 and 28.
54 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 25 Notes to the cash flow statement Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities
Company
Group
Grouptel
US000
US000
US000
US000
Profitloss before taxation Adjusted for Finance income Interest payable Unwinding of discount Fair value adjustment Depreciation of tangible fixed assets Amortisation of intangible asset
Increase in inventories Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables Decrease in other financial liabilities Increasedecrease in trade and other payables Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment Foreign currency translation Cash inflowoutflow from operations Income taxes payable Net cash inflowoutflow from operations Reconciliation of financing cash flows Group Cash flows Noncash changes 1 January 1 January
Decembertel
BFwd BFwd
CFwd
Less More
Interest Foreign
Less
More than than New Loans Interest accruals Profit and exchange value
1 year 1 year loans repaid paid BFwd loss movement changes of discount 1 year 1 year US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000
US000
US000
US000
Loan element of US10m Convertible bonds Derivative element of US10m convertible bond US2m Convertible bonds EBRD loan Related party borrowings 1039 700 Other borrowings
4439 11981 724 4331 1510 112 Company Cash flows Noncash changes 1 January 1 January
Decembertel
BFwd BFwd
CFwd
Less More
Interest Foreign
Less
More than than New Loans Interest accruals Profit and exchange value
1 year 1 year loans repaid paid BFwd loss movement changes of discount 1 year 1 year US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000 US000
US000
US000
US000
Loan element of US10m Convertible bonds Derivative element of US10m convertible bond US2m Convertible bonds
1200 112 Interest included in accruals in 2016 now shown within net liability as above.
55 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 26 Financial instruments Policy on financial risk management The Companys principal financial instruments comprise cash and cash equivalents trade receivables trade and other payables provisions other financial liabilities and borrowings.
The Companys accounting policies and methods adopted including the criteria for recognition the basis on which income and expenses are recognised in respect of each class of financial asset financial liability and equity instrument are set out in note 4  accounting policies .
The Company does not use financial instruments for speculative purposes.
The carrying value of all financial assets and liabilities approximates to their fair value.
Capital risk management The Companys primary objective when managing risk is to ensure there is sufficient capital available to support the Companys funding requirements including capital expenditure in a way that optimises the cost of capital.
Maximises shareholders returns and ensures the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
There were no changes to the Companys capital management approach in the year.
The Company may make adjustments to the capital structure as opportunities arise as and when borrowings mature or as and when funding is required.
This may take the form of raising equity debt finance equipment supplier credit or a combination thereof.
The Company monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio which is defined as net debt divided by total capital.
Net debt is calculated as total borrowings including current and noncurrent borrowings as shown in the consolidated statement of financial position less cash and cash equivalents.
Total capital is calculated as equity as shown in the consolidated statement of financial position plus net debt.
While the Company does not set absolute limits on the ratio the Company believes that a ratio of 30%40% was acceptable in the final stages of the construction and the commissioning phase of the Sekisovskoye mine and that optimally this should reduce to and remain below 25% thereafter.
The Companys policy in respect of capital risk management is the same as that of the Group.
US000
US000
Group
Total borrowings Less cash and cash equivalents Net debt Total equity Total capital Gearing ratio 28.81% 29.44%
Total borrowings Less cash and cash equivalents Net debt Total equity  restated Total capital Gearing ratio 12.33% 10.15% Derivatives financial instruments and risk management The Company does not use derivative instruments or other financial instruments to manage its exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates interest rates and commodity prices.
Foreign currency risk management The Company and its subsidiaries have transactional currency exposures.
Such exposures arise from sales or purchases by the Companys two subsidiaries in Kazakhstan in currencies other than the Companys functional currency.
The functional currency of TOO GMK Altyn MM and DTOO Gornorudnoe Predpriatie Baurgold is the Kazakh Tenge.
The currency transactions giving rise to this foreign currency risk are primarily USD denominated revenues USD denominated borrowings and other financial liabilities and certain USD denominated trade payables.
The Company and its subsidiaries do not enter into hedging positions in respect of its exposure to foreign currency risk.
The carrying amounts of the Companys and its subsidiaries foreign currency denominated net monetary assets and monetary liabilities at 31 December are as follows 2017 US000 2016 US000 Functional currency Functional currency Currency of monetary assetliability
KZT
Total
USD
KZT
Total
US Dollars British Pounds Kazakhstan Tenge Net monetary position 17127 56 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 26 Financial instruments continued Sensitivity analysis A 20% 2016 20% strengthening or weakening of any one of the above currencies against the US Dollar which the Directors consider to be a reasonably possible change for the purpose of sensitivity analysis is shown below The table below shows the impact of changes in exchange rates on the result and financial position of the Group
US000
20% weakening of Kazakh Tenge against the US Dollar Commodity price risk The Company is exposed to the effect of fluctuations in the price of gold and silver which are quoted in US Dollars on the international markets.
The Company prepares annual budgets and periodic forecasts including sensitivity analyses in respect of various levels of prices of these metals.
The Companys only significant sales during the years ended 31 December 2017 and 2016 were sales of gold dor containing gold and silver.
The sales proceeds for gold dor is fixed by reference to the gold and silver prices based on average gold and silver price in the month of sale.
The Company does not plan in the future to hedge its exposure to the risk of fluctuations in the price of gold or silver and therefore it held no financial instruments that are sensitive to commodity price changes at either reporting date.
Credit risk Credit risk refers to the risk that a counterparty will default on its contractual obligations resulting in a financial loss to the Company.
The Group has adopted a policy of only dealing with creditworthy counterparties.
The Groups exposure and the credit ratings of its counterparties are monitored by the Board of Directors to ensure that the aggregate value of transactions is spread amongst approved counterparties.
The Groups principal financial assets are cash and cash equivalents trade debtors and other accounts receivables.
Cash equivalents include amounts held on deposit with financial institutions.
The Group is mainly exposed to credit risk on its cash equivalents and trade and other receivables as per the balance sheet.
The maximum exposure to credit risk is represented by the carrying amount of each financial asset in the balance sheet which at the year end amounted to US1.2m 2016 US2.4m.
The credit risk on liquid funds held in current accounts and available on demand is limited because the Groups counterparties are mainly banks with high credit ratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
Trade receivables comprise amounts receivable from a refinery in respect of sales of gold dor.
On the sale of the gold dor payment is received on shipment.
It is often impractical in Kazakhstan to carry out a check of creditworthiness of suppliers before making the contracted prepayments.
There were no significant balances at 31 December 2017 and 2016 in respect of which suppliers had defaulted on their obligations.
The Companys maximum exposure to credit risk is limited to the carrying amount of loans recorded in the financial statements.
There are majority of the loans are on fixed repayment terms for the loans however they are not considered overdue or impaired.
Liquidity risk During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Company was financed by internally generated funds and other borrowings.
The Company manages its liquidity risk.
The Directors monitor cash flow and cash flow forecasts on a regular basis and ensure that the loan commitments and working capital commitments are adequately funded.
The Directors obtain assurances from the major shareholders as required that funds will be made available to fund any shortfall as required.
The following tables detail the Companys and its subsidiaries remaining contractual maturity for its financial liabilities.
The tables have been drawn up based on the undiscounted cash flows of financial liabilities based on the earliest date on which the Company and its subsidiaries can be required to pay.
The table includes both interest and principal cash flows.
Trade
Other
Borrowings payables
Total
Group
US000
US000
US000
US000
US000
31 December 2017 From two to five years For one to two years Due after more than one year Due within one year 25959 57 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements 26 Financial instruments continued
Other
Borrowings payables
Total
Group continued
US000
US000
US000
US000
31 December 2016 From two to five years For one to two years Due after more than one year Due within one year
31 December 2017 From two to five years For one to two years Due after more than one year Due within one year 31 December 2016 From two to five years For one to two years Due after more than one year Due within one year Borrowings and interest rate risk The Company and its subsidiaries entered into a long term borrowing agreement with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD on 21 February 2012 in order to fund capital commitments.
Interest was payable at 7% per annum above Libor.
The bank loan was repaid in October 2017.
There is no exposure to interest rate risk as the current borrowings in the Company and its subsidiaries are at fixed rates.
The bonds at a fixed coupon rate of 10% and the other borrowings at an average interest rate of 7% see note 22.
27 Commitments and contingencies General conditions In recent years the Republic of Kazakhstan has undergone substantial political and economic change.
As an emerging market the Republic of Kazakhstan does not possess a welldeveloped business infrastructure such as generally exists in a more mature free market economy.
As a result operations carried out in the Republic of Kazakhstan can involve risks which are not typically associated with those in developed markets.
Significant identified risks have been provided for or disclosed in these financial statements as appropriate.
Subsoil use rights are not provided to the Company on an indefinite basis and each renewal shall be approved before the current contract or license expires.
These rights can be cancelled by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan hereinafter referred to as the Government if the Company does not fulfil contractual liabilities.
Deposit development costs In accordance with the subsoil use contract the Company has an approved working programme which may be reviewed and reconsidered depending on the economic viability and operational conditions of the deposit.
The management of the Company believes it has fulfilled the requirements of the Contract.
Training for Kazakhstani specialists In accordance with the terms of the contract the Company is liable for the annual costs incurred in respect of the professional training of the Kazakhstani personnel involved in the work.
The costs are estimated to be at least 1% of the operational costs during the development and operational process.
As at 31 December 2017 the Company has met the conditions of the Contract.
Development of the social sphere of the region According to the terms of the contract the Company is liable for supporting the development and ensuring social support for the activity of the communities near the area of operations of the Company.
As at 31 December 2017 the Company has met all the conditions of the Contract.
58 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued year ended 31 December 2017 27 Commitments and contingencies continued General conditions continued Liabilities on the restoration of the mine Within eighty calendar days upon the expiration of the contract the Company is liable for the development of the mine restoration programme and its inspection by the competent authority of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
The Company is liable for implementation of the programme upon its approval.
In accordance with the subsoil use contract the Company is liable for the development of the insurance programme and its submission for approval by the competent authority.
The Company has several contracts of obligatory insurance including insurance of the vehicle owners the employers liability and insurance of the subsoil users liability where the activity of such subsoil users is connected to the damage to third parties.
The claims on the Company are periodically set out in the courts along with the Companys activities.
As at the reporting date there are no material claims against the Company.
As part of the settlement in relation to the tailings dam restoration programme the Company has a memorandum signed with the local authorities whereby the Company is liable for arranging the construction of the paste plant for US1800000 600m Tenge.
It has been agreed that the Company will use its best endeavors to have this completed once all necessary permits are obtained.
Other than the paste plant as at the reporting date the Company has fulfilled all of its obligations in relation to the outstanding works which required in relation to the tailings dam restoration program.
The tax system of Kazakhstan being relatively new is characterised by frequent changes to the legal norms official interpretations and court decisions which are often not explicit and can be contradictory.
This leads to differing interpretations by the tax authorities.
The examination and investigations of the accounts to ensure that the tax payable is accurate are carried out by several regulatory bodies.
These bodies have the power to impose heavy fines and penalties.
The accuracy of the tax computation can be investigated five calendar years after the end of the accounting period.
In certain circumstances this period can be increased.
These circumstances may lead to the taxation risks being much higher in Kazakhstan compared to other countries.
The management of the Company based on their understanding of the tax legislation regulatory requirements and court decisions considers the tax liabilities to be fully reflected in the accounts.
Nevertheless the interpretation of these provisions by the corresponding authorities can be different and in that case should the authorities prove the lawfulness of their position it may significantly affect these financial accounts.
28 Subsequent events On the 17 January 2018 African Resources Limited acquired 117730632 shares at a consideration price of 3p per share.
It subsequently acquired on the 23 January 2018 an additional 233333333 shares when US9.7m of the existing convertible bond of US10m was converted in ordinary shares at a conversion price of 3p per share.
This increased the shareholding of African Resources Limited from 61.69% to 69.8% of the total shares in issue.
The subsidiary DTOO GRP Baurgold has entered into an agreement with JSC Freedom Finance a subsidiary of Freedom Holding Corp. to assist in raising c.
US15m through the issue of fiveyear nonconvertible Tenge denominated bonds secured by the assets of the subsidiary Company.
29 Ultimate Controlling Party The controlling party and parent entity of the Company is African Resources Limited by virtue of the fact that at the date of this report it owns 69.8% 2016 61.69% of the voting rights in the Company.
There is no requirement to prepare consolidated accounts for African Resources Limited which is registered in the British Virgin Islands.
The ultimate controlling party are the Assaubayev family by virtue of the fact that they are the controlling party of African Resources Limited.
59 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT the Annual General Meeting of the Altyn plc the Company will be held at the offices of BDO LLP 55 Baker Street London WIU 7EU on 29 June 2018 at 11am in order to consider and if thought fit pass resolutions 1 to 8 as ordinary resolutions and resolution 9 as a special resolution ORDINARY RESOLUTIONS To receive the audited accounts and the reports of the Directors and auditors for the year ended 31 December 2017.
To approve the Directors remuneration report and the Directors remuneration policy.
To confirm the appointment of Vladimir Shkolnik as Director NonExecutive of the Company.
To reelect Sanzhar Assaubayev as a Director Executive of the Company.
To reelect Kanat Assaubayev as a Director NonExecutive of the Company.
To reappoint BDO LLP as the Companys auditors to hold office until the conclusion of the next general meeting at which the annual accounts are to be laid before the Company.
To authorise the Audit Committee of the Board to determine the auditors remuneration.
That in accordance with section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 as amended the Act the directors be generally and unconditionally authorised to allot Relevant Securities as defined in the notes to this Notice a. nominal amount of any Relevant Securities allotted under paragraph 9b. i. ii. b. under paragraph 9a. agreement notwithstanding that the authority conferred by this resolution has expired.
This resolution revokes and replaces all unexercised authorities previously granted to the directors to allot Relevant Securities but without prejudice to any allotment of shares or grant of rights already made offered or agreed to be made pursuant to such authorities.
60 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING continued SPECIAL RESOLUTION That conditional on the passing of Resolution 8 the directors be given the general power to allot equity securities as defined by section 560 of the Companies Act 2006 as amended the Act for cash either pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 8 or by way of a sale of treasury shares as if section  of the Act did not apply to any such allotment provided that this power shall be limited to a. the allotment of equity securities in connection with an offer of equity securities but in the case of the authority granted under 6a. i. ii. b. the allotment otherwise than pursuant to paragraph 9a. above of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 256767.
The power granted by this resolution will expire on the date which is 18 months after the date on which this resolution is passed or if earlier the conclusion of the Companys next annual general meeting unless renewed varied or revoked by the Company prior to or on such date save that the Company may before such expiry make offers or agreements which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after such expiry and the directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of any such offer or agreement notwithstanding that the power conferred by this resolution has expired.
This resolution revokes and replaces all unexercised powers previously granted to the directors to allot equity securities as if section  of the Act did not apply but without prejudice to any allotment of equity securities already made or agreed to be made pursuant to such authorities.
By order of the Board Rajinder Basra Company Secretary Registered Office 28 Eccleston Square
SW1V INZ Dated 30 April 2018 Company Number  61 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Relevant Securities means p Shares in the Company other than shares allotted pursuant to an employee share scheme as defined by section 1166 of the Act a right to subscribe for shares in the Company where the grant of the right itself constituted a Relevant Security or a right to convert securities into shares in the Company where the grant of the right itself constituted a Relevant Security. pursuant to an employee share scheme as defined by section 1166 of the Act.
References to the allotment of Relevant Securities in the resolution include the grant of such rights.
Entitlement to attend and vote Only those shareholders registered in the Companys register of members at p 6.00 pm on Wednesday 27 June 2018 or p if this meeting is adjourned at 6.00 pm on the day two days prior to the adjourned meeting shall be entitled to attend and vote at the meeting.
Changes to the register of members after the relevant deadline shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend and vote at the meeting.
Appointment of proxies If you are a shareholder who is entitled to attend and vote at the meeting you are entitled to appoint a proxy to exercise all or any of your rights to attend speak and vote at the meeting and you should have received a proxy form with this notice of meeting.
You can only appoint a proxy using the procedures set out in these notes and the notes to the proxy form.
If you are not a member of the Company but you have been nominated by a member of the Company to enjoy information rights you do not have a right to appoint any proxies under the procedures set out in this Appointment of proxies section.
Please read the section Nominated persons below.
A proxy does not need to be a shareholder of the Company but must attend the meeting to represent you.
You may appoint more than one proxy provided each proxy is appointed to exercise rights attached to different shares.
You may not appoint more than one proxy to exercise rights attached to any one share.
To appoint more than one proxy each proxy must be appointed on a separate proxy form.
If you wish your proxy to speak on your behalf at the meeting you will need to appoint your own choice of proxy not the chairman and give your instructions directly to them.
Shareholders can p appoint a proxy and give proxy instructions by returning the enclosed proxy form by post see note 7 p register their proxy appointment electronically see note 8 p if a CREST member register their proxy appointment by utilising the CREST electronic proxy appointment service see note 9.
Appointment of a proxy does not preclude you from attending the meeting and voting in person.
If you have appointed a proxy and attend the meeting and vote in person your proxy appointment will automatically be terminated.
A vote withheld is not a vote in law which means that the vote will not be counted in the calculation of votes for or against the resolution.
If no voting indication is given your proxy will vote or abstain from voting at his or her discretion.
Your proxy will vote or abstain from voting as he or she thinks fit in relation to any other matter which is put before the meeting.
Appointment of proxy by post The notes to the proxy form explain how to direct your proxy how to vote on each resolution or withhold their vote.
To appoint a proxy using the proxy form the form must be p completed and signed p sent or delivered to Neville Registrars the Registrar at 18 Laurel Lane Halesowen West Midlands B63 3DA and p received by the Registrar no later than 11.00am on 27 June 2018.
In the case of a shareholder which is a company the proxy form must be executed under its common seal or signed on its behalf by an officer of the company or an attorney for the company.
Any power of attorney or any other authority under which the proxy form is signed or a duly certified copy of such power or authority must be included with the proxy form.
If you have not received a proxy form and believe that you should have one or if you require additional proxy forms please contact the Registrar on 44 0tel.
Appointment of proxies electronically As an alternative to completing the hardcopy proxy formsite and completing the authentication requirements as set out on the proxy form.
For an electronic proxy appointment to be valid your appointment must be received by the Registrar no later than 11.00am on 27 June 2018.
Appointment of proxies through CREST CREST members who wish to appoint a proxy or proxies by utilising the CREST electronic proxy appointment service may do so for the meeting and any adjournments of it by using the procedures described in the CREST Manual available via site.
CREST Personal Members or other CREST 62 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING continued sponsored members and those CREST members who have appointed a voting service providers should refer to their CREST sponsor or voting service providers who will be able to take the appropriate action on their behalf.
In order for a proxy appointment made using the CREST service to be valid the appropriate CREST message a CREST Proxy Instruction must be properly authenticated in accordance with Euroclear UK and Ireland Limiteds EUI specifications and must contain the information required for such instructions as described in the CREST Manual.
The message regardless of whether it constitutes the appointment of a proxy or is an amendment to the instruction given to a previously appointed proxy must in order to be valid be transmitted so as to be received by the Registrar ID 7RA11 no later than 11.00am on 27 June 2018 or in the event of an adjournment of the meeting 48 hours before the adjourned meeting.
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message by enquiry to CREST in the manner prescribed by CREST.
After this time any change of instructions to proxies appointed through CREST should be communicated to the appointee through other means.
CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers should note that EUI does not make available special procedures in CREST for any particular message.
Normal system timings and limitations will therefore apply in relation to the input of CREST Proxy Instructions.
It is the responsibility of the CREST member concerned to take or if the CREST member is a CREST personal member or sponsored member or has appointed a voting service providers to procure that hisher CREST sponsor or voting service providers takes such action as shall be necessary to ensure that a message is transmitted by means of the CREST system by any particular time.
In this connection CREST members and where applicable their CREST sponsors or voting service providers are referred in particular to those sections of the CREST Manual concerning practical limitations of the CREST system and timings.
The Company may treat as invalid a CREST Proxy Instruction in the circumstances set out in Regulation a of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001.
Appointment of proxy by joint members n the case of joint holders where more than one of the joint holders completes a proxy appointment only the appointment submitted by the most senior holder will be accepted.
Seniority is determined by the order in which the names of the joint holders appear in the Companys register of members in respect of the joint holding the firstnamed being the most senior.
Changing proxy instructions hareholders may change proxy instructions by submitting a new proxy appointment using the methods set out above.
Note that the cutoff time for receipt of proxy appointments see above also apply in relation to amended instructions any amended proxy appointment received after the relevant cutoff time will be disregarded.
Where you have appointed a proxy using the hardcopy proxy form and would like to change the instructions using another hardcopy proxy form please contact the Registrar on 44 0tel.
If you submit more than one valid proxy appointment the appointment received last before the latest time for the receipt of proxies will take precedence.
Termination of proxy appointments shareholder may change a proxy instruction but to do so you will need to inform the Company in writing by p Sending a signed hard copy notice clearly stating your intention to revoke your proxy appointment to Neville Registrars at 18 Laurel Lane Halesowen West Midlands B63 3DA.
In the case of a shareholder which is a company the revocation notice must be executed under its common seal or signed on its behalf by an officer of the company or an attorney for the company.
Any power of attorney or any other authority under which the revocation notice is signed or a duly certified copy of such power or authority must be included with the revocation notice.
The revocation notice must be received by the Registrar no later than 11.00am on 27 June 2018.
If you attempt to revoke your proxy appointment but the revocation is received after the time specified your original proxy appointment will remain valid unless you attend the meeting and vote in person.
Corporate representatives corporation which is a shareholder can appoint one or more corporate representatives who may exercise on its behalf all its powers as a member provided that no more than one corporate representative exercises powers over the same share.
Issued shares and total voting rights s on 6pm at 27 April 2018 the Companys issued share capital comprised 2567675463 ordinary shares of 0.1p each.
Each ordinary share carries the right to one vote at a general meeting of the Company and therefore the total number of voting rights in the Company is 2567675463.
The Companys website site will include information on the number of shares and voting rights.
Notification of shareholdings ny person holding 3% or more of the total voting rights of the Company who appoints a person other than the Chairman of the Annual General Meeting as their proxy will need to ensure that both they and their proxy comply with their respective disclosure obligations under the Disclosure Rules and Transparency
63 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 Governance Strategic report Financial statements Questions at the meeting ny member attending the meeting has the right to ask questions.
The Company must answer any question you ask relating to the business being dealt with at the meeting unless p answering the question would interfere unduly with the preparation for the meeting or involve the disclosure of confidential information p the answer has already been given on a website in the form of an answer to a question or p it is undesirable in the interests of the Company or the good order of the meeting that the question be answered.
Nominated persons f you are a person who has been nominated under section 146 of the Companies Act 2006 to enjoy information rights Nominated Person p You may have a right under an agreement between you and the shareholder of the Company who has nominated you to have information rights Relevant Shareholder to be appointed or to have someone else appointed as a proxy for the meeting. the Relevant Shareholder to give instructions to the Relevant Shareholder as to the exercise of voting rights.
Company including any administrative matters.
The only exception to this is where the Company expressly requests a response from you.
Documents on display opies of the service contracts of the executive directors and the nonexecutive directors contracts for services are available for inspection at the Companys registered office during normal business hours and at the place of the meeting from at least 15 minutes prior to the meeting until the end of the meeting.
Communication xcept as provided above shareholders who have general queries about the meeting should use the following means of communication no other methods of communication will be accepted p Contact the Company by email to email You may not use any electronic address provided either p in this notice of annual general meeting or p any related documents including the chairmans letter and proxy form to communicate with the Company for any purposes other than those expressly stated.
64 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 EXPLANATION OF RESOLUTIONS An explanation of each of the resolutions is set out below.
ORDINARY BUSINESS Resolutions 1 to 8 will be proposed as ordinary resolutions and will be passed if more than 50% of shareholders votes cast are in favour.
Resolution 1 To receive the 2017 Report and Accounts The directors of the Company the Directors must present their Annual Report and Accounts of the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 the Annual Report to shareholders for formal adoption at the Annual General Meeting.
Resolution 2 Directors remuneration report The Directors remuneration report is set out in the Annual Report.
In accordance with the provisions of the Act the Directors remuneration report is the Annual Report contains p a statement by the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee p the Directors remuneration policy in relation to future payments to the Directors and former Directors and p the Annual Report on remuneration which sets out payments made in the financial year ending 31 December 2017.
The statement by the Remuneration Committee Chairman and the Annual Report on remuneration will be put to an annual advisory shareholder vote by ordinary resolution.
Accordingly Resolution 2 is the ordinary resolution to approve the Directors remuneration report and Directors remuneration policy.
As it is an advisory vote it does not affect the actual remuneration paid to any Director.
Resolutions 3 to 5 To reelect the Directors Under the Companys articles of association one third of the Directors or if their number is not a multiple of three then the number nearest to but not less than onethird must retire from office and then stand for reelection.
Biographical details of directors to be reelected are set out in the Annual Report and are also available for viewing on the Companys website at site Resolutions 6 and 7 To reappoint the auditors and authorise the Audit Committee of the Board to determine their remuneration The Company is required to appoint auditors at each general meeting at which the annual accounts and report are to be laid before the Company to hold office until the conclusion of the next such meeting.
The Audit Committee has reviewed the effectiveness independence and objectivity of the external auditors BDO LLP  on behalf of the Board which now proposes their reappointment as auditors of the Company.
Resolution 7 also authorises the Audit Committee of the Board in accordance with standard practice to negotiate and agree the remuneration of the auditors.
SPECIAL BUSINESS As well as the ordinary business of the meeting outlined above a number of special matters will be dealt with at the Annual General Meeting.
Resolution 6 will be proposed as an ordinary resolution and will be passed if more than 50% of shareholders votes cast are in favour.
Resolution 9 will be proposed as a special resolution.
For this resolution to be passed at least 75% of shareholders votes cast must be in favour.
Resolution 8 Directors authority to allot shares At the 2017 Annual General Meeting held on 28 June 2017 the Directors were given authority to allot shares in the Company and Resolution 8 seeks to renew this authority for a period until the date which is 18 months after the date on which this resolution is passed or if earlier the date of the next annual general meeting of the Company.
This resolution would give the Directors authority to allot ordinary shares and grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares in the Company up to an aggregate nominal value of 778114.04.
This amount represents approximately onethird 33.33% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company as at 27 April 2018 the last practicable date prior to the publication of this document.
The Company does not currently hold any shares in treasury.
The extent of the authority follows the guidelines issued by institutional investors.
The Directors consider that it is appropriate for this authority and these powers to be granted to preserve maximum flexibility for the future.
Resolution 9 Disapplication of preemption rights Section 561 of the Companies Act 2006 gives all shareholders the right to participate on a prorata basis in all issues of equity securities for cash unless they agree that this right should be disapplied.
The effect of this resolution is to empower the Directors until the date which is 18 months after the date on which this resolution is passed or if earlier the date of the next annual general meeting of the Company to allot equity securities for cash without first offering them on a prorata basis to existing shareholders but only up to a maximum nominal amount of 233434.21 representing approximately 10% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital on 26 April 2018 being the latest practicable date before the date of this document.
In addition the resolution empowers the Directors to deal with fractional entitlements and any practical problems arising in any overseas territory on any offer made on a prorata basis.
The Directors consider that it is appropriate for this authority and these powers to be granted to preserve maximum flexibility for the future.
65 Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 COMPANY INFORMATION
Kanat Assaubayev Chairman
Aidar Assaubayev Chief Executive Officer
Sanzhar Assaubayev Executive Director Ashar Qureshi NonExecutive Director Neil Herbert NonExecutive Director Victor Scholnik NonExecutive Director
Rajinder Basra FCA Registered office and number Company number 28 Eccleston Square London SW1V 1NZ Telephone 44tel
Kazakhstan office 10 Novostroyevskaya Sekisovskoye Village
Telephone 7 0tel7 Fax 7 0tel3 Financial advisers and brokers
15 Eldon Street
EC2M 7LD Telephone 44tel Auditors to the Group BDO LLP 55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU Telephone 44tel BDO Kazakhstan LLP 6 Gabdullin St Almaty city
Registrars
Neville Registrars 18 Laurel Lane
West Midlands B63 3DA Telephone 44 0tel
Wragge Lawrence Graham and Co.
LLP
54 More London Riverside London SE1 2AU Telephone 44 0tel Cleary GottliebSteen and Hamilton LLP City Place House 55 Basinghall Street London EC2V 5EH Telephone 44tel
Natwest Bank plc London City Commercial Business Centre 7th Floor 280 Bishopsgate
EC2M 4RB LGT Bank Herengasse 12 FL9490 Vaduz
Telephone   Altyn plc Annual Report 2017 GLOSSARY OF TERMS Grade The tenor or concentration by weight of a metal in a mineral deposit or ore. masl Metres above sea level.
Tonne A metric tonne of 1000 kilograms. oz Troy ounce. gt Grammes per tonne of mineralised rock.
JORC code Australasian code for the reporting of exploration results mineral resources and ore reserves Joint Ore Reserves
See www. orc. rgmain.
Mineral resource A concentration or occurrence of solid material of economic interest in such form grade or quality and quantity that there are reasonable prospects for eventual economic extraction.
The location quantity grade or quality continuity and other geological characteristics of a Mineral Resource are known estimated or interpreted from specific geological evidence and knowledge including sampling.
Indicated resource That part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity grade or quality densities shape and physical characteristics are estimated with sufficient confidence to allow the application of Modifying Factors in sufficient detail to support mine planning and evaluation of the economic viability of the deposit.
Geological evidence is derived from adequately detailed and reliable exploration sampling and testing gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops trenches pits workings and drill holes and is sufficient to assume geological and grade or quality continuity between points of observation where data and samples are gathered.
An Indicated Mineral Resource has a lower level of confidence than that applying to a Measured Mineral Resource and may only be converted to a Probable Ore Reserve.
Inferred resource That part of a Mineral Resource for which quantity and grade or quality are estimated on the basis of limited geological evidence and sampling.
Geological evidence is sufficient to imply but not verify geological and grade or quality continuity.
It is based on exploration sampling and testing information gathered through appropriate techniques from locations such as outcrops trenches pits workings and drill holes.
An Inferred Mineral Resource has a lower level of confidence than that applying to an Indicated Mineral Resource and must not be converted to an Ore Reserve.
It is reasonably expected that the majority of Inferred Mineral Resources could be upgraded to Indicated Mineral Resources with continued exploration.
Ore reserve The economically mineable part of a Measured andor Indicated Mineral Resource.
It includes diluting materials and allowances for losses which may occur when the material is mined or extracted and is defined by studies at Pre Feasibility or Feasibility level as appropriate that include application of Modifying Factors.
Such studies demonstrate that at the time of reporting extraction could reasonably be justified.
The reference point at which Reserves are defined usually the point where the ore is delivered to the processing plant must be stated.
It is important that in all situations where the reference point is different such as for a saleable product a clarifying statement is included to ensure that the reader is fully informed as to what is being reported.
Probable reserve The economically mineable part of an Indicated and in some circumstances a Measured Mineral Resource.
The confidence in the Modifying Factors applying to a Probable Ore Reserve is lower than that applying to a Proved Ore Reserve.
Mineral inventory A term used to describe mineral resources and mineable reserves which are not static as additional resource delineation is not yet complete and engineering calculations are pending.
As such what might be a mineral resource today may be a mineable reserve tomorrow.
Altyn plc 28 Eccleston Square
