10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO Evolving GREA T IDEAS into WORLDCHANGING businesses IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Registration Number Stock Code IPO 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 INVESTMENT CASE The purpose of IP Group is to evolve great ideas into worldchanging businesses.
The IP Group team has spent many years developing its approach to identifying attractive intellectual property IP nurturing and building businesses around such IP and then providing capital and support along the journey from cradle to maturity.
We are pioneering in our approach including the concept of forming longterm partnerships with leading research universities passionate about what we do principled in how we work and committed to delivering results for all of our stakeholders.
The Group now has operations in the UK the US and Australasia and following the combination with Touchstone Innovations and capital raise in 2017 benefits from increased scale and critical mass a more diverse portfolio and access to 16.8% of the worlds Top Research.
Our portfolio which is currently valued at 1.1bn comprises holdings in over 150 companies covering a broad range of commercial innovations across the life sciences and technology.
We have a strong track record of success and are proud to have helped create and build some truly exciting businesses based on cuttingedge science.
Strength of partnerships with leading research institutions giving access to potentially disruptive IP around the world.
Businessbuilding expertise including executive search capital networks recruitment and business support.
Patient capital approach enabling the provision of funding from cradle to maturity unconstrained by traditional fixedlife VC fund approach.
Strong track record built over 15 years.
Balanced and maturing portfolio of exciting companies.
International exposure with growing businesses in US and Australasia.
Combination with Touchstone creates clear international sector leader.
Critical mass allows access to greater pool of capital.
Inhouse technology transfer capability to identify disruptive IP and help commercialise it.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Disclaimer This Annual Report and Accounts may contain forwardlooking statements.
These statements reflect the Boards current view are subject to a number of material risks and uncertainties and could change in the future.
Factors that could cause or contribute to such changes include but are not limited to the general economic climate and market conditions as well as specific factors relating to the financial or commercial prospects or performance of individual companies within the Groups portfolio.
Further details can be found in the Risk management section on pages 46 to 53.
Throughout this Annual Report and Accounts the Groups holdings in portfolio companies reflect the undiluted beneficial equity interest excluding debt unless otherwise explicitly stated.
Our business and strategy Chairmans summary 8 Market 11 Business model 14 Our strategy 16 Our performance Key performance indicators 18 Operational review 20 Portfolio review 23 Financial review 40 Risk management 46 Our business ethics and social responsibility 54 Highlights 1 QandA with the CEO 2 Group at a glance 4
Board of directors 62 Corporate governance statement 64 Committee reports Directors remuneration report Report of the audit and risk committee 100 Other statutory Directors report 105 Statement of directors responsibilities 107 Independent auditors report 110 Group primary statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 116 Consolidated statement of financial position 117 Consolidated statement of cash flows 118 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 119 Group notes Notes to the consolidated financial statements 120 Company statements Company balance sheet 167 Statement of changes in equity 168 Notes to the company financial statements 169 Company information 183 Strategic Report Business Overview Our Financials Our Governance Whats insidetel 1326.2 315.5tel Hard NAV Proceeds from sales of equity investments 1326.2m 2016 706.5m 2016 14.7m Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Business Overview Portfolio highlights y Net portfolio gains of 94.2m 2016 6.5m y Fair value of portfolio 1130.6m 2016 614.0m including 352.2m fair value of acquired Touchstone portfolio y Capital provided by IP Group to portfolio companies and projects 71.2m 2016 69.7m and 13.4m 2016 nil by Parkwalk Advisors.
2016 14.7m y Total funds raised by portfolio companies of 315m 2016 230m y Istesso commences Phase 2a clinical trials for its lead programme in Rheumatoid Arthritis and expands its RandD collaboration with Janssen y Autifony Therapeutics signs 627.5m collaboration agreement with Boehringer Ingelheim y Diurnal receives positive CHMP opinion for Alkindi a precursor to market launch for its first product in Q2 2018 Financial and operational highlights y Net assets 1508.5m 2016 768.7m y Hard NAV 1326.2m 2016 706.5m y Return on Hard NAV of 64.1m 2016 negative 7.6m Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs 73.2m 2016 negative 7.2m y Profit for the year 53.4m 2016 loss 14.8m y Gross cash and deposits 326.3m 2016 112.3m y Increased scale and critical mass through allshare combination with Touchstone integration progressing well y Acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd UKs leading growth EIS fund manager focused on university spinouts y Launch of IP Group Australasia nine new partnerships signed with leading universities in Australia and New Zealand y 181.0m net capital raise completed including significant new shareholders from Australia China Singapore and the UK Post period end highlights y Oxford Nanopore completes 100m financing round in March confirms orders of 23.5m in 2017 and signals 2018 order book to more than treble to 75m 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine QandA with the CEO 2017 has been a significant year for IP Group.
The underlying business has performed well and there have also been a number of individually important strategic transactions.
ALAN AUBREY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
2017 has been a significant year for IP Group.
The underlying business has performed well and there have also been a number of individually important strategic transactions.
The Group completed two corporate transactions the combination with AIM listed Touchstone Innovations plc in October and the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd in January.
Touchstone Innovations creates builds and invests in technology companies and licensing opportunities developed from scientific research from the Golden Triangle the geographical region broadly bounded by London Cambridge and Oxford and Parkwalk is the UKs leading university spinout focused EIS fund manager.
In addition IP Group completed a placing to raise 181.0m of new capital and extended its model into Australasia signing a landmark agreement with nine of Australasias leading universities the University of Adelaide Australian National University the University of Melbourne Monash University UNSW Sydney the University of Queensland the University of Sydney and the University of Western Australia in Australia and the University of Auckland in New Zealand.
The Group now has operations in three major geographic territories  the UK US and Australasia a stronger balance sheet and a large and diversified portfolio of exciting opportunities.
What are the main benefits of the combination with Touchstone
Our vision is to create an international leader in IP commercialisation with an enlarged platform for growth and investment.
The three most significant benefits to the Group of the combination with Touchstone are 1 increased scale and critical mass 2 further diversification of the Groups portfolio in terms of maturity and business sector and 3 further access to worldclass research including Londons Imperial College and University College
As a result of the transaction the Group now operates the technology transfer operation known as Imperial Innovations.
It also brings with it a number of experienced team members.
We continue to believe that an industry champion will be better placed to attract the best university partnerships the best scientific and commercial talent and a broader and deeper pool of investors.
By creating a stronger betterresourced company we can help more scientists develop commercial businesses and help prevent the flight of commercially viable enterprises that so often has to leave the UK and or seek takeover before they have achieved what they set out to do.
The transaction was declared wholly unconditional in October and Touchstone is consequently being integrated into the Group.
What is Imperial Innovations Imperial Innovations is Imperial College Londons Technology Transfer Office or TTO for short.
University TTOs are dedicated to identifying research which has potential commercial interest and to then helping commercialise it.
Following the Touchstone transaction Imperial Innovations is now a wholly owned operating unit of IP Group and effectively gives the Group a direct pipeline to the research being carried out at one of the worlds leading technical universities until mid2020.
Imperial
Innovations works with researchers at Imperial College London to help develop their novel research into new businesses products or services supporting the process of taking an idea from the lab into the market.
Imperial Innovations assesses inventions protects intellectual property through patents and other appropriate forms of IP protection provides advice on establishing proof of concept and may provide development funding or support inventors in their applications for funding from other sources.
Its
Venture Support Unit establishes new businesses finds mentors and management and provides access to preferred suppliers similar in a number of ways to IP Groups existing IP Assist function.
READ ABOUT OUR BUSINESS MODEL ON PAGES 14 TO 15 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Integration is often a challenge with acquisitions.
How have the first few months worked out with
We have been really encouraged by the level of engagement and commitment shown by employees in both IP Group and Touchstone Innovations.
After an initial review last Autumn it was clear that staff in both companies felt strongly that it was important to start working together as one team as quickly as possible and we therefore focussed on making this happen.
The integration process was overseen by a team comprising individuals from both IP Group and Touchstone and is now substantially complete.
We have simplified and streamlined our organisational structure by moving to a twosector model of Life Sciences and T echnology and will operate both divisions from one central London office.
Both the TTO and Parkwalk continue to be run as separate entities.
Are there any changes to IP Groups divisional reporting following the integration of the Touchstone portfolio As part of the integration we decided to move to a simpler 2sector model of Life Sciences and Technology rather than our previous four sector model of Healthcare Biotech Technology and Cleantech.
Going forward both the Life Sciences and Technology sector will be managed as partnerships comprising a Managing Partner responsible for its overall performance with a structure of partners investment directors and managers and analysts specialising in particular fields and companies.
In Life Sciences the Managing Partner is Dr Sam Williams and in Technology the Managing Partner is Dr Mark Reilly.
How has the Parkwalk acquisition helped IP Groups access to capital Founded in 2009 Parkwalk is the largest EIS growth fund manager focused on university spinouts having raised over 175m to date with the majority of funds coming from leading private wealth platforms and having backed over 80 companies across its managed funds since inception.
In 2017 alone Parkwalk committed over 70m to UK university spinouts investing alongside IP Group Touchstone Innovations Oxford Sciences Innovation and Cambridge Innovation Capital.
Parkwalk which recorded a net contribution of 1.6m for the period since acquisition has significant assets under management an experienced team and strong links to many of IP Groups existing university partners.
Its
Opportunities Fund the University of Cambridge Enterprise Funds the University of Oxford Innovation Funds and the University of Bristol Enterprise Funds.
What benefits do you expect from the recently established Australasian operations One of the main reasons for selecting Australasia in terms of expansion was that it scored very highly in meeting our criteria of longterm partnerships with leading research institutions alongside access to significant pools of local capital with a potentially longterm investment horizon.
It is still early days in the region for us but we now have a team in place led by Dr Mike Molinari who has been appointed to the position of Managing Director.
Its a return to IP Group for Dr Molinari who was previously a Director of IP Groups IP Capital business in London.
He rejoins from Brandon Capital one of Australias leading life science investors with 500M under management where he was an Investment Manager.
Alistair
McCreadie has been appointed Chief Investment Officer Asia Pacific and Dr Peter Grant who is IP Group plcs Managing Director for New Business and Partnerships is Chairman of the Australian subsidiary.
This team will focus on building up the Australian and New Zealand operations as IP Group deepens its engagement with its nine university partners in the region.
We have been encouraged by investors response to the move with new investors including Temasek and Telstra both joining IP Groups share register through our fundraising last Summer and an AU100m global coinvestment mandate being agreed with Hostplus.
The team has identified an attractive pipeline of opportunities and anticipates making initial investments in 2018.
READ ABOUT OUR PORTFOLIO ON PAGES 23 TO 39 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Business Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Group at a glance A BALANCED PORTFOLIO WITH A STRONG RECORD OF GROWTH IP Group partners with leading research institutions in countries where leading research is produced.
The Group has three areas of geographic focus the UK the US and our recently formed business in Australasia.
In total the Group has access to RandD emanating from 32 universities or research institutions around the world comprising 18 in the UK 5 in the US and 9 in AustraliaNew Zealand.
IP Group has access to commercialisable intellectual property from universities whose academic staff have published 16.8% of the worlds Top Research.
The Directors therefore believe the Group is the international market leader in the emerging university IP commercialisation sector.
Technology
Life
Sciences
Life
Sciences
Technology
Multiple Sectors Multiple Sectors UNPARALLELED ACCESS TO GLOBAL RESEARCH HUBS UK THE GOLDEN TRIANGLE America THE AMTRAK CORRIDOR Australasia THE GO9 UNIVERSITIES y University of Adelaide y Australian National
Melbourne y Monash University y UNSW Sydney y The University of
Sydney y The University of Western Australia y The University of
READ ABOUT OUR PARTNERS IN OUR BUSINESS MODEL ON PAGES 14 TO 15 Xeros Technology Group Q Cell Medica P Circassia Q Actual Experience Q Ceres Power Holdings Q Diurnal Group Q PsiOxus Therapeutics P Istesso P Oxford Sciences Innovation P Oxford Nanopore P TOP 10 as at 31 December
Life Sciences Multiple Sectors Top 10 holdings by value mtel 1326.2 125.4pps 125pps 127pps 94pps 84pps IP Group Hard NAV By fair value By number of companies Excludes de minimis and organic holdings IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 4 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine AN ENLARGED GLOBAL BUSINESS IP Groups vision is to create an international leader in IP commercialisation with an enlarged platform for growth and investment.
The combination with Touchstone provides the Group with critical mass a betterbalanced portfolio across two main sectors as well as additional partnerships including Imperial College London where the business also operates the technology transfer operation known as Imperial Innovations.
Technology TOTAL
Value of companies in the portfolio 2017 net portfolio gains Number of portfolio companies
Development
Early stage Life Sciences 1038.4m Excludes 69.9m related to multisector platforms de minimis and organic portfolio holdings.
See page 27 for further details Includes 0.5m gains relating to multisector platforms Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Business Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 6
To build and maintain a pipeline of compelling intellectual propertybased opportunities 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our business and strategy Chairmans summary 8 Market 11 Business model 14 Our strategy 16 Our performance Key performance indicators 18 Operational review 20 Portfolio review 23 Financial review 40 Risk management 46 Our business ethics and social responsibility 54 STRATEGIC REPORT Stock Code IPO site 7 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Chairmans summary The Group now has operations in three major geographic territories  the UK US and Australasia  a stronger balance sheet and a large and diversified portfolio of exciting opportunities MIKE HUMPHREY CHAIRMAN
I am pleased to report a year of substantial progress at IP Group in 2017.
The underlying business performed well with some notable commercial progress within the portfolio while at a corporate level IP Group completed a number of individually significant strategic transactions.
The Group now has operations in three major geographic territories  the UK US and Australasia a stronger balance sheet and a large and diversified portfolio of exciting opportunities.
Corporate transactions 2017 was a busy period in terms of corporate transactions for the Group.
In June the Group formally launched an allshare offer for Touchstone Innovations plc a company which creates builds and invests in technology companies and licensing opportunities developed from scientific research from the Golden Triangle the geographical region broadly bounded by London Cambridge and Oxford.
The combination gives us critical mass a betterbalanced portfolio and additional partnerships.
The transaction was declared wholly unconditional in October and Touchstones portfolio people and operations have been integrated into the Group.
In May IP Group announced a 181.0m net capital raise and welcomed new shareholders from Australia China Singapore and the UK.
The funding allows the Group to accelerate growth by investing in new and existing portfolio companies build on its pool of valued scientific and commercial talent and attract further investors and coinvestment partners.
It also furthers the transformation underway by expanding the Groups share register and by further extending its model into Australasia.
TIMELINE
JANUARY 2017 Completed the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 8 Combination with T ouchstone Innovations Launch of Australasian operations Acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine In February we completed the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd.
2016.
Founded in 2009 Parkwalk is the UKs leading university spinout focused EIS fund manager.
We are delighted to have the team on board and Parkwalk recorded a net contribution of 1.6m for the period since acquisition while coinvesting in six IP Group portfolio companies.
Expansion into Australasia IP Group was also delighted to announce a landmark agreement with Australasias leading universities in 2017 which will see at least A200m invested in finding and developing companies involved in disruptive innovation.
The commercialisation agreements the first of their type in Australasia were signed with nine universities the University of Adelaide Australian National University the University of Melbourne Monash University UNSW Sydney the University of Queensland the University of Sydney and the University of Western Australia in Australia and the University of Auckland in New Zealand.
The
Group committed to invest at least A200m over a 10year period to fund investments in spinout companies based on the intellectual property IP developed by academics at the nine universities generated from research in areas such as digital medicine new medical therapies and quantum computing.
Key portfolio events Turning to the portfolio I would draw out a few highlights.
During the year Diurnal received positive CHMP opinion for its Alkindi product followed by market authorisation in February 2018 paving the way for Diurnal to become the first IP Group company to launch a new therapeutic in Europe which is anticipated in Q2 2018.
Istesso commenced Phase 2a clinical trials for its lead MBS2320 programme in Rheumatoid Arthritis and expanded its RandD collaboration with Janssen.
Autifony Therapeutics Ltd a Touchstone Innovations company announced it had signed a 627.5m collaboration agreement with Boehringer Ingelheim.
And finally once again Oxford Nanopore has shown significant commercial progress during the period with the company recently announcing that 2017 order intake had increased approximately threefold to 25.3m with an expectation for a similar level of growth in 2018 and a number of product developments including the launch of the GridION x5.
In addition our portfolio companies continue to attract significant external funding raising approximately 315m of new capital this year.
Significant fund raisings included AIMquoted Tissue Regenix Group plc 40m Actual Experience plc 17.5m and among the private companies Ultrahaptics Ltd 17.9m and Creavo Medical Technologies 13.4m.
MAY 2017 OCTOBER 2017 IPG announced the result of 181m net capital raising with new shareholders from Australia China Singapore and the UK and the launch of IP2IPO Australia with commercialisation agreements with nine leading Australian and New Zealand research universities Offer for Touchstone Innovations goes wholly unconditional IPG announced an offer to acquire Touchstone Innovations plc Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our business and strategy 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Financial performance In terms of financial performance the Group continues to build on its strong track record.
In 2017 IP Groups portfolio delivered a solid performance with net assets excluding goodwill and intangibles Hard NAV totalling 1326.2m 2016 706.5m with the fair value of the portfolio increasing to 1130.6m 2016 614.0m and resulting in a reported profit of 53.4m 2016 14.8m loss.
The Group ended the year with gross cash and deposits of 326.3m 2016 112.3m.
I must stress however that our business model remains long term in nature and while our objective is to generate long term value for stakeholders portfolio company valuations and therefore our results can and do fluctuate from year to year.
Changes to the Board At Board level there have been two changes this year.
In October we were delighted to welcome Professor David Begg as a nonexecutive director following the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc where he was a nonexecutive director.
Professor Begg joined Touchstone Innovations plc from Imperial College London where he was Professor of Economics and Principal of the Business School from 2003 until 2012.
He also acted as Vice Provost for Research for the
During his earlier career he held a number of distinguished advisory and academic appointments including Professor of Economics at Birkbeck College Visiting Fellow at the Reserve Bank of Australia and Visiting Professor at M.
Economic Policy Advisor in the Bank of England.
Doug Liversidge CBE retired from his position as a nonexecutive director of the Company at the end of 2017.
Mr Liversidge served on the Board in a nonexecutive capacity since March 2014 following IP Groups acquisition of Fusion IP plc where he was
He was also the Groups Senior Independent Director a role that Professor Begg agreed to take on from the beginning of 2018.
Mr Liversidge made an important contribution to the Groups growth and I would like to thank him for his commitment and wise counsel over the past four years.
Summary
The business made substantial progress in 2017 leaving IP Group well positioned for 2018 and beyond.
I would like to welcome all our new colleagues and partners to the Group this year and to thank staff academic partners and portfolio companies for their commitment and contribution to this positive performance.
As ever I would also like to extend the Boards thanks to all our stakeholders for their continued support without whom none of this would be possible.
With a larger and maturing portfolio and an expanded pipeline of opportunities around the world we look to the rest of the year with continued confidence.
MIKE HUMPHREY
Chairmans summary CONTINUED IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 10 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
The purpose of IP Group is to evolve great ideas into worldchanging businesses.
IP Group is a leading intellectual property commercialisation company which focuses on evolving great ideas mainly from its partner universities into worldchanging businesses.
The Group has pioneered a unique approach to developing these ideas and the resulting businesses by providing access to business building expertise capital through its 100%owned FCAauthorised subsidiaries IP Capital and Parkwalk Advisors networks recruitment and business support.
The Directors consider that the Group is operating and competing in two major areas.
Firstly the Group competes for access to great ideas with significant commercial potential.
The Group primarily sources these ideas from a network of worldleading academic research institutions frequently those with which it has a longterm partnership arrangement.
Secondly the Group competes for capital to develop these great ideas into viable businesses against other investment opportunities.
While the market for capital is very broad and deep the Groups companies are typically seeking earlierstage and development risk capital.
Challenges facing the developed and developing world today One of IP Groups core beliefs is that overcoming many of the worlds common problems will require multiple scientific solutions.
The common challenges facing the developed and developing world include issues such as ageing population climate change resource scarcity energy availability and storage rapid urbanisation health challenges and increasing digitisation.
Historically many of the solutions to these global problems have come from fundamental RandD carried out in the worlds leading research universities and institutions.
IP Group believes that this will continue to be the case and therefore the Directors feel the Groups work of helping commercialise cuttingedge science is of such importance.
The search for solutions IP Group partners with major leading research institutions in countries where research is produced.
The Group has three areas of geographic focus the UK the US and our recently formed business in Australasia.
In total the Group has access to RandD emanating from 32 universities or research institutions around the world comprising 18 in the UK 5 in the US and 9 in AustraliaNew Zealand.
IP Group has access to intellectual property from universities whose academic staff have published 16.8% of the worlds Top Research.
The Directors therefore believe the Group is the international market leader in the emerging university IP commercialisation sector.
The Groups core business remains the UK which has been further reinforced by the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc.
IP Group does however continually assess potential opportunities in other territories that satisfy its criteria including longterm partnerships with leading research institutions and good access to both capital and entrepreneurial talent.
Economic backdrop The overall economic backdrop has a significant bearing on the Groups ability to pursue its strategic objectives.
In the shorter term financial market volatility and investor risk appetite impacts access to capital for the development of spinout companies which in turn can affect the likelihood of achieving exits and can influence the periodic valuations of holdings in portfolio companies.
Over the longerterm Government spending on fundamental RandD as well as policy support towards the commercialisation of IP are key areas affecting the Groups business model.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our business and strategy 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Market CONTINUED In this context these are uncertain times both economically and politically particularly following events including the UKs vote to leave the European Union and the economic policy changes made and under consideration in the US.
Global economic activity however has been strengthening with the International Monetary Fund forecasting a global growth rate for 2018 of 3.9%.
The forecast for strong growth is a result of upward revisions to the EU and for many parts of Asia though it also includes downward revisions for both the US and UK.
While the ongoing European Union exit negotiations may have an impact on the Groups business IP Group is actively mitigating this through diversification to both research and capital.
The Group has a burgeoning business in the US and in 2017 established operations in Australasia.
In addition the Group has taken steps to broaden its shareholder register and now counts several large global investors among its shareholder base.
Global research landscape Globally the US remains the worlds largest RandD investor with nearly 463bn of gross domestic RandD expenditures in 2015 according to the OECD.
This exceeded by almost onequarter the amount of RandD performed in the Peoples Republic of China 377m the secondlargest performer which is just over the combined level of the EU28 area 346m.
However concerns remain that a potential decline in government funding of science and technology research in some countries could pose a threat to innovation.
The OECD Science Technology and Innovation Outlook 2016 published in December 2016 noted expenditure on RandD by universities and public research institutes in OECD countries began flattening out in 2010 following three decades of growth as other policy priorities such as state pensions health and social care absorbed a growing share of public resources.
UK landscape In the UK where IP Group is predominantly based and where it has partnerships with 18 leading UK universities including access to innovation from both the universities of Oxford and Cambridge the Government has announced a package of measures designed to support innovation and drive economic growth.
The Governments 4.7bn stimulus package for science and innovation was increased in the Autumn Statement 2016.
The Government stated that this will grow by a further 2.3bn of additional spending in 202122 taking total direct RandD spending to 12.5bn per annum by 202122.
Stressing that research and development is a key driver of economic growth and a vital part of the Governments Industrial Strategy the UK Government also announced that it would review the tax environment for RandD to ensure the system is strongly proinnovation to make the UK an even more competitive place to carry out RandD.
The UK Government also concluded its review of long term investment into British firms.
The
Patient Capital review led by the Treasury looked at how to remove the obstacles to getting long term investment into innovative firms.
The results from the consultation with leading industry figures included references to the significant need for patient capital and various ways to increase government support such as through publicprivate partnerships and tax incentives.
It is also worth noting that the government has recently extended the applicability of its Enterprise Investment Scheme in the 2017 Autumn budget including an increase to the upper annual limit of funding that each company can take.
Competitive landscape The number of companies and organisations seeking to commercialise intellectual property andor provide capital to spinout companies from universities and researchintensive institutions in the UK has increased in recent years.
Further the Group continues to face the risk of competition in new geographies in which it seeks to operate.
When approaching new opportunities potential funders including the Group will often act in a collaborative manner through syndication of investment.
However there are also occasions when IP Group may need to participate in a competitive process to obtain an interest in a particular technology.
READ ABOUT OUR BUSINESS MODEL ON PAGES 14 TO 15 Top Research classified as the top 10% of publications cited globally.
Includes the top 200 universities by volume of Top Research 20122015 based on data from the Leiden University Rankings 2017.
Includes UK US and Australasian partnerships including Oxford and Cambridge through strategic holdings in Oxford Sciences Innovation and Cambridge Innovation Capital and University College London through interest in UCL Technology Fund.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 12 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP GROUPS KEY DIFFERENTIATORS Operations in three core geographic hubs UK US and Australasia Breadth of partnerships with leading research institutions giving access to 16.8% of the worlds T op Research T echnology transfer capability to identify disruptive IP and to enable its transfer from research lab to commercial entity Businessbuilding expertise including executive search administrative support capital sourcing and innovative portfolio board and CEO programmes Patient capital approach enabling the provision of funding from cradle to maturity unconstrained by artificiality of fixed life funds International shareholder and coinvestor network Strong track record built over 15 years The Group and its portfolio companies regularly compete with a range of technology and other businesses when seeking capital for the development of their business models.
The competition for capital and for opportunities on occasion can come from a wide variety of entities including y specialist traditional venture capital investors y large private institutional investors y privately managed schemes based on government funding y private individuals both acting individually or collectively as groups such as business angel networks crowdfunding platforms or through beneficial tax mechanisms such as SEIS EIS and VCTs in the UK y direct public funding for example the EU level JEREMIE fund and other national and local schemes and y universities and researchintensive institutions seeking to raise private sector funding themselves to support their inhouse technology commercialisation activities.
IP Groups approach to building businesses is one of the ways in which it differentiates itself from more traditional venture funds.
The Group actively supports the development of its portfolio companies through access to earlystage businessbuilding expertise interim executive support technical and commercial networks and senior team recruitment and development in addition to the provision of capital.
In addition the Group provides operational legal business and company secretarial support to its companies with a view to minimising the most common administrative factors that can contribute to earlystage company failure.
The Group has also successfully carried out several innovative programmes to accelerate company growth including working with CEOs and company boards to improve performance.
In the UK the Group also considers taxadvantaged Enterprise Investment Scheme EIS funds to be an increasingly important source of financing for early stage technology companies and has seen a strong operating performance from its new subsidiary Parkwalk the UKs largest EIS growth fund manager focused on university spinouts which has strong links to leading institutional wealth managers and university partners.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our business and strategy 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Business model Evolving great ideas into worldchanging businesses.
The Group pioneered the concept of the longterm partnership model with UK universities and has spent many years honing a unique approach to building businesses and providing support along the journey from cradle to maturity.
The team is the primary interface between the Group and the universities and focuses on mining and evaluating very earlystage opportunities and then developing and shaping them into businesses.
Our specialist earlystage inhouse executive search team recruits experienced and high calibre individuals to lead our businesses alongside founders and IP Group team members.
SELECTION
IP Groups specialists work closely with our university partners to identify promising research and to create and build businesses around this research.
Working with technology transfer teams and academics we assess initial disclosures for their potential commercial viability alongside possible exploitation pathways.
INCUBATION
Typically a company will be set up owned by the academic team the university and any other founders.
IP will be transferred in and an initial investment made with IP Group represented on the Board and typically taking a handson approach.
Time and capital are then deployed to develop the ideas to an early commercial prototype and beyond with stringent milestones put in place.
SEED
Engagement with potential customers is sought and feedback used to direct effort.
As milestones are met further investment is released while commercial and technical teams are expanded.
As the company shows signs of traction an investment case is made for seed funding to accelerate growth.
LONGTERM PATIENT CAPITAL
OPPORTUNITY
OUR SUPPORTING
Our sector experts take a handson role in businessbuilding working closely with founders to shape strategic direction and frequently taking an interim commercial management role.
SECTOR EXPERTISE SECTOR EXPERTISE STARTUP PHASE SCALEUP PHASE IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 14 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine We systematically help create build and support outstanding intellectual propertybased companies in order to provide attractive returns for all our stakeholders.
Our specialist fund management and corporate advisory business seeks to create value for the Groups portfolio companies primarily by supporting their access to capital as well as providing advice on corporate finance matters including MandA.
We provide operational legal and business support including company secretarial to our portfolio companies with a view to minimising the most common administrative factors that can contribute to early stage company failure.
IP Impact has created two innovative programmes to accelerate company growth working with CEOs and company boards to improve performance.
POSTSEED and BEYOND As companies mature IP Group continues to offer support and can help inform discussions around further funding as well as exit strategies whether trade sale or IPO.
We take an active role in company development to help growth the value of the asset over time.
Sustainable Value Financial returns New company creation Solutions to global challenges Purposeled employment opportunities LONGTERM PATIENT CAPITAL
SECTOR EXPERTISE SCALEUP PHASE DELIVERING Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our business and strategy 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our strategy OUR STRATEGIC AIMS To create and maintain a pipeline of compelling intellectual propertybased opportunities y Provided capital for the first time to 21 companies or projects 10 UK and 11 US 2016 20911 y 15year partnership agreements signed with Go9 leading Australian and New Zealand universities y First spinout opportunities completed under US agreements with the University of Washington and The Johns Hopkins University y Business combination with Touchstone Innovations providing worldclass technology transfer operation with Imperial College and links to UCL To develop and support these opportunities into a diversified portfolio of robust businesses y Maintained board representation on approximately 70% of companies by number y IP Exec team placed 14 senior executives with portfolio companies of which six were chair appointments and three were nonexecutive director appointments y IP Capital completed seven successful portfolio company financing engagements y Completed a significant follow on funding round in US portfolio y Continued to provide other support services including business support and legal advice to 53 spinout companies y Portfolio fair value increased to 1130.6m with net portfolio gains of 94.2m y Portfolio excluding de minimis holdings multisector platforms and organic holdings of 155 companies 133 UK 22 US To deliver attractive financial returns on our assets and thirdparty funds y Generated net portfolio gains of 94.2m y Provided 71.2m of capital to 79 distinct portfolio investments y Completed the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations and Parkwalk Advisors y Generated proceeds from sale of equity and debt of 6.6m y Portfolio now stands at 155 companies and three multi sector investments with a combined total value of approximately 5bn y Total funds under management of approximately 241.9m WHAT WE DID IN 2017 TO ADDRESS OUR OBJECTIVES Systematically building businesses IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 16 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine y Maintain a similar level of new opportunity formation in the UK and US y Create first new opportunities from Australasian partner universities y Maintain existing US and UK partnerships.
Continue to explore potential partnerships with further worldclass universities on a case by case basis y Optimise approach of IP Group and Touchstone across combined Group y Increase value of portfolio company holdings through handson support and development y Replicate our successful UK support model in the US and Australasia through the provision of local business support IP Exec and IP Capital offerings y Seek to maintain approach of direct IP Group representation on spinout company boards y Increase the number of executive search mandates within IP Exec and assist portfolio companies to increase diversity of boards y Complete capital raising mandates for certain portfolio companies requiring finance from nonGroup sources y Continue to provide specialist support services such as IP Exec IP Impact IP Assist and corporate finance advice y Seek to continue net longterm increase in portfolio value and net assets y Assist directly or indirectly portfolio companies to access public and private markets to raise development capital y Where appropriate generate cash realisations from portfolio y Generate attractive performance in Groups managed funds y Substantially exit IP Venture Fund holdings OBJECTIVES FOR 2018 y Number of new portfolio companies READ MORE ON PAGES 18 TO 19 y Purchase of equity and debt investments y Change in fair value of equity and debt investments READ MORE ON PAGES 18 TO 19 y Total equity y Profitloss attributable to equity holders y Proceeds from sale of equity investments y Change in fair value of equity and debt investments READ MORE ON PAGES 18 TO 19 LINK TO KPIS Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our business and strategy 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Key performance indicators FINANCIAL KPIS FURTHER DESCRIPTION 2017 PERFORMANCE STRATEGIC ELEMENT RISKS POTENTIALLY IMPACTING KPI LINK TO PERFORMANCERELATED DIRECTOR REMUNERATION Total equity net assets The value of the Groups assets less the value of its liabilities including minority interest 1508.5m 2016 768.7m To grow the value of our assets and those we manage on behalf of third parties and deliver attractive financial returns from these assets LTIP 2015  2017 Profitloss attributable to equity holders Profitloss after tax for the year attributable to owners of the parent 2016 13.5m Portfolio fair value movement has the most material impact on this figure which also reflects corporate expenses.
Measures the development of portfolio companies and return on our assets annual incentive Purchase of equity and debt investments The total level of capital deployed from the Groups balance sheet into portfolio companies during the year 2016 69.7m Build and maintain a pipeline of IPbased opportunities and develop these into robust businesses Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above Net portfolio gains Movement in the value of holdings in the portfolio due to share price movements or impairments in value and realisations 2016 6.5m To develop IPbased businesses and grow their value Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above Proceeds from sale of equity investments The total amount received from the disposal of interests in portfolio companies 2016 14.7m Cash from proceeds can be used for redeployment into the portfolio or for new opportunities Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above NONFINANCIAL KPIS Number of new portfolio investments The number of portfolio investments that received initial capital from the Group during the year 2016 20 Build and maintain a pipeline of IPbased opportunities and develop these into robust businesses Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above Access to capital 1 Personnel 4 Earlystage company returns 2 Macroeconomic conditions 5 University partnerships 3 Legislation and regulation 6
Measuring our performance focusing on delivery against our strategy IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 18 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine FINANCIAL KPIS FURTHER DESCRIPTION 2017 PERFORMANCE STRATEGIC ELEMENT RISKS POTENTIALLY IMPACTING KPI LINK TO PERFORMANCERELATED DIRECTOR REMUNERATION Total equity net assets The value of the Groups assets less the value of its liabilities including minority interest 1508.5m 2016 768.7m To grow the value of our assets and those we manage on behalf of third parties and deliver attractive financial returns from these assets LTIP 2015  2017 Profitloss attributable to equity holders Profitloss after tax for the year attributable to owners of the parent 2016 13.5m Portfolio fair value movement has the most material impact on this figure which also reflects corporate expenses.
Measures the development of portfolio companies and return on our assets annual incentive Purchase of equity and debt investments The total level of capital deployed from the Groups balance sheet into portfolio companies during the year 2016 69.7m Build and maintain a pipeline of IPbased opportunities and develop these into robust businesses Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above Net portfolio gains Movement in the value of holdings in the portfolio due to share price movements or impairments in value and realisations 2016 6.5m To develop IPbased businesses and grow their value Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above Proceeds from sale of equity investments The total amount received from the disposal of interests in portfolio companies 2016 14.7m Cash from proceeds can be used for redeployment into the portfolio or for new opportunities Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above NONFINANCIAL KPIS Number of new portfolio investments The number of portfolio investments that received initial capital from the Group during the year 2016 20 Build and maintain a pipeline of IPbased opportunities and develop these into robust businesses Indirectly impacts both net assets and Group profitloss See above FOR MORE INFORMATION ON OUR STRATEGY SEE PAGES 16 TO 17 FOR MORE INFORMATION ON OUR RISK
SEE PAGES 46 TO 53 FOR MORE INFORMATION ON OUR REMUNERATION SEE PAGES 80 TO 99 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Operational review The Board continues to believe the fundamentals of the business remain strong and appeal to an increasingly broad set of international investors.
ALAN AUBREY CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
2017 was an important year for IP Group which has seen a period of intense corporate activity including the transaction with Touchstone Innovations plc.
The integration of the two businesses was a key operational focus throughout the latter part of the year that has continued into 2018.
The combination added a maturing portfolio of 45 new companies to the Group which we have fair valued at 352.2m on completion.
This compares to Touchstones last audited accounts at 31 July 2017 which reported a portfolio fair value of 461.1m.
These businesses complement our existing portfolio companies while presenting growth opportunities across our newly formed life sciences and technology sectors.
Further information on the companies added through the Touchstone combination is included in the portfolio review on pages 38 to 39.
Throughout 2017 we have remained focussed on delivering attractive returns from the portfolio delivering net portfolio gains of 92.4m resulting from a combination of technical and commercial progress in our portfolio companies and successful fundraising transactions.
Included in the former category were gains from Istesso Limited 45.1m.
Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 27.8m Ceres Power Holdings plc 13.5m and Diurnal Group plc 9.4m while in the latter category were gains in Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 11.8m and Creavo Medical Technologies Limited 5.3m The most significant fair value reductions were seen in a small number of the Groups AIMquoted portfolio companies including hVIVO plc 15.0m Tissue Regenix Group plc 11.8m and Applied Graphene Materials plc 3.8m.
In addition there were write downs in a small number of existing IP Group private companies 10.0m.
During 2017 the Group provided 71.2m of incubation seed and development capital to 79 portfolio companies 2016 58.8m capital excluding multi sector platforms 55 companies.
Significant portfolio company transactions and developments Notable highlights in the portfolio in 2017 included LIFE S C IENC ES This year saw the transition of our single asset drug discovery company Istesso Limited formerly Modern Biosciences plc from a subsidiary to a portfolio company resulting in a 45.1m profit on deconsolidation.
We have operated Istesso Limited as a subsidiary since 2007 as it has progressed its MBS2320 lead product through product development and into the clinic however it has always been our intention to spin out the business once it had achieved a significant value inflection point.
Following the commencement of MBS2320s Phase 2a clinical trial in rheumatoid arthritis in partnership with Johnson and Johnson we recruited two industryexpert nonexecutive directors in the latter half of the year as part of the establishment of an independent board for the company.
In combination with a reduction in the Groups voting rights and a restructuring of debt funding the business the company is now recognised in our portfolio rather than as a consolidated subsidiary.
The Groups largest holding Oxford Nanopore made significant commercial progress in the year.
Oxford
Nanopore is the company behind the worlds only portable realtime DNARNA sequencer the MinION.
Its goal is to enable the analysis of any living thing by any person in any environment  to disrupt multiple IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 20 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Strategic Report Our performance scientific and industrial markets.
Oxford Nanopore is now entering its third commercial year and has reported having a customer base of thousands of MinION users mostly in the scientific research community.
The company also introduced larger formats in the year  GridION and PromethION  that start to access the higherthroughput end of the sequencing market.
The company reported that orders for its products have trebled to 23.5m in 2017 and with an expectation of 75m for 2018.
The validity of this valuation assessment was confirmed in March 2018 on completion of a 100m fundraising with the addition of a group of major new investors from Singapore China and Australia.
Another significant fair value gain of 9.4m came from AIMlisted Diurnal Group plc one of the Groups most advanced biotech assets.
Diurnal has two products either in or having completed Phase 3 studies Infacort and Chronocort for the treatment of the childhood and adult forms of adrenal insufficiency respectively and anticipates market launch for its first product in Q2 2018.
Among the larger assets it was encouraging to note a positive impact from Circassia Pharmaceuticals plc a Touchstone Innovations plc company where positive share price performance led to a 4.2m fair value gain from the date of acquisition to the year end.
Another
Touchstone company Autifony Therapeutics signed a 627.5m collaboration agreement in December with Boehringer Ingelheim in respect of its voltage gated potassium channel modulator platform including for the treatment of schizophrenia.
TECHNOLOGY
The most valuable holding in the Technology portfolio AIMlisted Ceres Power Holdings plc made excellent commercial progress in the year resulting in a positive movement in Ceres share price which translated to a 13.5m gain for the
The companys annual results announced in October showed revenue increase ahead of expectations and up 140% from last year to 4.1m 2016 1.7m while in September Ceres announced the successful conclusion of a oneyear field trial in homes in the UK.
The results showed that the Ceres SteelCell technology is reliable and could reduce annual household energy costs by 400 and carbon emissions by up to 2 tonnes per year.
Finally the company announced that it has secured its fifth OEM partner in a preclose trading update in December.
Four of our other key technology assets all completed substantial fundraisings in 2017 each involving high quality new institutional shareholders.
More detail on the performance of our assets is contained in the portfolio review.
North America In North America IP Group Inc. momentum positioning the business well for 2018.
We finished the year with eight institutional relationships five with prominent universities and three with US Department of Energy Laboratories.
Collectively these institutions represented 7.9bn 5.9bn in total annual RandD spending with four of the universities in the top 10 for annual RandD expenditure and notable for conducting worldleading research across a broad range of life and physical science disciplines.
Initial
BetterClouds Argonne National Laboratory and Lorem Johns Hopkins University.
We also continued our incubation of new technologies at our mature partnerships Penn 2 Princeton 1 Columbia 2 NREL 1 PNNL 2.
Stock Code IPO site 21 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Operational review CONTINUED By the end of the year our team in North America had grown to 15 representing more than 13 advanced degrees including six PhDs.
The team has continued to work directly with our research partners in high touch engagement to develop a deep pipeline of future opportunities and to advance the existing portfolio of exciting companies 22 in total so far.
The North American business has established a portfolio that continues to attract strong US investor interest from both financial and strategic investors.
During 2017 we continued to see strong external validation and support for our US portfolio.
To date our portfolio has attracted 11m of external investment.
Exyn Technologies University of Pennsylvania in January 2018 raised 3m from new investors and Lumiode Columbia University received an investment from a large c.
60bn US strategic investor.
In September Cynash Inc.
Pacific
Northwest National Laboratories commercialised three technologies from the Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate through its Transition to Practice program creating a novel cyberdefence technique and introducing the new cybersecurity solution to the marketplace.
CARMA
Therapeutics University of Pennsylvania was voted one of the top 20 life science startups to watch in 2018 by industry trade publication BioSpace.
In November the Group hosted its third annual Hard Science Innovation Forum in Philadelphia showcasing more than 16 investments to more than 200 investors academics politicians and partners.
This event comprised panel discussions that examined investing in innovation advancements in oncology research AI robotics and drone technology.
Australasiathe Far East In Australasia the Group was excited to launch a landmark agreement with Australasias leading universities under which it anticipates investing at least AU200m c. companies involved in disruptive innovation.
The
1010year agreements with the Group of Eight Go8 universities in Australia and Auckland University in New Zealand are the first of their kind and provide for the Group to gain access to the intellectual property generated by academics at the partner universities.
The Go8 comprises Australias eight leading research Universities  The University of Melbourne The Australian National University The University of Sydney The University of Queensland The University of Western Australia The University of Adelaide Monash University and the University of NSW.
Each of the nine partner universities in Australasia is consistently ranked in the top 150 institutions worldwide and each year spend in excess of A6bn c.
3.5bn on research.
On the capital side the Group was delighted to welcome TelstraSuper a significant Australian superannuation fund with AU19 billion under management to the Groups shareholder register as part of the capital raising.
In addition it is pleased to be working with Hostplus one of Australias largest superannuation funds with over AU30 billion in funds under management who has committed AU100m to a global coinvestment mandate with the Group and who made its first investment as part of Oxford Nanopores March 2018 financing.
Following the appointment of the senior team for our Australasian business in October we have identified what we consider to be an attractive pipeline of opportunities and anticipate making initial investments in 2018.
The Group also held Deep Tech Forum events in Shenzhen and Beijing in China bringing together ten of our portfolio companies Oxford Nanopore Tissue Regenix Istesso Diurnal Ceres Power Eight 19 Medaphor Creavo Xeros Mirriad and over 300 Chinese private equity and venture capital investors corporate representatives and government bodies.
The event was aimed at capitalising on strong Chinese investor interest in the IP Group story and the innovative companies we help build and resulted in many new relationships investment and business opportunities and strategic collaboration opportunities both for the Group and our portfolio companies.
Outlook
The Board continues to believe the fundamentals of the business remain strong and appeal to an increasingly broad set of international investors.
While it remains important to consider the Group as a longterm business where results can fluctuate from year to year IP Group has a maturing portfolio of exciting assets as well as an expanded pipeline of opportunities around the world.
The Group also has a sound balance sheet a strong core business in the UK and exciting emerging opportunities in both the US and Australasia.
These factors combined with a number of anticipated value inflection points this year particularly in our life sciences portfolio means we look to the rest of the year with continued confidence.
Excluding a further 39 organic holdings and 42 de minimis holdings Of the fair value gains noted above the following amounts are attributable to the third party limited partners in the consolidated fund IPVF II Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 2.0m Creavo Medical Technologies Limited 0.9m 1.73 AUDGBP at 31 December 2017 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 22 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio Review Our portfolio Significant enhancements to size and maturity
At 31 December 2017 the value of the Groups portfolio had increased to 1130.6m from 614.0m in 2016 as a result of the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plcs portfolio of 352.2m the fair value movements set out below and a net investment of The portfolio now consists of interests in 155 companies 133 UK and 22 US strategic holdings in three multisector platform businesses as well as a further 42 de minimis holdings and 39 organic holdings 2016 903200.
Of these 155 holdings the 20 most valuable portfolio companies account for 65% of the total portfolio value 2016 76%.
During the year to 31 December 2017 the Group provided preseed seed and postseed capital totalling approximately 71.2m to its portfolio companies 2016 In contrast to the prior year in which there were large investments made into the Groups multi sector platform holdings this year the investments have been more broadly spread across the portfolio.
The Directors continue to believe that the Groups ability to utilise its capital to maintain its equity interests in its most promising companies will contribute to significant potential fair value increases in the portfolio over the medium to long term.
The Group deployed capital into 21 new companies or projects during the year 2016 20 ten of which were sourced from the UK 2016 13 and 11 from the US 2016 seven.
Both geographies have again provided consistent pipelines of opportunities helping to further diversify the portfolio geographically.
In addition to this organic growth the Groups portfolio increased substantially in size following the acquisition of T ouchstone Innovations plc in October 2017.
This transaction resulted in the addition of 45 new actively managed investments a further 39 organic investments and 27 investments which are considered de minimis.
These investments fall relatively evenly by number across the Groups two sectors Life Sciences and T echnology and help to diversity the Groups portfolio with the proportion of the portfolio represented by Oxford Nanopore Technologies falling from 40.1% in 2016 to 24.4% at the end of 2017.
The acquisition has contributed eight of the Groups 20 largest investments by yearend value.
Two companies were sold during the year 2016 three two were acquired by existing portfolio companies and a further two companies with a total historic cost of 2.9m were closed or fully provided against 2016 four 4.8m.
During the year cash proceeds from the realisation of investments were 6.6m 2016 14.7m with a further 1.0m received after the yearend.
The proceeds received during the year were primarily driven by the disposal of interests in Puridify Limited and Plaxica Limited cash received post yearend related to the sale of Theysay Limited in December 2017.
Prior year realisations predominantly arose from the cash received from the sales of Tracsis plc Gold Standard Simulations Limited and Summit Therapeutics plc.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review Performance summary A summary of the Income Statement gains and losses which are directly attributable to the portfolio is as follows Unrealised gains on the revaluation of investments Unrealised losses on the revaluation of investments Effects of movement in exchange rates Change in fair value of equity and debt investments Gainloss on disposals of equity investments Gain on deconsolidation of subsidiary Net portfolio gains 94.2 6.5 The most significant contributors to unrealised gains on the revaluation of investments Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 27.8m Ceres Power Holdings plc 13.5m Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 11.8m and Diurnal Group plc 9.4m.
The major contributors to the unrealised losses on the revaluation of investments were hVivo plc 15.0m Tissue Regenix Group plc 11.8m and Applied Graphene Materials plc 3.8m.
The performance of the Groups holdings in companies quoted on AIM saw a net unrealised fair value decrease of 1.0m 2016 decrease of 36.1m while the Groups holdings in unquoted companies experienced a net fair value increase of 49.9m 2016 increase of 43.1m in addition to a 45.1m gain in respect of the deconsolidation of Istesso Limited formerly Modern Biosciences plc and its recognition as a portfolio company.
Since the yearend i.
AIM market experienced a net fair value decrease of Investments and realisations The Groups overall rate of capital deployment increased during 2017 with a total of 71.2m being deployed across 79 new and existing projects 2016 58.8m excluding the 7.5m and 3.4m strategic investments into OSI and CIC 55 projects.
The average level of capital deployed per company decreased from 1.2m to 0.9m in 2017.
Excluding the Groups participation in Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limiteds 2016 financing round and Oxford Sciences Innovation plcs 2016 financing round the average investment per company was 0.7m in 2016.
Cash invested by company stage was as follows Focus 33.7 39.0 Development 29.1 10.8 Early stage 8.4 9.0 Total 71.2 58.8 Multisector platforms  10.9 Total purchase of equity and debt investments 71.2 69.7 Cash proceeds from sales of equity investments 6.6 14.7 Net investment 64.6 55.0 The Development stage group includes other businesses to which the Group has provided in excess of 0.5m as principal investor or in excess of 1.0m of funding in conjunction with other significant investors.
Although each business can vary significantly in its rate and manner of development such additional funding is generally used to progress towards key milestones and commercial validation to build senior level capability in the business and to attract experienced nonexecutive directors to their boards.
Earlystage companies include both incubation and seed opportunities.
Incubation opportunities comprise businesses or preincorporation projects that are generally at a very early stage of development at most within three years since the Groups first financing and have received at least one stage of funding.
Opportunities at this stage usually involve capital of less than 0.2m from IP Group predominantly allowing for proof of concept work to be carried out.
Seed businesses are those that have typically received financing of up to 1m in total primarily from the Group in order to continue towards agreed commercial and Of the fair value gains noted above the following amounts are attributable to the third party limited partners in the consolidated fund IPVF II Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 2.0m.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 24 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine technology milestones and to enable the recruitment of management teams and early commercial engagement.
Portfolio companies which are classed as being in the Focus stage are those which comprise the largest 20 investments by value excluding multisector platform companies.
In 2016 Focus investments were those in which the Groups holding had a fair value in excess of 4m and this change has been made following the acquisition of Touchstone and the resulting larger portfolio.
Finally the multisector platform companies in which the Group has taken a strategic stake operate a similar business model of sourcing and developing university spinouts typically from a single institution.
These companies include Oxford Sciences Innovation plc OSI and Cambridge Innovation Capital plc CIC.
Those companies which either do not progress beyond the incubation stage within three years of the Groups initial funding andor whose value has subsequently fallen to below 0.1m but remain as operating businesses are classed as de minimis holdings.
Organic holdings are investments in which the Group has acquired a shareholding upon creating the company via our technology transfer relationship with Imperial College London but in which we have not actively invested.
Since its inception in May 2013 IP Venture Fund II IPVFII the 30m venture capital successor fund to IP Venture Fund has invested alongside the Group in 27 companies spunout from IP Groups university partnerships and other collaborations.
At
31 December 2017 IPVFII had invested 15.6m into spinout companies from incubation stage through seed and postseed stage 2016 10.6m with an investment ratio of 3070 IP Venture Fund II IP
Further IP Group holds a 33% interest in IP Venture Fund II.
In complying with IFRS 10 the Group consolidates the assets liabilities and results of IPVFII.
In order to reflect meaningful information to its shareholders the detailed sectoral analysis tables included in this Portfolio review reflect the Groups economic interest in portfolio company holdings including an estimate of its look through interest via IPVFII which as noted above is calculated as one third of IPVFIIs holdings in such companies.
The minority interest ownership i. within those tables.
During the year 21 opportunities received initial incubation or seed funding 2016 19 and no companies received initial postseed funding 2016 one.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON LIFE SCIENCES SECTOR SEE PAGES 30 TO 33 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review CONTINUED Portfolio analysis by stage of company maturity At 31 December 2017 the Groups portfolio fair value of 1130.6m was distributed across stages of company maturity as follows
As at 31 December 2017 As at 31 December 2016 Fair value Number Fair value Number m % % m % % Focus 709.6 68% 19 12% 463.5 86% 19 21% Development 307.2 30% 84 54% 58.7 11% 32 36% Earlystage 21.6 2% 52 34% 19.2 3% 39 43% Total 1038.4 100% 155 100% 541.4 100% 90 100% Multisector platforms 62.9  3  62.5  3 De minimis holdings 1.3  42  0.9  20 Organic 5.7  39 Total Portfolio 1108.3  239  604.8  113 Attributable to third parties Gross Portfolio 1130.6 614.0 The amount attributable to third parties consists of 16.3m attributable to minority interests represented by third party limited partners in the consolidated fund IPVFII 5.7m attributable to Imperial College London and 0.3m to other third parties 2016 9.2m nil nil.
Of the 155 companies in the Groups portfolio 52% 2016 76% of the fair value resides in the ten most valuable companies excluding multisector platforms and the Groups holdings in these businesses are valued at a total of 573.8m 2016 418.2m.
The total value of the Groups 155 portfolio companies excluding multisector platforms organic investments and de minimis holdings calculated by reference to the Groups holding in such companies and grossed up to reflect their total value is now in excess of 4bn or approximately 5bn including the Groups three holdings in multisector platform companies Oxford Sciences Innovation plc Cambridge Innovation Capital plc and Frontier IP Group plc 2016 2.7bn 3.3bn.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON THE TECHNOLOGY SECTOR SEE PAGES 34 TO 35 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 26 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio analysis by sector The Group funds spinout companies based on a wide variety of scientific research emerging from leading researchintensive institutions and does not limit itself to funding companies from particular areas of science.
The Group splits its core opportunity evaluation investment and business building team into two specialist divisions Life Sciences and Technology.
This is a departure from previous years when the management of the portfolio was split between Healthcare Biotech Technology and Cleantech and the change has been made as part of the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc.
The sectors formerly known as Healthcare and Biotech now constitute the Life Sciences sector while those formerly known as Technology and Cleantech now constitute the Technology sector.
Where the Group invests in businesses that cannot be classified within these divisions primarily those portfolio companies which also invest in other opportunities they are recorded in a separate sector as shown below.
Together these three sectors make up the Groups university partnership business segment.
An update on the other two operating segments is included in the financial review on pages
As at 31 December 2017 As at 31 December 2016 Fair value Number Fair value Number m % % m % % Life Sciences 704.4 68% 73 47% 375.4 69% 39 43% Technology 334.0 32% 82 53% 166.0 31% 51 57% Total 1038.4 100% 155 100% 541.4 100% 90 100% Multisector platforms 62.9  3  62.5  3 De minimis holdings 1.3  42  0.9  20 Organic 5.7  39 Total Portfolio 1108.3  239  604.8  113 Attributable to third parties Gross Portfolio 1130.6 614.0 The amount attributable to third parties consists of 16.3m attributable to minority interests represented by third party limited partners in the consolidated fund IPVFII 5.7m attributable to Imperial College London and 0.3m to other third parties 2016 9.2m nil nil.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review CONTINUED COMPANY NAME DESCRIPTION Sector Quoted Q Unquoted U %
Fair value of Group holding at 31 Dec
Innovations
Net investment divestment ii Fair value movement and fees settled in equity iii Fair value of Group holding at 31 Dec Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Enabling the analysis of any living thing by any person in any environment Life Sciences U 19.6% 246.3   27.8 274.1 Oxford Sciences Innovation plc University of Oxford preferred IP partner under 15year framework agreement
Istesso Limited Reprogramming metabolism to treat autoimmune disease Life Sciences U 61.1%   51.1  51.1 PsiOxus Therapeutics Limited Oncolytic viral therapeutics for cancer Life Sciences U 26.3%  44.5   44.5 Diurnal Group plc Novel treatments of hormone deficiency Life Sciences Q 44.7% 29.3   9.4 38.7 Ceres Power Holdings plc World leading developer of next generation fuel cell technology Technology Q 25.4% 18.0   13.5 31.5 Actual Experience plc Optimising the human experience of networked applications Technology Q 22.2% 23.4  1.5 3.5 28.4 Circassia plc Developing a range of novel immunotherapies Life Sciences Q 8.0%  22.5  4.2 26.7 Cell Medica Limited T cell therapeutics for oncology Life Sciences U 24.6%  20.6 5.7  26.3 Xeros Technology Group plc Polymer bead cleaning systems Technology Q 10.9% 20.2  2.0 3.6 25.8 Autifony Limited Developing high value novel medicines to treat CNS diseases Life Sciences U 26.4%  23.9   23.9 Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited Contactless haptic technology feeling without touching Technology U 31.0% 8.0  4.0 9.8 21.8 Mirriad Advertising plc Native invideo advertising for postproduction ad placement Technology Q 27.7% 13.4  3.7 0.6 16.5 Featurespace Limited Leading predictive analytics company Technology U 27.9%  15.6   15.6 Ieso Digital Health Limited Live online cognitive behavioural therapy Life Sciences U 49.5%  10.2 4.5  14.7 Creavo Medical Technologies Limited Quantum cardiac imaging technology Life Sciences U 39.5% 6.6  3.2 4.6 14.4 Veryan Medical Limited Development and commercialisation of novel 3D stent technology for the peripheral vasculature Life Sciences U 46.1%  11.7 2.3  14.0 First Light Fusion Limited Net methodology for achieving extreme intensity cavity collapse Technology U 34.9% 13.9    13.9 Tissue Regenix Group plc Regenerative dCELL soft tissue body parts Life Sciences Q 13.1% 20.6  5.0 11.8 13.8 Topivert Limited Small molecule therapeutics for G1 and Ophtha indications Life Sciences U 29.6%  13.8   13.8 Other companies 138 companies 148.8 183.4 28.5 18.4 342.3 De minimis investments 0.8   0.2 1.0 Value not attributable to equity holders 9.2 6.0 3.4 3.7 22.3 The following table lists the value movements attributable to the largest twenty portfolio investments by value which represent 69.0% of the total portfolio value 2016 85.1%.
Additional detail on the performance of these companies is included in the Life Sciences and Technology portfolio reviews.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 28 Represents the Groups undiluted beneficial economic equity interest excluding debt including the portion of IPVFIIs stake attributable to the Group.
Voting interest is below 50%.
Includes 51.1m movement in respect of the deconsolidation of Istesso Limited and recognition as a portfolio company.
Includes 0.5m fees settled in equity.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine COMPANY NAME DESCRIPTION Sector Quoted Q Unquoted U %
Fair value of Group holding at 31 Dec
Innovations
Net investment divestment ii Fair value movement and fees settled in equity iii Fair value of Group holding at 31 Dec Oxford Nanopore Technologies
Enabling the analysis of any living thing by any person in any environment Life Sciences U 19.6% 246.3   27.8 274.1 Oxford Sciences Innovation plc University of Oxford preferred IP partner under 15year framework agreement
Istesso Limited Reprogramming metabolism to treat autoimmune disease Life Sciences U 61.1%   51.1  51.1 PsiOxus Therapeutics Limited Oncolytic viral therapeutics for cancer Life Sciences U 26.3%  44.5   44.5 Diurnal Group plc Novel treatments of hormone deficiency Life Sciences Q 44.7% 29.3   9.4 38.7 Ceres Power Holdings plc World leading developer of next generation fuel cell technology Technology Q 25.4% 18.0   13.5 31.5 Actual Experience plc Optimising the human experience of networked applications Technology Q 22.2% 23.4  1.5 3.5 28.4 Circassia plc Developing a range of novel immunotherapies Life Sciences Q 8.0%  22.5  4.2 26.7 Cell Medica Limited T cell therapeutics for oncology Life Sciences U 24.6%  20.6 5.7  26.3 Xeros Technology Group plc Polymer bead cleaning systems Technology Q 10.9% 20.2  2.0 3.6 25.8 Autifony Limited Developing high value novel medicines to treat CNS diseases Life Sciences U 26.4%  23.9   23.9 Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited Contactless haptic technology feeling without touching Technology U 31.0% 8.0  4.0 9.8 21.8 Mirriad Advertising plc Native invideo advertising for postproduction ad placement Technology Q 27.7% 13.4  3.7 0.6 16.5 Featurespace Limited Leading predictive analytics company Technology U 27.9%  15.6   15.6 Ieso Digital Health Limited Live online cognitive behavioural therapy Life Sciences U 49.5%  10.2 4.5  14.7 Creavo Medical Technologies Limited Quantum cardiac imaging technology Life Sciences U 39.5% 6.6  3.2 4.6 14.4 Veryan Medical Limited Development and commercialisation of novel 3D stent technology for the peripheral vasculature Life Sciences U 46.1%  11.7 2.3  14.0 First Light Fusion Limited Net methodology for achieving extreme intensity cavity collapse Technology U 34.9% 13.9    13.9 Tissue Regenix Group plc Regenerative dCELL soft tissue body parts Life Sciences Q 13.1% 20.6  5.0 11.8 13.8 Topivert Limited Small molecule therapeutics for G1 and Ophtha indications Life Sciences U 29.6%  13.8   13.8 Other companies 138 companies 148.8 183.4 28.5 18.4 342.3 De minimis investments 0.8   0.2 1.0 Value not attributable to equity holders 9.2 6.0 3.4 3.7 22.3 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review LIFE SCIENCES Significant commercial and scientific progress across the portfolio in 2017 DR SAM WILLIAMS MANAGING PARTNER LIFE SCIENCES Review of the year Oxford Nanopore The Groups largest holding Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ltd made tremendous commercial progress in the year.
Oxford Nanopore is the company behind the worlds only portable real time DNARNA sequencer the MinION.
Its goal is to enable the analysis of any living thing by any person in any environment  to disrupt multiple scientific and industrial markets.
Oxford Nanopore is now entering its third commercial year and has reported having a customer base of thousands of MinION users mostly in the scientific research community.
The company also introduced larger formats in the year  GridION and PromethION that start to access the lucrative higherthroughput end of the market.
Increasing numbers of publications and talks indicate expanding uses for their disruptive sequencing technology including the introduction of a new direct RNA sequencing method.
This does not require reverse transcription or amplification and delivers fulllength RNA transcripts both highly compelling properties.
It is estimated that about half the 3 billion research sequencing market is composed of RNA analysis.
As well as being used in scientific research progress is being made towards applied markets such as diagnostics agriculture food safety water testing biologics production and education.
For example reports emerged of a major international food company developing nanopore technology for food safety a study to evaluate the MinION in rapid identification of hospital acquired pneumonia work on rapid diagnosis of TB and other infectious diseases and pilot projects to identify plant pathogens rapidly in rural areas.
Oxford Nanopore consolidated significant improvements in the performance of its technology most notably on accuracy and the yields of data customers can achieve by implication making the technology cheaper per base.
This marked a transition from an emerging technology with novel features such as portability realtime data direct analysis and simple preparation to a technology that was also competitive on traditional metrics.
In 2017 Oxford Nanopore noted that it required a performance of 50Gb per PromethION Flow Cell in order to release the product to customers.
This was achieved in December 2017 and early in the New Year the Company reported achieving 150Gb of data from a single PromethION Flow Cell approaching the requirement for two 30X human genomes on a single consumable PromethION is designed to run up to 48 Flow Cells at any time.
These increased yields correspond to a lower cost per Gb for customers a key competitive metric but also the ability to deliver realtime long read nanopore sequencing data at large scale required for human plant or population studies.
Early results from customers indicates examples of 70Gb per PromethION Flow Cell and we await further news with interest.
In addition the release of new chemistries software and other materials has resulted in a consensus accuracy level of 99.98% when using certain tools  sufficient to serve most of the research market applications.
The Company has spoken in presentations about its intended pathway to the highest levels of consensus accuracy.
IP Groups Life Sciences portfolio comprises 73 companies worth 704.4m as at 31 December 2017.
This includes an additional 23 companies valued at 235.8m following the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 30 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine While Oxford Nanopore is private and does not report its financial results the CEO remarked in a recent interview that the company anticipates 300% year on year growth of its order book.
We look forward to updates in particular noting y the companys anticipated growth in China having launched its technology there in late 2017 the company has noted rapid growth in custom in customer laboratories.
Instruments are already placed with numerous labs and the company has noted that it is now shipping early Flow Cells to participants in its early access programme y with GridION and PromethION further emergence of much larger datasets for example in big game projects in human genetics cancer research and plant genetics.
In 2018 Oxford Nanopore announced its pathway to a sub 1000 genome unveiled the Flongle which will offer smaller singleuse consumables for rapidresult tests in the lab or in the field and also introduced MinIT which eliminates the need for a dedicated laptop for nanopore sequencing with MinION.
Finally the company announced it had successfully defended a lawsuit with PacBio.
In November 2016 PacBio filed a Complaint with the International Trade Commission ITC alleging that Oxford Nanopore infringed two of PacBios patents and seeking to prevent Oxford Nanopore from selling its product in the United States.
The ITC Commission has made a Final Determination affirming the Administrative Judges decision that Oxford Nanopore has not infringed PacBios patents and also found that there was no violation of 19 U.
1337 and terminated the ITC investigation.
Based on the significant commercial and scientific progress made in the year and the fact that the companys previous financing round was greater than twelve months prior to the balance sheet date the Group reviewed the value of its holding resulting in an increase of 12% or 27.8m as at 31 December 2017.
This validity of the valuation assessment was confirmed in March 2018 by the completion of the companys 100m fundraising from significant new investors.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Other significant portfolio company updates The largest gain for the Group came from the deconsolidation of Istesso Limited formerly Modern Biosciences plc and its recognition as a portfolio company which resulted in a 45.1m profit on deconsolidation.
Istesso now the third largest company in the portfolio also made considerable progress in 2017 with its lead product MBS2320 moving into Phase 2a studies in rheumatoid arthritis while demonstrating good safety and tolerability in Phase 1.
In addition changes in biomarkers of disease observed in a small patient cohort in the Phase 1 were observed that were consistent with the drugs mechanismofaction.
Another significant gain of 9.4m came from Diurnal Group plc one of the Groups most advanced biotech assets.
Diurnal has two products in Phase 3 studies Infacort and Chronocort for the treatment of the childhood and adult forms of adrenal insufficiency respectively.
During 2017 the company took significant steps towards the eventual market launch of both these Phase 3 products.
These include the signing of a marketing and distribution agreement for both products in Israel with Israels leading commercial group for niche healthcare products the launch of a European patient access programme for Infacort in collaboration with Clinigen Group plc and the dosing of a foodeffect study for Infacort as the first step in its Phase 3 registration programme in the US.
In December Diurnal announced that the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use CHMP an advisory committee of the European Medicine Agency EMA issued a positive opinion to the European Commission EC recommending Alkindi development programme name Infacort hydrocortisone granules in capsules for opening as replacement therapy for paediatric adrenal insufficiency AI.
In February 2018 Diurnal was granted a paediatric use marketing authorisation PUMA from the EC and anticipates first launch of Akindi R is anticipated in Q2 2018.
Among the larger assets it was encouraging to note a positive impact from Circassia Pharmaceuticals plc a Touchstone Innovations plc company where positive share price performance led to a 4.2m gain.
Another company from the Touchstone stable Autifony Therapeutics Ltd also signed a 627.5m collaboration agreement in December with Boehringer Ingelheim about certain aspects of its voltage gated potassium channel modulator platform.
Autifony a UKbased biotechnology company formed in 2011 as a spin out from GSK with investment from Touchstone Innovations plc is focused on the development of high value novel medicines to treat serious diseases of the central nervous system.
Boehringer Ingelheim now has an exclusive option to purchase Autifonys Kv3.13.2 positive modulator platform.
Included in the agreement is the lead compound AUT00206 a novel orally active small molecule that is currently being evaluated in two Phase Ib studies including one in patients with schizophrenia.
PsiOxus Therapeutics also from the Touchstone stable announced in December that the Clinical Trial Application for NG 348 an armed oncolytic virus for the treatment of solid tumours was approved and per the licensing agreement between the parties BristolMyers Squibb will make a US 15m milestone payment to PsiOxus.
Under the terms of the December 2016 agreement BristolMyers Squibb granted PsiOxus an upfront payment of 50m.
In aggregate PsiOxus is eligible to receive development regulatory and salesbased milestones of 936m as well as royalties on net sales.
Creavo Medical Technologies Limited provided a 5.3m fair value gain following a 13.7m fundraising in the first half of 2017.
The Company is developing and undertaking clinical trials on a 2017 FDA 510k approved device for diagnosing heart attacks which if the clinical trials it is undertaking prove successful envisages could save the NHS 200m per year.
Portfolio review LIFE SCIENCES IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 32 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Turning to more challenging matters weak share price performance from hVIVO plc translated to a 15m fair value reduction for the Group.
Addressing disappointment in clinical results earlier in the year Dr Trevor Phillips was appointed to the post of Executive Chairman.
Dr Phillips who will work closely with Chief Executive Kym Denny to refine and focus hVIVOs strategy has over thirty years experience in the pharmaceutical industry and has a proven track record in corporate development.
He was previously Chief Operations Officer and President of US Operations as well as a member of the Board at Vectura Group plc.
On the back of this we look forward to developments in 2018.
The Groups second largest fair value reduction of 11.8m came from Tissue Regenix Group plc.
In
2017 Tissue Regenix completed the acquisition of revenuegenerating and profitable CellRight Technologies LLC a US regenerative medicine business based in San Antonio Texas concurrent with a 40m fundraising.
The acquisition which helps to position the business as a leading commercial stage regenerative medicine company was considered cautiously by the market perhaps following the departure of Chief Executive Antony Odell and the companys Chief Financial Officer in the latter part of the year.
Nevertheless the new Chief Executive Steve Couldwell takes on the role with highly relevant experience overseeing the integration of Cellright Technologies and prioritising sales and RandD.
Most recently Mr Couldwell was Chief Operating Officer of Global Sanofi Biosurgery.
Prior to this he held several roles at Smith and Nephew including President Orthopaedics Europe and Senior VP Sales and Marketing of the Advanced Wound Management business.
Other positive developments in therapeutics included Avacta Group plc continues to advance the reagents and therapeutics side of its Affimers business demonstrating low immunogenicity in an exvivo study versus a reference monoclonal antibody and signing several reagentsdiagnostics deals with major biotechnology diagnostic players.
In the unquoted portfolio Karus Therapeutics Limited is now in Phase 1 trials for both of its lead cancer programmes.
Glythera Limited continued to demonstrate the advantages of its Antibody Drug Conjugate technology and began the buildout of its executive and nonexecutive team.
Finally the divisions newest company Microbiotica Limited which was founded in 2016 to exploit advances in microbiome science at the Sanger Institute in Cambridge made great progress during 2017 building out its team as well as replicating and expanding the scientific platform licensed from the Sanger.
In healthcare the Group participated in equity co investments in Oxford Drug Design Limited which is using AI technologies to identify novel gramnegative antibiotics Oxehealth Limited which has deployed its technology with a number of NHS Trusts to improve UK patient care particularly in the complex mental health arena and Alesi Surgical Limited which secured FDA 510k approval for its device to clear smoke in laproscopic surgery procedures and is now accelerating commercial activities.
There was also significant technical progress at OxSyBio Limited while Oxford based Genomics plc announced that it had entered into a strategically important collaborative deal with Biogen Inc. the U. biotech to work on multiple sclerosis MS.
Also over the summer Medaphor Group plc completed its acquisition of Healthcare AI specialist Intelligent Ultrasound Limited concurrent with a 5.5m placing while Cronin Group plc which is commercialising a platform to digitize chemistry announced it had acquired revenuegenerating OpenIOLabs a Cambridgebased specialist in developing hardware and software for scientific and industrial uses.
As part of the acquisition serial entrepreneur David Cleevely a founder of Abcam plc and Chairman of the Raspberry Pi Foundation joined the Board.
Working with the New Business and Partnerships team the team also completed or approved five new grub and seed investments continuing to ensure a steady pipeline of highgrowth opportunities as we head into 2018 and beyond.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review
Substantial fundraisings completed across the portfolio in 2017 alongside highquality institutional investors MARK REILLY MANAGING PARTNER TECHNOLOGY Review of the year
Several of the top Technology portfolio assets completed substantial fundraisings during 2017 each involving highquality new institutional shareholders.
In October Featurespace Ltd a Touchstone Innovations plc company and specialist in machine learning and fraud prevention completed a 16.5m funding round led by Highland Europe and supported by Worldpay Group plc and Invoke Capital.
The funding will enable Featurespace to drive revenues from its product platform and continue to expand internationally.
Featurespace was recently featured in the Deloitte UK Fast 50 a ranking of the UKs fastest growing technology companies.
February saw Actual Experience plc announce that it had raised 17.5m before expenses to support channel partners deploying the companys technology into a global enterprise customer base.
The company has now received its first production order from a channel partner for a major endcustomer and expects further orders to follow shortly.
Midair haptics pioneer Ultrahaptics hit a key commercial milestone during 2017 securing its first product royalty income.
The company announced a series B round of 17.9m in earlyMay to support global expansion and entry into the virtual and augmented reality markets.
IP Group participated in the round alongside new investors including Ultrahaptics distribution partner Cornes and Dolby Family Ventures.
Late in the year came the listing of Mirriad Advertising plc on AIM with the company raising gross proceeds of 26.2m.
The video advertising company made encouraging commercial progress during the year exemplified by the announcement of a major customer deal secured via partner Alibaba YouKu in China.
Elsewhere in the portfolio SAM Labs a Touchstone Innovations plc company announced the completion of a 6.75m Series A round of financing led by Touchstone Innovations and E15 Ventures to develop a number of new educational products that support its mission to inspire every student to discover the fun in coding and creating.
Positive news came also from Itaconix plc formerly Revolymer plc and Getech Group plc where new customer contracts were announced whilst there was also encouraging commercial progress at Perpetuum Limited as the company continues to deploy its train monitoring technology to rail operators around the world and at Anacail Limited whose technology is gaining increasing traction with large foodproducing companies.
The falling share price of Applied Graphene Materials plc led to a 3.8m fall in the value of the Groups holding which was the largest contributor to offsetting gains made elsewhere in the portfolio during the year but there is an opportunity for value recovery if the company can deliver commercial progress following its 9.0m placing completed in October.
IP Groups Technology portfolio comprises 82 companies worth 334.0m as at December 31 2017.
This includes an additional 22 companies valued at 115.2m following the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 34 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
In our Cleantech portfolio we focus on building outstanding sciencebased businesses that mitigate the impacts of climate change and other environmental challenges.
2017 has been the most successful year for Cleantech at IP Group with the portfolio achieving a fair value gain of 15.1m on a starting asset base of 74.4m.
This reflects strong commercial progress by our companies and continued improvement in investment market sentiment and political support.
AIMlisted Ceres Power Holdings plc made excellent commercial progress in the year resulting in a positive movement in Ceres share price which translated to a 13.5m gain for the Group.
The companys annual results announced in October showed revenue increase ahead of expectations up 140% from last year to 4.1m 2016 1.7m while in September Ceres announced the successful conclusion of a oneyear field trial in homes in the UK.
The results showed that the Ceres SteelCell technology is reliable and can reduce household energy costs by 400 and carbon emissions by up to 2 tonnes per year.
Finally the company announced that it has secured its fifth OEM partner in a preclose trading update in December.
Xeros Technology Group plc continued to develop additional applications for its polymer fabric processing technology and launched a new business model for its lead market of commercial laundry.
First
Light Fusion Ltd the Oxford spinout developing novel implosion processes that can achieve the high temperatures and compression necessary for fusion also made notable progress.
The company achieved its interim technology milestones set in the 22.7m August 2015 funding round three months ahead of schedule triggering the second tranche of funding of just under 9m.
It also recruited the former UK Government Chief Scientist Professor Sir David King to its advisory board.
In November Oxford Sciences Innovation plc acquired a stake in the company in a secondary transaction.
Azuri Technologies Ltd had another good year launching a programme to deliver 20000 PayGo solar home systems in Nigeria in January.
Azuri has secured strong backing from the Nigerian government for its plans and its programme in the country was announced by the Acting President HE Professor Yemi Osinbajo.
The company followed this up by securing a 5m debt facility from Standard Chartered in February and in March hit the milestone of 100000 unit sales achieved across 12 countries.
This progress has helped Azuri dramatically increase its turnover up from 2.5m in calendar 2016 to 8.7m in 2017.
Elsewhere despite some good engineering progress at Magnomatics Ltd the company has struggled commercially.
We have therefore written down the value of this asset by approximately 2m.
Since the yearend the Group has also exited its position in AIMquoted Ilika plc.
Founded in 2004 to develop highthroughput materials discovery technology the company has more recently focussed on developing solidstate battery technology.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review CONTINUED IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 36 MultiSector Platforms The Group has maintained its strategic stakes in its three multisector platform companies Oxford Sciences Innovation plc OSI Cambridge Innovation Capital plc CIC and Frontier IP Group plc.
The value of the Groups holdings in these companies remains largely unchanged during 2017 aside from a 0.4m gain in the Groups holding in AIMlisted Frontier IP Group plc as a result of an increase in its share price.
As a result of its 15year framework agreement with the University of Oxford OSI is the preferred intellectual property partner for the provision of capital to and development of Oxford spinout companies and is entitled to 50 per cent of the universitys founder equity in spinout companies.
SI has raised in excess of 580m to date and 2017 was another good year for OSI as the portfolio continued to develop with a further 20 companies being added to the portfolio at seed stage and the completion of the first Series A investments.
The number of investments now stands at 47 with a total portfolio value of 126m.
Net Asset Value per share has increased from 107.6p to 111.2p.
The most significant Series A investments were those of 17m in Diffblue and 20m in Vaccitech.
These investments were also pleasing as they attracted funds and world class companies who had not previously invested in Oxford including Goldman Sachs Google Ventures and just post yearend Sequoia China.
The quality and volume of the deal flow is a result of applying OSIs capital and expertise to the world leading science being conducted at the University.
With over 12000 academics and more than 480m being spent annually on research it is unlikely that the deal flow will reduce in the foreseeable future.
The quality of research has also been endorsed by the Times Higher Education supplement which has awarded Oxford the accolade of best research University in the world for the second year running.
Cambridge Innovation Capital CIC is a preferred investor for the University of Cambridge for the commercialisation of intellectual property created at the University under a 10year memorandum of understanding and a Cambridgebased investor in technology and healthcare companies from the Cambridge Cluster.
CIC has raised 125.0m to date.
In July CIC announced that it had committed a total of 40.0m 2016 19.0m into seven new and nine existing portfolio companies in the year ending March 2017.
By the end of 2017 CIC had invested 77.2m since inception in 23 companies.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Portfolio additions resulting from the Touchstone combination Below is a highlevel introduction to some of the investments that IP Group has gained exposure to following the combination.
PsiOxus Therapeutics Limited is an Oxfordbased immuneoncology company which has developed a patented platform for the systemic delivery of tumour targeted oncolytic immune therapeutics.
The company was founded in 2010 in its present form having been created by the merger of Imperial College London spinout Myotec Therapeutics with Oxford spinout Hybrid BioSystems.
PsiOxus
TumourSpecific ImmunoGene TSIGn therapy platform is based on the companys oncolytic virus enadenotucirev which has unique properties that allow it to be delivered systemically via intravenous administration and to replicate only in tumour cells.
The viruss anticancer capability can be further enhanced through arming  a process that involves the addition of new genes to the virus.
The armed TSIGn platform makes possible creation of a broad range of systemically delivered oncolytic immune therapeutics including oncolytic viruses that express one or more antibodies cytokines immunomodulatory proteins and nucleotide RNA based payloads.
In December 2017 the company received a 15m milestone payment pursuant to its licensing agreement with BristolMyers Squibb following the announcement that the Clinical Trial Application for NG348 an armed oncolytic virus for the treatment of solid tumours had been approved.
Cell Medica Limited develops manufactures and markets personalised cellular immunotherapeutics for cancer and infectious diseases.
It is committed to improving patients lives through the significant therapeutic potential of cellular immunotherapy.
Its
In December 2017 Cell Medica announced the appointment of industry leader
Annalisa Jenkins as Chair of the Board of
Dr.
Annalisa Jenkins is a life sciences business and thought leader with over 25 years of biopharmaceutical industry experience in advancing programs from scientific research through clinical development regulatory approval and into healthcare systems globally.
In March 2017 the company raised 60m in a funding round with 13.7m committed by Touchstone Innovations alongside coinvestors Invesco Asset Management and Woodford Investment Management.
Circassia Pharmaceuticals plc is a worldclass specialty pharmaceutical business focused on respiratory disease.
It has a growing commercial organisation to promote its innovative asthma management products directly to specialist physicians.
It markets the COPD product Tudorza in the US and has a pipeline of asthma and COPD treatments in development.
In February 2018 it received a multiyear Innovative Technology contract for its NIOX VERO asthma management products from Vizient Inc. care company in the United States.
Circassias NIOX VERO range is used to assist asthma diagnosis and management and is based on the discovery that patients with Th2 or type 2 driven airway inflammation the major underlying cause of asthma generally have higher than normal levels of nitric oxide in their exhaled breath.
By measuring the concentration of this fractional exhaled nitric oxide FeNO NIOX enables clinicians to evaluate airway inflammation in patients with underlying asthma aiding diagnosis and helping guide treatment and reduce exacerbations.
Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Portfolio review CONTINUED IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 38 Autifony Therapeutics Limited is a company focused on the development of high value novel medicines to treat serious diseases of the central nervous system.
The company was founded in 2011 as a spinout from GlaxoSmithKline by Charles Large and Giuseppe Alvaro previously Directors in GSKs Neuroscience Centre of Excellence for Drug Discovery.
Autifony is backed by Touchstone Innovations SV Life Sciences Pfizer Venture Investments International Biotechnology Trust PLC and UCL Business.
In
December 2017 the company signed a EUR627.5m agreement with Boehringer Ingelheim about certain aspects of Autifonys voltage gated potassium channel modulator platform.
Featurespace Limited is an Adaptive Behavioural Analytics company which has developed a machine learning software platform the behaviour analytics engine ARIC that enables the identification of abnormal behaviour in highvolume realtime applications such as online betting and credit card transactions.
Featurespaces software which is based on Bayesian statistics and research undertaken at the University of Cambridge delivers significant economic benefits to customers by providing a granular view of transactions which allows them to predict likely fraud and take appropriate action.
For example for a UK credit card company it reduced fraud loss by 40% and cut the ratio of false positives to genuine rejections from 231 to 61.
The company raised 16.5m in a funding round during October 2017 led by investor Highland Europe and supported by Worldpay Group plc and Invoke Capital.
Mission Therapeutics Limited was founded in 2011 to commercialise expert research into the ubiquitin pathway for the treatment of cancers and non malignant disease.
It has built a worldleading platform for the discovery and development of first inclass small molecule drugs that selectively target deubiquitinating enzymes DUBs  an emerging and hitherto intractable drug class that is attracting significant commercial interest as the potential next kinase area.
DUBs are involved in multiple cellular processes including DNA damage response and cell proliferation.
The inhibition of these enzymes has considerable potential for the generation of novel drugs for treating cancer and other unmet medical needs.
The company presented two posters with new research and preclinical data from its USP30 inhibitor Parkinsons disease programmes at Neuroscience 2017.
USP30 is a mitochondrialassociated DUB that has emerged as a promising new target in Parkinsons disease and has been implicated in the control of mitophagy a cellular mitochondrial quality control mechanism.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance Ieso Digital Health Limited is a company providing online cognitive behavioural therapy and is transforming the accessibility affordability and accountability of mental health treatment.
Discreet
1to1 therapy is delivered in real time using written conversation with patients meeting an accredited therapist in a secure virtual therapy room at a time and location that is both convenient and comfortable for them.
The use of technology and written conversation offers greater patient choice more widespread access to effective evidence based therapy and a freedom for patients to express themselves by communicating online.
Ieso is also treating patients in the US via a partnership with Beacon Health Options the largest behavioural health managed care organisation in the USA and covers 45 million lives.
In December 2017 Ieso Digital Health was named as one of the top ten disruptors in the Sunday Times Virgin Media Business Disruptors to Watch 10 powered by Fast Track.
The company has been recognised for its outstanding business model and cuttingedge technology which is helping people with anxiety depression and other common mental health problems to get better faster.
Veryan Medical Limited is a medical technology company that has developed and patented a threedimensional stent BioMimics 3DTM for use in peripheral leg arteries.
The shape of the stent improved its biomechanical performance and blood flow in the vessel with a demonstrated benefit on clinical outcomes in peripheral arterial disease.
Existing stents indicated for placement in leg arteries have a straight tubular design that tends to straighten any curvature present in vessels.
This straightening effect may interfere with normal shortening of the femoropopliteal artery during lower limb movement such as when the knee is bent.
However Veryans BioMimics 3D stent technology involves adapting traditional straight stent designs to a patented three dimensional helical shape which more closely mimics the natural geometry of the human vascular system.
In February 2018 the company announced it had submitted a Premarket Approval PMA application for the BioMimics 3D Vascular Stent System to the
Food and Drug Administration FDA following the achievement of a successful outcome to its pivotal 271subject MIMICS2 study in January 2018.
TopiVert Pharma Limited is a clinicalstage biotechnology company developing narrow spectrum kinase inhibitors NSKIs as novel locally acting medicines for the local treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and eye.
TopiVerts most advanced drug candidate TOP1288 for the treatment of ulcerative colitis has successfully completed Phase I development and in January 2018 it announced positive results from the study.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Financial review
A strong balance sheet position 326.3m of gross cash and a diversified portfolio of investments worth 1130.6m GREG SMITH CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER Statement of comprehensive income Overall the Group recorded a profit for the year of 53.4m 2016 loss of 14.8m and a Return on Hard NAV i. on the Groups net assets excluding goodwill and intangible assets of 64.1m 2016 negative 7.6m.
A summary analysis of the Groups financial performance is provided below Net portfolio gains Change in fair value of limited and limited liability partnership interests 0.2 0.3 Fair value loss on contingent value rights  1.4 Licensing income 3.4 0.2 Other income 6.1 2.6 Carried interest plan charge 1.3 Amortisation of intangible assets 3.9 5.6 Administrative expenses  Istesso group 3.5 1.4 Administrative expenses  other consolidated portfolio companies 2.1 1.1 Administrative expenses  performancebased staff incentives and share based payments charge 4.9 1.5 Administrative expenses  all other central expenses 21.2 13.0 IFRS3 charge in respect of acquisition of subsidiary 4.4 Acquisition and restructuring costs 9.1 0.4 Net finance income 0.3 0.6 Profitloss for the year 53.4 14.8 Other comprehensive income  0.1 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year 53.4 14.7
Amortisation of intangible assets 3.9 5.6 Share based payment charge 2.4 1.5 IFRS charge in respect of acquisition of subsidiary 4.4 Return on Hard NAV 64.1 7.6
Acquisition and restructuring costs 9.1 0.4 Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs 73.2 7.2 Defined in Note 28 Alternative Performance Measures IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 40 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Net portfolio gains consist of realised and unrealised fair value gains and losses from the Groups equity and debt holdings in portfolio companies and deconsolidated subsidiaries.
A detailed analysis of fair value gains and losses is provided in the Portfolio review on pages 23 to 39.
Other income comprises fund management fees corporate finance fee income and other fees typically chargeable to the Groups portfolio companies for services including executive search and selection legal and administrative support.
Other income for the year increased to 6.1m 2016 2.6m.
The increase was largely due to the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors in January and the resultant fund management related fees and commissions 3.2m which were consolidated into the Groups results for the first time.
In addition to Parkwalk Advisors fund management fees are also received from the Groups existing three managed funds two of which IP Venture Fund IPVF and The North East Technology Fund LP NETF also have the potential to generate performance fees from successful investment performance.
The results of the Groups third managed fund IPVFII are consolidated into those of the Group and accordingly the fund management fees received are not reflected in the statement of comprehensive income.
As described in the portfolio review the Groups drug development subsidiary Istesso Limited formerly Modern Biosciences plc was deconsolidated from the Group after a share and board reorganisation which resulted in the Group no longer holding a controlling interest in the company.
The consolidated results show the licencing income received 3.4m and the expenses incurred 3.5m by Istesso before the reorganisation occurred and a gain of 45.1m to the Group on deconsolidation representing Istesso Limiteds cumulative losses since inception and the fair value ascribed to the business which was calculated based on it.
Included within the Groups administrative expenses are costs in respect of a small number of other portfolio companies.
Typically the Group owns a noncontrolling interest in its portfolio companies however in certain circumstances the Group will take a controlling stake and hence consolidate the results of a portfolio company into the Groups financial statements.
The administrative expenses included in the Groups results for such companies primarily comprise staff costs RandD and other operating expenses.
Total Equity Net Assets Profitloss attributable to equity holders Cash cash equivalents and deposits mtel 24.1tel 1508.5 2016 112.3m 1508.5m 2016 768.7mtel 2016 13.5m Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Financial review CONTINUED
Other central administrative expenses have increased to 21.2m during the period 2016 13.0m.
This increase was primarily due to an increase in staffing costs the result of Parkwalk Advisors 1.4m and Touchstone Innovations 3.7m being consolidated for the first time.
Administrative expenses resulting from performance based staff incentives and sharebased payment charges increased to 4.9m during the period 2016 1.5m as the Groups return on Hard NAV during the period exceeded the minimum threshold for payments to be awarded under the Groups Annual Incentive Scheme.
This expense is inclusive of a non cash IFRS 2 sharebased payments charge totalling 2.4m 2016 1.5m and the cost of the Groups 2017 Long Term Incentive Plan and Deferred Bonus Share Plan awards.
This noncash charge reflects the fair value of services received from employees measured by reference to the fair value of the sharebased payments at the date of award but has no net impact on the Groups total equity or net assets.
Additional costs of 4.4m were incurred in relation to the deferred and contingent consideration paid to the sellers of Parkwalk Advisors in the year deemed under IFRS3 to be a payment for postacquisition services.
The Groups carried interest plan recognised a charge of 1.3m in its first year of operation as a result of a net increase in the value of those companies included within one or more of the Groups carry vintages that is in excess of the hurdle return.
There is no cash payment due to members of the scheme until the Group has made sufficient cash realisations.
This years results include oneoff costs relating to the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations of 9.1m 6.2m of which was for the provision of legal corporate broker and other professional advice in relation to the transaction and 2.9m of restructuring costs including redundancy and onerous lease provisions and accelerated depreciation on the fixed assets within Touchstones central London office.
In excess of 4.0m of annual synergy cost savings have been identified across the enlarged Group going forward.
Statement of financial position The Group ended the period with net assets of 1508.5m representing an increase of 739.8m from the position at 1 January 2017 768.7m.
As described above this increase in net assets was largely as a result of the 53.4m profit in the year the successful equity placing and the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations.
Hard net assets i.
Based on the Groups 1057383601 shares in issue at 31 December 2017 this represents 125.4p per share 2016 565221967 shares 125.0p.
Total Equity or Net Assets 1508.5 768.7
Goodwill 172.1 57.1 Other intangible assets 10.2 5.1 Hard NAV 1326.2 706.5 Hard NAV per share 125.4p 125.0p At 31 December 2017 the Group held gross cash and deposits of 326.3m 2016 112.3m and a diversified portfolio of equity and debt investments in 155 private and publicly listed technology companies 2016 90.
The value of the Groups holdings in portfolio companies increased to 1130.6m at year end 2016 614.0m after net portfolio gains of 94.2m 2016 6.5m net investment of 64.6m 2016 55.0m and the acquisition of the Touchstone portfolio 352.2m.
The Portfolio review on pages 23 to 39 contains a detailed description of the Groups portfolio of equity and debt investments including key developments and movements during the year.
The Groups statement of financial position includes goodwill of 172.1m 2016 57.1m and acquired intangible assets of 10.2m 2016 5.1m.
The increase since the prior year is largely attributable to the Groups combination with Touchstone Innovations in October where 108.5m of goodwill and 6.9m of acquired intangible assets were recognised the goodwill 5.7m and intangibles 2.1m recognised on the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors in January and goodwill 0.8m recognised on purchase of a 3rd partys minority holding in subsidiary MobilION
38.7m of the goodwill and the majority of the remaining acquired intangible asset value arose as a result of the Groups acquisition of Fusion IP in 2014.
The remainder of the goodwill balance arose from historical acquisitions of IP Assist Services Limited formerly known as Techtran Group Limited university partnership business 16.3m 2016 16.3m and Top Technology Ventures Limited venture capital fund management business 2.1m 2016 2.1m.
Goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment as described in note 12.
The intangible assets are separately identifiable assets resulting from Fusion IPs agreements with its partner universities.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 42 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine The fair value of the intangible assets is amortised on a straightline basis over each partnerships useful economic life.
Allshare acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc As described above on 17 October 2017 the Group acquired control of 100% of the ordinary shares in Touchstone Innovations in exchange for 357518520 new ordinary shares in IP Group plc.
A summary of the assets acquired and consideration is as follows Net assets acquired Fair value net assets liabilities Investment portfolio 352.2 Cash and cash equivalents 119.1 Other net current assets 2.1 Noncurrent liabilities predominantly EIB debt finance 88.3 Acquired intangible assets 6.9 Net assets 392.0 Goodwill 108.5 Total consideration being 357518520 IP Group shares at 140p per share 500.5 The fair values of the companies within Touchstones investment portfolio at the acquisition date have been determined using the Groups accounting and valuation policies.
In several cases these values differed from those within Touchstones audited financial statements for the year ended 31 July 2017 which valued their investment portfolio at 461.1m.
Such differences primarily related to combinations of the following factors i differing views on the appropriate valuation based on the commercial and technical progress of a company ii clinical stage setbacks and in a limited number of cases iii technicalscientific failure.
A number of these differences were anticipated based on our due diligence and this was an important factor taken into account by the Directors in determining the appropriate level of consideration to offer for the business.
If subsequent information comes to light in respect of a particular portfolio company within twelve months of the acquisition date that is indicative of conditions that existed at that time the directors will review and if necessary adjust the acquisition valuations.
Goodwill has been recognised as the difference between the net assets acquired and the consideration paid in the form of newly issued IP Group shares and relates to the value attributable to Touchstones access to early stage commercialisation activities with top tier UK universities and the benefits from increased scale and critical mass and a more diverse portfolio the Group expects to benefit from.
UCL Technology Fund and Apollo Therapeutics In addition to investments into its core portfolio Touchstone has committed 24.8m towards the UCL Technology Fund LP and 3.3m towards Apollo Therapeutics LLP.
The actual cash will be invested over a number of years.
Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Financial review CONTINUED
Cash cash equivalents and shortterm deposits Cash The principal constituents of the movement in Cash during the year are summarised as follows Net Cash generatedused by operating activities excluding cash flows from deposits 22.4 11.4 Net Cash generatedused in investing activities 67.6 55.2 Cash acquired on acquisition of subsidiary undertakings 107.8 Issue of share capital 181.0 Drawdown of debt facility 15.0 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes 0.2 0.1 Movement during period 214.0 66.5 At 31 December 2017 the Groups Cash totalled 326.3m an increase of 214.0m from a total of 112.3m at 31 December 2016 predominantly due to net placing proceeds of 181.0m the business combinations with Touchstone and Parkwalk Advisors which included 119.1m and 2.1m in cash respectively at the acquisition date offset by net investment in the Groups spinout companies and operating expenses.
Cash generated in operations has decreased from the comparable period in 2016 most significantly due to the receipt of 3.0m of payments under MBSs agreement with Janssen Biotech in 2017 and an increase in revenue from services and other income in the year predominantly due to the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd which contributed 3.2m of revenue in the period since acquisition.
The Groups net cash generated in investing activities increased during 2017 reflecting an increase in the level of investment 2017 71.2m 2016 69.7m a decreased level of realisations after a record year for the group in 2016 2017 6.6m 2016 14.7m an increase in spending on property plant and equipment predominantly due to IP Groups head office relocation in April and the cash acquired on acquisition of Touchstone 119.1 and the deconsolidation of Istesso Limited negative 6.1m.
In 2015 the Group secured a 30m 8year debt facility from the European Investment Bank the EIB.
The facility is to be disbursed in two tranches with the first tranche of 15m having been drawn down in December 2015 and the second tranche was drawn in December 2017.
The size of the facility has significantly increased in the year following the acquisition of Touchstone who had a similar facility with the EIB which brings the total EIB debt facility to 104.0m 6.3m of which is due to be repaid within twelve months of the yearend.
The facility provides IP Group with an additional source of longterm capital and represents an evolution in the Groups capital structure to support its future growth and development.
It remains the Groups policy to place cash that is surplus to nearterm working capital requirements on shortterm and overnight deposits with financial institutions that meet the Groups treasury policy criteria or in lowrisk treasury funds rated A or above.
The Groups treasury policy is described in IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 44 The value of the Group s holdings in portfolio companies increased to 1130.6m at year end Net assests have increased by 739.8m from the position at 1 January 2017 HIGHLIGHTS 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site detail in note 2 to the Group financial statements alongside details of the credit ratings of the Groups cash and deposit counterparties.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had a total of 1.2m 2016 1.1m held in US Dollars and less than 0.1m 2016 nil held in AUS Dollars to meet the short term working capital requirements of its US and Australasian operations including capital anticipated to be required by new and existing spinout company opportunities.
At 31 December 2017 the Group recognised 13.1m of loans 2016 9.8m from the Limited Partners of IPVFII a fund raised during 2013 that is consolidated by the Group.
These loans are repayable only upon IPVFII generating sufficient returns to repay the Limited Partners.
At 31 December 2017 the Group recognised a carried interest plan liability of 8.8m 2016 nil which consists of a carried interest plan established in 2017 and separately an existing carried interest plan liability acquired on acquisition of Touchstone.
There is no cash payment due to members of either scheme until the Group has made sufficient cash realisations.
Taxation
The Groups business model seeks to deliver longterm value to its stakeholders through the commercialisation of fundamental research carried out at its partner universities.
To date this has been largely achieved through the formation of and provision of services and development capital to spinout companies formed around the output of such research.
The Group primarily seeks to generate capital gains from its holdings in spinout companies over the longerterm but has historically made annual net operating losses from its operations from a UK tax perspective.
Capital gains achieved by the Group would ordinarily be taxed upon realisation of such holdings however since the Group typically holds in excess of 10% in its portfolio companies and those companies are themselves trading the Directors continue to believe that the majority of its holdings will qualify for the Substantial Shareholdings Exemption
This exemption provides that gains arising on the disposal of qualifying holdings are not chargeable to UK corporation tax and as such the Group has continued not to recognise a provision for deferred taxation in respect of uplifts in value on those equity holdings that meet the qualifying criteria.
Gains arising on sales of nonqualifying holdings would ordinarily give rise to taxable profits for the Group to the extent that these exceed the Groups operating losses from time to time.
The Groups unrecognised deferred tax assets and liabilities are set out in note 9 to the financial statements.
The Directors consider that the SSE regime has been simplified and enhanced during the period with a number of changes being enacted in the Finance No.2 Act 2017 that are effective for disposals on or after 1 April 2017.
From the Groups perspective the key changes were to remove the requirement for the investing entity in this case IP Group to be a sole trading entity or member of a trading group and extending the minimum 10% holding period to any 12month period in the six years prior to disposal.
The Group welcomed these changes and the directors anticipate that they will have a favourable impact on the Group giving greater certainty over the exemption of qualifying gains under SSE and increasing the Groups flexibility over the timing of future portfolio company disposals.
The changes in the Finance No.2 Act 2017 also included a restriction on companies use of brought forward losses.
As a result the amount of profit that can be mitigated by brought forward losses will be restricted to 50% of the amount of profits in excess of 5m.
The Directors do not currently consider that these proposed changes will result in the recognition of a deferred tax liability in respect of any unrealised gains that do not qualify for SSE but note that such liabilities may arise in the future.
Assets held in Luxembourg which were acquired via the combination with Touchstone in the year are also subject to capital gains and ordinarily the Group would be taxed on their realisation.
The participation exemption similar to the UK SSE scheme described above is available for certain share disposals.
Dividends and gains arising to Imperial Innovations Srl through its interest in Touchstone Innovations Businesses LLP should be exempt from tax under Luxembourg law provided the conditions for the participation exemption are met for each investment or each investment can be attributed to a UK permanent establishment.
Tax residence of Imperial Innovations Srl will be maintained in Luxembourg and no UK tax should arise on the applicable gains.
The Group complies with relevant global initiatives including the US Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act FATCA and the OECD Common Reporting Standard.
Strategic Report Our performance 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Risk management
Managing risk our framework for balancing risk and reward A robust and effective risk management framework is essential for the Group to achieve its strategic objectives and to ensure that the directors are able to manage the business in a sustainable manner which protects its employees partners shareholders and other stakeholders.
Ongoing consideration of and regular updates to the policies intended to mitigate risk enable the effective balancing of risk and reward.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 46
Overall responsibility for the risk framework and definition of risk appetite rests with the Board who through regular review of risks ensure that risk exposure is matched with an ability to achieve the Groups strategic objectives.
Risk identification is carried out through bottomup process via operational risk registers maintained by individual teams with additional topdown input from the management team with nonexecutive review being carried out by the audit and risk committee.
Risk management process Ranking of the Groups risks is carried out by combining the economic operational or environmental impact of risks and the likelihood that they may occur.
Those risks that are considered to pose the greatest threat to the Group and score the highest are identified as principal risks.
The operations of the Group and the implementation of its objectives and strategy are subject to a number of principal risks and uncertainties.
Were more than one of the risks to occur together the overall impact on the Group may be compounded.
The design and ongoing effectiveness of the key controls over the Groups principal risks are documented using a risk and control matrix which includes an assessment of the design and operating effectiveness of the controls in question.
The key controls over the Groups identified principal risks are reviewed by management the audit and risk committee and the Board at least twice a year.
However the Groups risk management programme can only provide reasonable not absolute assurance that principal risks are managed to an acceptable level.
During 2017 we have continued to build on our existing risk management framework enhancing risk management and internal control processes.
This activity included the development of operational risk registers for front line operations and central functions a number of control reviews supported by our external risk consultants PwC including a review of the US operations an integration risk review and a review of the controls over our principal risks.
We have continued to support the Executive Committee and Board through regular meetings of the Risk Council.
Priorities for 2018 include amending our risk management framework to reflect new team structure post the integration of Touchstone Innovations plc.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP Group risk management framework FIRST LINE OF DEFENCE Front line ownership of risk process reporting and effectiveness Oversight and challenge by the Risk Council Central Functions and Management Independent assurance SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE IP Exec
Risk Council Collated risk registers
Management
HR
Finance
IT
Legal and Cosec IP Capital IP Assist IP Group Inc.
Front Line Operations Central Functions Audit and Risk
Lifesciences
Technology
Internal and external audit CONSOLIDATION ANALYSIS REPORTING OVERSIGHT CHALLENGE FEEDBACK LEARNING
Direct Reporting Review and Challenge Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Risk management 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Risk management CONTINUED
RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI It may be difficult for the Group and its earlystage companies to attract capital.
The Groups operations are reliant on capital markets particularly those in the UK.
As the Groups operations and the operations of the majority of its portfolio companies are based in the UK the financial and operational performance of the Group and particularly the ability of its portfolio companies to attract development capital is influenced by the general economic climate and trading conditions in the UK. sufficient. capital. attractive portfolio opportunities. mandates for portfolio companies. development. and transaction authorisation controls. the UK.
While Parkwalk Advisors operates independently they have been and continue to be an important coinvestor of the Group supporting shared portfolio companies. raising net proceeds of 181.0m. capital via increased scale and critical mass. government bodies. investments. net assets. equity holders.
The returns and cash proceeds from the Groups earlystage companies can be very uncertain.
The following risks are typically associated with earlystage companies y may not be able to secure later rounds of funding y may not be able to source or retain appropriately skilled staff y competing technologies may enter the market y technology can be materially unproven and may fail y IP may be infringed copied or stolen y may be more susceptible to cyber crime and y other administrative taxation or compliance issues may lead to company failure. value and profitability. these companies.
Oxford
Nanopore is an example of such a portfolio company that has the potential to materially impact the Groups results. negative clinical trial result.
Groups portfolio through trade sales and IPOs could vary significantly from year to year. delegated board authorities. remedy critical issues promptly. factors. failure or sector demise. possible stage.
Touchstone Innovations plc resulting in increased diversification of the Groups portfolio. approximately 315m of capital. approximately 70% of companies by number. investments. investments. investments.
Increase Decrease No change Develop Deliver Create
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 48 Summary of principal risks and mitigants A summary of the principal risks affecting the Group and the steps taken to manage these is set out below.
Further discussion of the Groups approach to principal risks and uncertainties are given on page 78 of the Corporate Governance Report and pages 100 to 103 of the Report of the Audit and Risk Committee while further disclosure of the Groups financial risks is set out in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements on pages 130 and 132.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI It may be difficult for the Group and its earlystage companies to attract capital.
The Groups operations are reliant on capital markets particularly those in the UK.
As the Groups operations and the operations of the majority of its portfolio companies are based in the UK the financial and operational performance of the Group and particularly the ability of its portfolio companies to attract development capital is influenced by the general economic climate and trading conditions in the UK. sufficient. capital. attractive portfolio opportunities. mandates for portfolio companies. development. and transaction authorisation controls. the UK.
While Parkwalk Advisors operates independently they have been and continue to be an important coinvestor of the Group supporting shared portfolio companies. raising net proceeds of 181.0m. capital via increased scale and critical mass. government bodies. investments. net assets. equity holders.
The returns and cash proceeds from the Groups earlystage companies can be very uncertain.
The following risks are typically associated with earlystage companies y may not be able to secure later rounds of funding y may not be able to source or retain appropriately skilled staff y competing technologies may enter the market y technology can be materially unproven and may fail y IP may be infringed copied or stolen y may be more susceptible to cyber crime and y other administrative taxation or compliance issues may lead to company failure. value and profitability. these companies.
Oxford
Nanopore is an example of such a portfolio company that has the potential to materially impact the Groups results. negative clinical trial result.
Groups portfolio through trade sales and IPOs could vary significantly from year to year. delegated board authorities. remedy critical issues promptly. factors. failure or sector demise. possible stage.
Touchstone Innovations plc resulting in increased diversification of the Groups portfolio. approximately 315m of capital. approximately 70% of companies by number. investments. investments. investments.
SEE OUR KPIs ON PAGES 18 TO 19 SEE OUR STRATEGY ON PAGES 16 TO 17 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Risk management 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Risk management CONTINUED
RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI Universities or other researchintensive institutions may terminate their partnerships or other collaborative relationships with the Group.
The Groups business results of operations and prospects are at least partially dependent on competitive advantage gained from access to leading scientific research through partnerships and other collaborative arrangements with researchintensive institutions and commercial partners such as Oxford Sciences Innovation plc Cambridge Innovation Capital and the UCL Technology Fund .
University partners may terminate their partnerships or may move to nonexclusive sourcing models. rights.
IP opportunities to commercialise. performance and prospects. new spinout businesses. source new opportunities. research institutions. relationships and other sources. beneficial and productive. acting as a barrier to entry to competitors. university partners. the year.
Parkwalks investment vehicles include the University of Cambridge Enterprise Funds the University of Oxford Innovation Funds and the University of Bristol Enterprise Funds.
The
Directors believe that Parkwalks strong links to university partners will be beneficial to the Group. its Technology Pipeline agreement TPA.
Sciences Innovation and Cambridge Innovation Capital as coinvestors demonstrating the value of our strategic stakes in these partners. companies.
The Group may lose key personnel or fail to attract and integrate new personnel.
The industry in which the Group operates is a specialised area and the Group requires highly qualified and experienced employees.
There is a risk that the Groups employees could be approached and solicited by competitors or other technology based companies and organisations or could otherwise choose to leave the
Given the relatively small size of the Group its operations are reliant on a small number of key individuals.
Scaling the team particularly into foreign jurisdictions such as the US presents an additional potential risk. andor future prospects. and updated regularly. wellarticulated and consistently promoted. working and salary sacrifice arrangements. setting and appraisal. autonomy to do their jobs.
We are fully supportive of flexible working and have enabled employees with technology to work flexibly.
The Group also continues to dedicate resources to remuneration and incentivisation. remained at low absolute levels.
Approximately
44% of staff have been with the Company for at least five years. y Total equity. y Net assets. companies.
Macroeconomic conditions may negatively impact the Groups ability to achieve its strategic objectives.
Adverse macroeconomic conditions could reduce the opportunity to deploy capital into opportunities or may limit the ability of such portfolio companies to raise third party funds develop profitable businesses or achieve increases in value or exits.
Political uncertainty including impacts from Brexit or similar scenarios could have a number of potential impacts including changes to the labour market available to the Group for recruitment or regulatory environment in which the Group operates. for smaller businesses. sufficient.
Groups portfolio value is held in companies quoted on the AIM market and decreases in values to this market could result in a material fair value impact to the portfolio as a whole.
Groups capital markets team and its brokers. budget.
Group and third parties. of the world. uncertainty in the year. investments. y Total equity. y Net assets. equity holders.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 50 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Increase Decrease No change Develop Deliver Create
RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI Universities or other researchintensive institutions may terminate their partnerships or other collaborative relationships with the Group.
The Groups business results of operations and prospects are at least partially dependent on competitive advantage gained from access to leading scientific research through partnerships and other collaborative arrangements with researchintensive institutions and commercial partners such as Oxford Sciences Innovation plc Cambridge Innovation Capital and the UCL Technology Fund .
University partners may terminate their partnerships or may move to nonexclusive sourcing models. rights.
IP opportunities to commercialise. performance and prospects. new spinout businesses. source new opportunities. research institutions. relationships and other sources. beneficial and productive. acting as a barrier to entry to competitors. university partners. the year.
Parkwalks investment vehicles include the University of Cambridge Enterprise Funds the University of Oxford Innovation Funds and the University of Bristol Enterprise Funds.
The
Directors believe that Parkwalks strong links to university partners will be beneficial to the Group. its Technology Pipeline agreement TPA.
Sciences Innovation and Cambridge Innovation Capital as coinvestors demonstrating the value of our strategic stakes in these partners. companies.
The Group may lose key personnel or fail to attract and integrate new personnel.
The industry in which the Group operates is a specialised area and the Group requires highly qualified and experienced employees.
There is a risk that the Groups employees could be approached and solicited by competitors or other technology based companies and organisations or could otherwise choose to leave the
Given the relatively small size of the Group its operations are reliant on a small number of key individuals.
Scaling the team particularly into foreign jurisdictions such as the US presents an additional potential risk. andor future prospects. and updated regularly. wellarticulated and consistently promoted. working and salary sacrifice arrangements. setting and appraisal. autonomy to do their jobs.
We are fully supportive of flexible working and have enabled employees with technology to work flexibly.
The Group also continues to dedicate resources to remuneration and incentivisation. remained at low absolute levels.
Approximately
44% of staff have been with the Company for at least five years. y Total equity. y Net assets. companies.
Macroeconomic conditions may negatively impact the Groups ability to achieve its strategic objectives.
Adverse macroeconomic conditions could reduce the opportunity to deploy capital into opportunities or may limit the ability of such portfolio companies to raise third party funds develop profitable businesses or achieve increases in value or exits.
Political uncertainty including impacts from Brexit or similar scenarios could have a number of potential impacts including changes to the labour market available to the Group for recruitment or regulatory environment in which the Group operates. for smaller businesses. sufficient.
Groups portfolio value is held in companies quoted on the AIM market and decreases in values to this market could result in a material fair value impact to the portfolio as a whole.
Groups capital markets team and its brokers. budget.
Group and third parties. of the world. uncertainty in the year. investments. y Total equity. y Net assets. equity holders.
SEE OUR KPIs ON PAGES 18 TO 19 SEE OUR STRATEGY ON PAGES 16 TO 17 Stock Code IPO site Strategic Report Risk management 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Risk management CONTINUED
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 52 RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI There may be changes to impacts from or failure to comply with legislation government policy and regulation.
There may be unforeseen changes in or impacts from government policy regulation or legislation including taxation legislation.
This could include changes to funding levels or to the terms upon which public monies are made available to universities and research institutions and the ownership of any resulting intellectual property. property on attractive terms.
Shareholder Exemption may adversely affect the Groups tax position and accordingly its value and operations.
FCAauthorised subsidiary resulting in loss of fund management contracts reputational damage or fines.
Group could otherwise fail to adhere to data protection regulations. and the Group. or other legislation. subject to external review. policies.
Governments ten steps framework.
Exemption rules reduce the level of uncertainty around the exemption of disposal gains were enacted in Finance No 2 Act 2017. including third party reviews. science and innovation. consulted. this applies to the Group. y Total equity. y net assets.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Viability statement The Directors have carried out a robust assessment of the viability of the Group over a threeyear period to December 2020 considering its strategy its current financial position and its principal risks.
The strategy and associated principal risks underpin the Groups threeyear financial plan and scenario testing which the Directors review at least annually.
The threeyear plan is built using a bottom up model.
The threeyear plan makes certain assumptions about the level of capital deployed into and realisations from its portfolio of companies the financial performance and valuation of the underlying portfolio companies the Groups utilisation of its debt finance facility and ability to raise further capital and the level of the Groups net overheads.
To assess the impact of the Groups principal risks on the prospects of the Group the plan is stress tested by modelling several severe but plausible downside scenarios as part of the Boards review of the principal risks of the business.
These scenarios envisage the impact of adverse outcomes in the Groups principal risk areas primarily through reducing the fair value of the Groups portfolio company interests reducing the amount of capital that the Group can raise lowering the deployment of capital and decreasing portfolio company divestment proceeds.
The scenarios also consider the impact of available mitigating actions.
Based on this assessment the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue to operate and meets its liabilities as they fall due up to December 2020.
SEE OUR KPIs ON PAGES 18 TO 19 SEE OUR STRATEGY ON PAGES 16 TO 17 Stock Code IPO site RISK AND DESCRIPTION IMPACT MITIGATION RISK TREND DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE YEAR STRATEGY KPI There may be changes to impacts from or failure to comply with legislation government policy and regulation.
There may be unforeseen changes in or impacts from government policy regulation or legislation including taxation legislation.
This could include changes to funding levels or to the terms upon which public monies are made available to universities and research institutions and the ownership of any resulting intellectual property. property on attractive terms.
Shareholder Exemption may adversely affect the Groups tax position and accordingly its value and operations.
FCAauthorised subsidiary resulting in loss of fund management contracts reputational damage or fines.
Group could otherwise fail to adhere to data protection regulations. and the Group. or other legislation. subject to external review. policies.
Governments ten steps framework.
Exemption rules reduce the level of uncertainty around the exemption of disposal gains were enacted in Finance No 2 Act 2017. including third party reviews. science and innovation. consulted. this applies to the Group. y Total equity. y net assets.
Strategic Report Risk management
Increase Decrease No change Develop Deliver Create KEY 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our business ethics and social responsibility Our goal is to build a sustainable and viable business.
As part of that the Group seeks to conduct all of its operating and business activities in an honest ethical and socially responsible manner and these values underpin our business model and strategy.
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 54 We are committed to acting professionally fairly and with integrity in all our business dealings and relationships with consideration for the needs of all of our stakeholders including university partners investors suppliers employees and the businesses in which the Group has holdings.
IP Group pioneered the concept of the longterm partnership model and has arrangements covering 18 of the UKs leading universities 9 of Australasias and 5 leading universities in the US.
Our New Business and Partnerships team and sector teams work closely with the universities to identify exciting opportunities and to ensure these partnerships are mutually beneficial.
We believe that our approach to providing executive and administrative support where appropriate to portfolio companies gives their founders the best possible chance of building a successful business.
Our support of earlystage businesses demonstrates our alignment with government initiatives in science and innovation and contributes to employment growth in the communities in which our portfolio companies operate.
In addition to the support they receive from the Group our portfolio businesses often seek funding from other sources both public such as governmentbacked grant funding and private from sources ranging from angel investors and small privatelyowned funds to large institutional investors and the Group will often assist in gaining access to this financial capital.
The Group complies with all applicable legislation in this respect and communicates with its coinvestors in an appropriate and transparent manner.
As a publicly traded entity IP Group actively seeks to engage and maintain an open dialogue with both institutional and private shareholders through its investor relations programme.
The Groups daytoday activities have limited adverse social and environmental impact.
There can however be a more significant impact indirectly through the nature and operations of the companies that we support with financial and human capital.
Our portfolio companies which are primarily focused on the healthcare technology clean technology and biotechnology sectors are developing solutions to some of the most significant social environmental and health challenges faced in the world today.
Consequently the Group recognises the importance of ensuring that the businesses it establishes and nurtures comply with all applicable environmental ethical and social legislation.
Further our direct involvement in these companies allows greater scope to engage with their management teams and offer guidance.
IP Group aims to conduct its business in a socially responsible manner to contribute to the communities in which it operates and to respect the needs of its employees and all of its stakeholders.
The Group is committed to growing the business while ensuring a safe environment for employees as well as minimising the overall impact on the environment.
IP Group endeavours to conduct its business in accordance with established best practice to be a responsible employer and to adopt values and standards designed to help guide staff in their conduct and business relationships.
The Group works with a variety of suppliers and seeks to ensure that there is diversity in the supply chain working with SMEs as well as larger organisations.
Where possible we work with local suppliers therefore impacting positively on the communities where we operate.
The Group is a signatory to the Prompt Payment Code.
The Group seeks to operate as a responsible employer and has adopted standards which promote corporate values designed to help and guide employees in their conduct and business relationships.
The Group seeks to comply with all laws regulations and rules applicable to its business and to conduct the business in line with applicable established best practice.
We take a zero tolerance approach to bribery and corruption and implement and enforce effective systems.
The Group is bound by the laws of the UK including the Bribery Act 2010 and has implemented policies and procedures based on such laws.
All employees who are involved with the regulated business of managing investment transactions receive compliance and antimoney laundering training with periodic refresher courses.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Employee diversity and employment policies Diversity is key to how we work and we believe that great ideas can come from anyone.
As such we believe in equal opportunity for all people when it comes to recruitment selection and career development.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group employed an average of 118 employees and had five nonexecutive directors.
A breakdown of our people by gender can be seen in the table above.
IP
Group supports the rights of all people as set out in the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights and insofar as it is able to ensures that all transactions the Group enters into uphold these principles.
Total Staff 151 Male Female
70% 30% Senior Leadership Team 82% 18% Senior managerspartners 76% 24% All Employees 51% 49% Excludes NEDs 5 Includes Company Secretary Includes EDs Company Secretary and direct reports to CEO People management Our mantra is to recruit exceptional people to do exceptional things and we believe our unique culture is important in attracting and retaining the best talent.
Our values  passionate principled pioneering describe how we want our staff to feel when working in IP Group.
We give our people a high degree of freedom and authority to accomplish the extraordinary things we do and we are necessarily highly supportive of flexible working.
We consider these to be important in our approach to turning groundbreaking science into worldchanging businesses.
Because we operate in a highly specialised segment of our industry we endeavour to recruit people with a combination of rare skills such as scientists with commercial and entrepreneurial backgrounds who can operate with equal confidence in both academia and fastpaced startups while speaking the language of the City.
Our people gain significant experience from working with a significant number of startup enterprises and seeing firsthand what works and what doesnt.
Sharing knowledge and discussing these experiences as well as structured training is key to leveraging this learning across the Group.
To this end we encourage employees to build very strong relationships with all their colleagues by keeping everyone updated regularly and often in person on the Groups objectives and progress.
We also believe that exceptional people doing exceptional things should be wellrewarded for achieving exceptional results.
While heavily weighted to successful performance over the medium to long term we consider that the Group offers an attractive overall remuneration package to all our employees with both short and longerterm components.
We benchmark remuneration and benefits regularly against industry peers.
Our remuneration and benefits package focusses on supporting health through private medical and RidetoWork and family insurance and through inclusion of families in some of our other benefit options and Childcare Vouchers while also offering opportunities for investment and saving through certain schemes.
Internship programme Touchstone Innovations has run a regular paid internship programme for six years with the majority of those recruited working in the Technology Transfer business Imperial Innovations.
Between summer 2011 and summer 2017 69 interns have taken part in the programme playing a vital role in providing market analyses patent management and contract administration among other things.
This internship programme recruits heavily from Imperial College London and other leading UK universities and many candidates have PhDs or experience with post doctoral research.
The internship programme offers valuable experience of the commercial aspects of science and research.
Interns who have completed the programme have gone on to work as patent attorneys technology transfer executives and in research positions at startups as well as starting their own ventures.
Strategic Report Our business ethics Internship  between Summer 2011 and Summer 2017 69 interns have taken part in the programme W e have longterm partnerships with 17 of the UKs leading universities HIGHLIGHTS 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our business ethics and social responsibility
IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 56 Health and Safety All our people are responsible for the promotion of and adherence to health and safety measures in the workplace.
The Chief Operating Officer has overall responsibility for the implementation of the Groups health and safety policies and procedures.
The primary purpose of the Groups health and safety policy is to enable all of the Groups people to go about their everyday business at work in the expectation that they can do so safely and without risk to their health.
During the years ended 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016 no reportable accidents occurred under UK Health and Safety regulations.
Copies of the Groups policies in relation to equal opportunities and diversity health and safety and anticorruption and bribery can be found on the Groups website site Community engagement The Group seeks to have a positive impact on the communities in which it operates and one of the ways in which it achieves this is through charitable support at both a Group level and by staff.
In 2017 the Group changed the approach to charity donations and signed a 3year strategic partnership with a charity closely aligned to the Groups values.
Generating
Genius set up to support talented young people from disadvantaged backgrounds to help realise their potential in STEM subjects science technology engineering and maths received a 33333 donation from IP Group in 2017.
Generating Genius used the first tranche of funding to help support 50 newly recruited students in Year 10 from a range of schools across London all with a passion for science y 60% of the new cohort is female y 64% have previouslyare currently claiming free school meals y 38% will be the first in their family to go to university y 28% come from local areas with the lowest participation in higher education.
The new year 10 pupils called Junior Genius attended chemistry masterclasses at LOreal Young Scientist Centre and Maths Masterclasses with Think Maths during the October halfterm.
Year 10 students took part in a colour chemistry session working together to extract a natural dye from pomegranate and producing a synthetic dye  Parared  through chemical reactions.
In addition the donation from IP Group helped support the sixth form programme Uni Genius with Year 13 students intending to apply to Oxbridge or to highly selective universities across the country receiving expert advice from university admissions staff.
Generating Genius was supported by staff from the University of Bath Imperial College London and the independent school sector to deliver this programme.
Support was also provided to students to help them make informed choices with a session on Alternatives to Medicine supported by Queen Mary University of London.
Students were challenged to think beyond medicine and learned about other diverse university disciplines related to science and engineering led by a Student
A list of the other charities that IP Group has supported to date can be found on the Groups website site 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Environmental policy While we believe the direct environmental impact of IP Group plc and its subsidiary companies is relatively small the Group is committed to ensuring the environmental impacts of our business operations remain as low as possible.
We recognise our responsibility to ensure that the business operates in an environmentally responsible and sustainable manner.
Employees are encouraged to reduce their impact on the environment by hosting meetings via video conference where possible thereby only engaging in business travel when necessary using public transport and by minimising the usage of paper by using the recycling facilities provided in our offices.
While the Board as a whole has primary responsibility for environmental issues it has allocated daytoday responsibility for the review of environmental and social issues to the Chief Financial Officer Greg Smith.
In addition major investment themes for IP Group have included and will continue to include areas which have the potential to develop technologies which could result in significant environmental benefits.
Organisation boundary and scope of emissions The following section includes our mandatory reporting of greenhouse gas emissions.
The reporting period is the same as the Groups financial year.
We have reported on all of the emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
These sources fall within our consolidated financial statement.
An operational control approach has been used in order to define our organisational boundary.
This is the basis for determining the Scope 1 and 2 emissions for which the Group is responsible.
For avoidance of doubt this excludes any emissions from our investment subsidiary companies.
Management believe the approach taken best captures the emissions for which the Group is directly responsible and has control over.
FTSE Russell the trading name of FTSE International Limited and Frank Russell Company confirms that IP Group Plc has been independently assessed according to the FTSE4Good criteria and has satisfied the requirements to become a constituent of the FTSE4Good Index Series.
Created by the global index provider FTSE Russell the FTSE4Good Index Series is designed to measure the performance of companies demonstrating strong Environmental Social and Governance ESG practices.
The
FTSE4Good indices are used by a wide variety of market participants to create and assess responsible investment funds and other products.
GHG reporting The section below includes our mandatory reporting of greenhouse gas emissions.
The reporting period is the same as the Groups financial year.
Organisation boundary and scope of emissions We have reported on all of the emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
These sources fall within our consolidated financial statement.
An operational control approach has been used in order to define our organisational boundary.
This is the basis for determining the Scope 1 2 and 3 emissions for which the Group is responsible.
For avoidance of doubt this excludes any emissions from our investment subsidiary companies.
Management believes the approach taken best captures the emissions for which the Group is directly responsible and has control over.
Methodology
The Group has employed the services of a specialist adviser Verco to quantify the GHG emissions associated with the Groups operations.
The following methodology was applied by Verco in the preparation and presentation of this data y use of the Greenhouse Gas Protocol published by the World Business Council for Sustainable Development and the World Resources Institute the WBCSDWRI GHG Protocol y application of Defra emission factors to the Groups activities to calculate GHG emissions y application of locationbased and marketbased Scope 2 emissions factors for electricity supplies y inclusion of all the applicable Kyoto gases expressed in carbon dioxide equivalents or CO y presentation of gross emissions as the Group does not purchase carbon credits or equivalents.
Strategic Report Our business ethics 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our business ethics and social responsibility
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 1093.0 1093.0 marketbased tC0 locationbased Scope 1 Scope 2 Scope 3 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 58 Absolute emissions The total greenhouse emissions from IP Group plcs operations in the financial year 2017 year ending 31 December 2017 were
1275.1 tonnes of CO equivalent tCO
1249.8 tonnes of CO equivalent tCO There were significant changes to the companys operations since 2016.
The Group acquired Parkwalk Advisors and Touchstone Innovations during 2017.
The Group changed office locations in London Sheffield and the US.
The head office in London was based at two locations for four months of the year.
There has been an increase in Scope 1 emissions due to natural gas use.
Scope 2 emissions have also increased although there has been a reduction in district heating due to the Sheffield office move.
The most significant change was a reduction in Scope 3 emissions due to changes in business travel and also a decrease in waste.
There was also an increase in emissions from employee commuting.
Intensity ratio As well as reporting the absolute emissions the Groups GHG emissions are reported below on the metric of tonnes per square metre of occupied office space.
This is considered the most appropriate metric given that the majority of emissions result from the operation of the Groups offices and the daytoday activities of the employees.
Target and baselines Given the comparatively low GHG impact of the Groups operations the Groups objective is to maintain or reduce its GHG per square metre of office space each year and will report each year whether it has been successful in this regard.
For 2017 the intensity metric using the locationbased method has decreased from 0.09 tCO e per m to 0.04 tCO e per m The main source of this decrease is from Scope 2 emissions.
This is due to a reduction in the carbon intensity of the electricity grid in the United Kingdom.
The 2017 intensity metric using the marketbased method decreased slightly from 0.04 tCO e per m to 0.03 tCO e per m Key figures IP Group emissions by scope 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site
CO 2e
CO
2e
CO
2e
CO
2e
CO
2e
CO
2e GHG emissions Scope 1 Scope 2 locationbased Scope 2 marketbased Subtotal locationbased 182.1 79.7 225.3 0.04 0.09 0.27 Subtotal marketbased 156.8 29.4  0.03 0.04 Scope 3 1093.0 3093.5 235.2 Total GHG emissions Locationbased Scope 2 1275.1 3173.2 460.5 Total GHG emissions Market based Scope 2 1249.8 3122.9 Scope 1 being emissions from the Groups combustion of fuel and operation of facilities.
Scope 2 being electricity from locationbased calculations heat steam and cooling purchased for the Groups own use.
Scope 3 being all indirect emissions not in scope 2 that occur in the value chain of the reporting company including both upstream and downstream emissions 2017 114 employees and 4706 m office space
Tonnes
Tonnes
Waste production Landfill waste 0.6 1.2 6.7 Recycled waste 2.1 2.1 2.1 Total Waste 2.7 3.3 8.8 Board approval The Strategic Report as set out on pages 7 to 59 has been approved by the Board.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD MIKE HUMPHREY 29 March 2018 Strategic Report Our business ethics 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 60
To develop and support these opportunities into a diversified portfolio of robust businesses 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Board of directors 62 Corporate governance statement 64 Committee reports Directors remuneration report Report of the audit and risk committee 100 Other statutory Directors report 105 Statement of directors responsibilities 107 OUR GOVERNANCE Stock Code IPO site 61 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Board of directors Effective date of current letter of appointment 24 March 2015 Age 66 Independent NA Tenure 6 years Term of office 3 years 3 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience Formerly 40 years at Croda plc including 13 years as CEO Current external appointments
Committee memberships Nomination chair and
Effective date of current letter of appointment 20 January 2005 Age 56 Independent No Tenure 13 years Term of office Permanent 6 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience Founder of Techtran Group 7 years as partner at KPMG FCA 20 Years Current external appointments
Proactis Holdings plc Committee memberships Executive Disclosure Effective date of current letter of appointment 5 March 2007 Age 55 Independent No Tenure 11 years Term of office Permanent 6 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience 17 years equity capital markets experience at Lehman Brothers Donaldson Lufkin and Jenrette.
Current external appointments
Committee memberships
Effective date of current letter of appointment 2 June 2011 Age 39 Independent No Tenure 6 years Term of office Permanent 6 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience KPMG background FCA 10 years Current external appointments
Committee memberships Executive Disclosure Effective date of current letter of appointment 20 March 2014 Age 54 Independent No Tenure 4 years Term of office Permanent 6 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience 10 years as CEO at Fusion IP plc previous experience taking companies from startup to full listing on the London Stock Exchange Current external appointments
Committee memberships
Mike Humphrey Nonexecutive Chairman
Alan Aubrey Chief Executive Officer
Mike Townend Chief Investment Officer Greg Smith Chief Financial Officer David Baynes Chief Operating Officer 62 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Effective date of current letter of appointment 31 August 2011 Age 62 Independent Yes Tenure 6 years Term of office 3 years 3 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience Formerly CFO ARM Holdings plc 20 years technology sector experience FCMA Current external appointments NCC Group plc Committee memberships Nomination Audit chair and Remuneration chair Effective date of current letter of appointment 26 March 2014 Age 56 Independent Yes Tenure 4 years Term of office 3 years 3 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience Fellow of the Royal Society Royal Academy of Engineering Institution of Chemical Engineers Royal Society of Chemistry and Institute of Physics Shell Professor of Chemical Engineering Current external appointments The British Land Company PLC Committee memberships Nomination Audit and
Effective date of current letter of appointment 30 July 2015 Age 57 Independent Yes Tenure 2 years Term of office 3 years 3 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience 25 years pharmaceutical industry experience senior management teams of Eli Lilly and Astra Zeneca currently CEO of Carrick
Current external appointments Supervisory Board of Evotec AG CEO of Carrick Therapeutics UK
Committee memberships Nomination Audit and
Effective date of current letter of appointment 18 October 2017 Age 67 Independent Yes Tenure Less than 1 year Term of office 3 years 3 months notice Reelection to Board Annually at AGM Experience Professor of Economics at Imperial College London Principal of Imperial College Business School 20032011.
Previous appointments include Professor of Economics at Birkbeck College Visiting Fellow at the Reserve Bank of Australia and Visiting Professor at M. of England.
Current external appointments None Committee memberships Nomination Audit and
Jonathan Brooks Nonexecutive Director Professor Lynn Gladden CBE Nonexecutive Director Dr Elaine Sullivan Nonexecutive Director Professor David Knox Houston Begg Senior Independent Director Mr Humphrey was considered by the Board to be independent on appointment.
Excludes appointments to Group portfolio company boards.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement The Board continues to recognise the importance of a topdown focus on corporate governance as an integral part of all of the Groups activities.
MIKE HUMPHREY CHAIRMAN 2017 has been a busy year for the Group with the combination with Touchstone Innovations the completion of a significant equity fundraising and expansion into Australasia alongside strong performances from portfolio companies in each of its sectors.
The Board continues to focus on developing a robust corporate governance strategy alongside promoting a culture of risk identification reporting and mitigation.
The Board remains focused on the execution of the Groups strategy and working with its partner institutions to develop outstanding businesses based on unique intellectual property.
In doing so it continues to recognise the importance of a topdown focus on corporate governance as an integral part of all of the Groups activities.
The Board is accountable to the Groups shareholders for good governance and this report together with the Reports of the Remuneration Nomination and Audit and Risk Committees of the Board describes the Groups detailed approach to corporate governance and further information on the key developments in these areas during the year.
The Board looks forward to being able to discuss these matters with shareholders at the Groups forthcoming AGM in June 2018 or indeed at any other point during the year.
MIKE HUMPHREY
Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code The Directors are committed to a high standard of corporate governance and to compliance with the best practice of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
The version of the Code applicable to reporting periods beginning on or after 17 June 2016 was the version issued by the Financial Reporting Council in April 2016.
The Directors consider that the Group has been and continues to be in compliance with all of the provisions set out in the Code.
Further explanation as to how the main principles set out in the Code have been applied by the Group is set out in the following statement the Directors Remuneration Report the Audit and Risk Committee Report and the Strategic Report.
The Board Role and responsibilities of the Board The Board is responsible to shareholders for the overall management of the Group as a whole.
Whilst seeking to support entrepreneurial behaviour in its partner institutions through the identification of compelling intellectual property with the potential to grow into robust unique and world changing business propositions the Board also seeks to provide entrepreneurial leadership within a framework of controls for assessing and managing risk defining challenging and interrogating the Groups strategic aims and direction.
64 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine The Board recognises that in doing so it is necessary to support the maintenance and evolution of a policy and decisionmaking framework in which such strategic aims are implemented ensuring that the necessary financial and human resources are in place to meet those aims monitoring performance against key financial and nonfinancial indicators succession planning overseeing the system of risk management setting values and standards in governance matters monitoring policies and performance on corporate social responsibility and helping to shape and embed the Groups corporate culture and values.
The Directors recognise that the longterm nature of the business of the Group in evolving great ideas into world changing businesses presents novel and unique challenges from both an operational and strategic standpoint.
In supporting the evolution of novel technologies into outstanding intellectual based companies the Board acknowledges the key roles of Group functions in the fields of executive search capital raising company secretarial and legal support alongside the delivery of inhouse mentoring and development of portfolio company management teams as well as from time to time facilitating portfolio company board strategy days.
The Directors believe that the Groups approach to supporting the portfolio companies it develops in this way is unique and serves not only to build sustainable businesses with longevity but also to provide attractive returns for stakeholders by creating value over the longer term.
The robustness of the Groups portfolio supported in this way has been borne out over the course of the year in review.
The impact of Brexit negotiations and other political transitions has continued to provide a volatile backdrop to what has proven to be a year of notable commercial progress within the Groups portfolio.
The Directors are responsible for promoting the long term success of the Company and thereby the Group taking into account the interests of shareholders and other key stakeholders including employees suppliers customers universities and other partners the community and the environment for ensuring that obligations to shareholders and other stakeholders are understood and met and in maintaining a satisfactory dialogue with shareholders.
All Directors are equally accountable to the Companys shareholders for the proper stewardship of its affairs and its long term success.
The responsibility of the Directors is collective taking into account their respective roles as Executive Directors and Nonexecutive Directors.
The Executive Directors are directly responsible for running the business operations and developing and implementing strategy and the Nonexecutive Directors are responsible for constructively challenging and contributing to proposals on strategy scrutinising the performance of management determining levels of remuneration and for succession planning for the Executive Directors and senior management.
The
Nonexecutive Directors must also satisfy themselves on the integrity of financial information and that financial controls and systems of risk management are robust and comprehensive.
Further details in relation to the Groups approach to the management of its business risks and the function and ongoing roles and responsibilities of its internal Risk Council are set out on pages 46 to 53 and on pages 100 to 104.
Strategy
The Board reviews the strategy of the Group and any issues arising from it on a regular basis and exercises control over the performance of the Group by agreeing budgetary targets and monitoring performance against those targets.
Any decisions made by the Board on policies and strategy to be adopted by the Group or changes to current policies and strategy are made following a Board paper and presentations by the Executive Directors on the same and a detailed process of review discussion and constructive challenge by the Board as a whole.
Once
READ ABOUT OUR STATEGY ON PAGES 16 TO 17 Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED Schedule of Matters Except for a formal schedule of matters which are reserved for decision and approval by the Board the Board has delegated the daytoday management of the Groups operations to the Executive Directors supported closely by its senior management team comprising amongst others the newly created roles of Managing Partner Life Sciences and Managing Partner Technology.
Through 2017 and the early part of 2018 this daytoday management had previously been delegated to an Executive Committee but the constitution of the same was reviewed in detail as part of the integration of the Touchstone Innovations business and the decision was made to make some changes in order to ensure each component of the Groups business was properly represented and had a direct report into the Chief Executive Officer.
The schedule of matters reserved for Board decision and approval are those significant to the Group as a whole due to their strategic financial andor reputational implications.
The previous schedule which was adopted by the Board in August 2014 has been reviewed in early 2018 as part of the integration of the Touchstone business with particular attention being given to the effect of the increased size of the combined Group on delegated investment authorities to the new created Life Sciences and Technology Partnerships headed by their respective Managing Partners as well as to the US and Australia.
The schedule of matters reserved for the Board includes without limitation those matters more particularly set out in the box in the table on page 67 and the full schedule can be found within the Corporate Governance section of the Groups website at site Committees and Oversight In addition to the Executive Directors the Board delegates specific responsibilities to certain additional Committees that assist the Board in carrying out its functions and to ensure independent oversight of internal control and risk management.
The three principal Board Committees Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nomination play an essential role in supporting the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities and ensuring that the highest standards of corporate governance are maintained throughout the Group.
Each Committee has its own terms of reference which set out the specific matters for which delegated authority has been given by the Board.
The current terms of reference for the Audit and Risk Committee which were updated in December 2015 are fully compliant with the provisions of the Code and reflect best practice.
The terms of reference were reviewed by the Audit and Risk Committee throughout the year and no amendments were considered necessary.
A previous review of the terms of reference of each of the Remuneration Committee and Nomination Committee during 2016 concluded that whilst compliant with the provisions of the Code certain amendments were desirable to reflect current best and market practice and the actual workings of the relevant Committee.
The terms of reference for the Remuneration Committee and Nomination Committee were updated recommended for approval and adopted by the Board in February 2016 and May 2016 respectively.
No further updates were made during 2017.
Each Committee will continue to review its own terms of reference at least annually and propose any updates where necessary.
All of the current Committee terms of reference are available on request from the Company Secretary or within the Corporate Governance section of the Groups website at site 66 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine
Reserved for the Board y Approval of the Annual Report and accounts and halfyear results statement accounting policies and procedures and any matter having a material impact on future financial performance of the Group. y Strategic acquisitions or disposals by the Group.
Groups strategic assets as defined by the Board from time to time ii in excess of 10m per investment and iii in excess of 10m on a cumulative basis in a single portfolio company and 5m increments thereafter. with universities and other research institutions. from time to time and ii in excess of 10m. objectives. y Approval of the annual budget and any material changes to it. of Association. same. committees. and remuneration of the external auditors.
Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules or the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers. securities and material borrowing of the Group.
Chief Executive Officer.
Available from the Company Secretary or on our corporate website site Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED
Committees
The terms of reference of each Committee establish its responsibilities and are available from the Company Secretary and on the Groups corporate website site Available from the Company Secretary or on our corporate website site
Directors
Daytoday decisions are delegated to the Executive Directors who in turn have delegated those portfolio investment and realisation decisions other than those reserved for the Board see above to the Managing Partner Life Sciences and Managing Partner Technology see below.
Managing
Partners
Life
Sciences and
Portfolio investment and realisation decisions other than those reserved for the Board are delegated to the Managing Partner Life Sciences and the Managing Partner Technology with a tiered level of decision within defined parameters being delegated further to subcommittees of the Life Sciences and Technology Partnerships as well as to the US and Australia.
Disclosure Committee established in 2016 continues to assist the Group to make timely and accurate disclosure of all information that is required to be disclosed to meet its legal and regulatory obligations and requirements arising from its listing on the London Stock Exchange.
It also enables the Group to meet its obligations under the Market Abuse Regulation and takes responsibility for the assessment and control of inside information.
Board size and composition As at 31 December 2017 and following the retirement of Doug Liversidge as noted below there were nine Directors on the Board the Chairman four Executive Directors and four Nonexecutive Directors.
The biographies of all Directors are provided on pages 62 and 63.
2017 saw two changes to the Board Doug Liversidge who had previously served as chairman of Fusion IP plc prior to its acquisition by the Group in March 2014 was appointed as NonExecutive Director on 24 March 2014 and became Senior Independent Director in March 2015 retired from the Board with effect from 31 December 2017 after a lengthy period of distinguished service Professor David Begg previously a nonexecutive director of Touchstone Innovations plc was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director of the Group on 18 October 2017 in connection with the Groups combination with Touchstone Innovations plc.
Professor Begg was subsequently appointed as the Senior Independent Director with effect from 31 December 2017 succeeding Mr Liversidge upon his retirement.
New directors may be appointed by the Board from time to time but the appointee is always subject to election by shareholders at the first Annual General Meeting following their appointment.
Accordingly
Professor Begg will submit himself for election by shareholders at the Groups Annual General Meeting to be held on 18 June 2018.
In accordance with both the Code and the Groups policy all of the other Directors will submit themselves for annual reelection by shareholders at the Groups Annual General Meeting on 18 June 2018.
The Board unanimously recommends to shareholders the appointment of Professor Begg as a Director of the Company given both his highly esteemed background in economics academia and business as well as his in depth knowledge of the Touchstone business portfolio companies and people having served as a nonexecutive director of Touchstone Innovations since 20 March 2012.
Furthermore the Board unanimously recommends to shareholders the reappointment of all of the other Directors retiring at the meeting and offering themselves for reelection on the basis that the annual Board evaluation demonstrated that they are all effective directors of the Company and continue to display the appropriate level of commitment in their respective roles.
An extract of the Groups Policy relating to the terms of appointment and the remuneration of both Executive Directors and Nonexecutive Directors is detailed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 99.
68 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Board Observers With effect from the Board meeting in February 2018 each of the Groups newly appointed Managing Partners of Life Sciences and Technology Dr Sam Williams and Mark Reilly will be invited to attend the Groups Board meetings as observers.
Such attendance will at all times be entirely at the Chairmans discretion and the observers shall upon attendance but subject to disclosing and managing any conflicts of interest which may require the relevant observer to be excluded from all or part of future Board meetings be able to speak and participate in the discussions of the Board but not to vote on any decisions required by the Board.
In agreeing to extend such invite to these individuals the Board felt that as the two most senior investment professionals in the business with oversight and accountability for the performance of a majority of the value of the Groups portfolio it was important for them to have a degree of direct representation at Board meetings and to be available to report to and respond directly to questions and challenge from the Board over the assets they managed.
In addition the Board welcomes the additional diversity of viewpoints that will be offered by such individuals their contribution to the quality of the debate on key issues affecting the Group and its portfolio and the increased stakeholder engagement offered by their attendance for example employees and portfolio company investors.
Diversity
The Board is committed to a culture that attracts and retains talented people to deliver outstanding performance and further enhance the success of the Group.
In that culture diversity across a range of criteria is valued.
The Board recognises that diversity in all its forms is key for introducing different perspectives into board debate and decision making.
A genuinely diverse board comprises individuals with a range of personal attributes perspectives skills knowledge experiences and backgrounds as well as representing differences in nationality race and gender.
The Boards policy is to make appointments to the Board based upon merit against objective criteria.
In addition the Board agrees that diversity including gender ethnic and cultural diversity remains a key aspect in creating an optimal board in terms of balance and composition.
In relation to gender diversity the Nomination Committee gave further consideration throughout the year as to whether to set a target in relation to the number of women on the Board and in particular with reference to the Women on Boards Report by Lord Davies issued in March 2015 and the Hampton Alexander Review issued in November 2017.
Whilst the Group endorses Lord Davies recommendations and the target of 33% women in FTSE 250 leadership teams contained in the HamptonAlexander Review it does not consider it appropriate nor in its best interests to set either Board or Groupwide fixed targets at this stage and prefers instead to continue to consider all aspects of diversity including but not limited to gender when assessing the overall Board composition and in making further new appointments.
Notwithstanding that it does not have a fixed target in relation to the number of women on the Board the Company currently has two female directors on its Board and will aim to maintain female representation on the Board at least at this current level.
In addition the terms of reference of the Nomination Committee include a requirement for the Nomination Committee to consider diversity including but not limited to gender nationality and race in evaluating the composition of the Board and in identifying suitable candidates for Board appointments.
In relation to ethnic diversity the Nomination Committee has reviewed the final Parker Review Committee Report on the ethnic diversity of boards issued in October 2017 and is aware of the recommendation that each FTSE 250 board should have a director of colour by 2024.
Similar to the approach adopted by the Committee with respect to gender diversity the Committee does not consider it appropriate to set Board or Groupwide fixed targets at this stage with respect to ethnic diversity and will continue to consider all aspects of diversity when making further appointments.
When Board vacancies arise the Groups Nomination Committee will require the Groups inhouse executive search function andor external search consultants as appropriate to identify and present qualified people of a range of diverse backgrounds gender nationality and ethnicity to be considered for appointment.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED The Groups commitment to diversity at the senior management level is also very strong and it actively works to increase the number of women ethnic and other cultural diversities in leadership positions within the Group.
Specifically on gender whilst as stated above the Group does not consider it appropriate nor in its best interests to set Groupwide fixed targets for women in leadership positions at this stage both the Groups Chief Executive Officer and Chairman signed up to the 30% Club in January 2018 in connection with which they have committed to setting an aspirational target of 30% female representation in the Groups leadership team by 2020.
The Group is in the process of setting up a working group whose mandate will be to examine ways in which this aspirational target may be achieved and to thereafter lead action on those actions decided upon.
A breakdown of employee diversity showing the number of persons who were Directors of the Company and senior managers at the date of this report can be found on page 55.
Nonexecutive Directors The Nonexecutive Directors provide a wide range of unique skills and experience to the Group.
By virtue of such a diverse mix of skills and experience the Nonexecutive Directors are and continue to be well placed to constructively challenge and scrutinise the performance of executive management at both Board and Committee meetings.
The Code sets out the circumstances that should be relevant to the Board in determining whether each Nonexecutive Director is independent.
The Board considers Nonexecutive Director independence on an annual basis as part of each Nonexecutive Directors performance evaluation.
Having undertaken this review and with due regard to provision B.1.1 of the Code the Board has concluded this year that all of the Nonexecutive Directors are considered by the Board to be independent of management and free of any relationship or circumstance which could materially influence or interfere with or affect or appear to affect the exercise of their independent judgement.
Since 2009 the Boards policy has been to prohibit personal investments by the Nonexecutive Directors in any of the Groups portfolio companies whether new or existing and including all Touchstone portfolio companies from the date of completion of the combination on 17 October 2017.
This policy remains unchanged and accordingly none of the Nonexecutive Directors presenting themselves for election or reelection at the Annual General Meeting in 2018 have holdings in any of the Groups portfolio companies.
Nonexecutive Directors are required to obtain the formal written approval of the Chairman before taking on any further directorial appointments and the Chairman requires the approval of the Board before adding to his commitments.
In all cases the Nonexecutive Directors must ensure that their external appointments do not involve excessive time commitments or cause a conflict of interest.
The roles of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Mike Humphrey is the Groups Chairman.
The division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer is clearly established set out in writing and agreed by the Board.
The Chairman is responsible for the leadership and conduct of the Board the conduct of the Groups affairs and strategy and for ensuring effective communication with shareholders.
The Chairman facilitates the full and effective contribution of Nonexecutive Directors at Board and Committee meetings ensures that they are kept well informed and fosters a constructive relationship between the Executive Directors and Nonexecutive Directors.
The Chairman also ensures that the membership of the Board is appropriate to the needs of the business and that the Board Committees carry out their duties including reporting back to the Board following their meetings either orally or in writing at the next Board meeting depending on its proximity to the meeting of the relevant committee.
The role of the Chief Executive Officer is to lead the delivery of the strategy and the executive management of the Group and its operating businesses.
The Chief Executive Officer is responsible amongst other things for the development and implementation of strategy and processes which enable the Group to meet the requirements of its shareholders for delivering the operating plans and budgets for the Groups business sectors monitoring business performance against key performance indicators KPIs and reporting on these to the Board and for providing the appropriate environment to recruit engage retain and develop the high quality personnel needed to deliver the Groups strategy.
70 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Senior Independent Director Doug Liversidge was the Senior Independent Director until his retirement on 31 December 2017.
Upon his retirement Professor David Begg was appointed as his successor to the role of Senior Independent Director.
A key responsibility of the Senior Independent Director is to be available to shareholders in the event that they may feel it inappropriate to relay views through the Chairman or Chief Executive Officer.
In addition the Senior Independent Director serves as an intermediary between the rest of the Board and the Chairman where necessary and takes the lead when the Nonexecutive Directors assess the Chairmans performance and when the appointment of a new Chairman is considered other than where the Senior Independent Director himself or herself wishes to be considered for the role.
Further the Senior Independent Director will lead the Board in their deliberations on any matters on which the Chairman is conflicted.
Board support The Company Secretary is responsible to the Board for ensuring that Board procedures are followed applicable rules and regulations are complied with and that the Board is advised on governance matters and relevant regulatory matters.
All Directors have access to the impartial advice and services of the Company Secretary.
The Company Secretary acts as a key point of contact for the Chairman and has an important role in the quality of information that flows between the Executive Directors and the Non executive Directors and the Company Secretary is also responsible for ensuring agreed actions are completed.
The Company Secretary supports the Chairman on performance evaluation the induction of new directors and the continuing development of current directors including ensuring directors receive suitable training to enable them to comply with their duties and effectively carry out their roles.
There is also an agreed procedure for directors to take independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
In accordance with the Companys Articles of Association directors have been granted an indemnity issued by the Company to the extent permitted by law in respect of liabilities incurred as a result of their office.
The indemnity would not provide any coverage where a director is proved to have acted fraudulently or dishonestly.
A copy of the indemnity is available for inspection as required by the Companies Act 2006.
The
Company has also arranged appropriate insurance cover in respect of legal action against its directors and officers.
Board meetings provision of information and decisions The Board meets regularly during the year as well as on an ad hoc basis as required in response to the needs of the Groups business.
The Board had seven scheduled Board meetings in 2017 with six Board meetings scheduled for 2018 to ensure that the meeting schedule is sufficient to meet the needs of the business.
The requirement for additional scheduled meetings shall be kept under review by the Chairman and the Company Secretary.
In order to assist the Board in gaining a deeper understanding of the breadth stage of development and diversity of the Groups portfolio the Heads of the Groups previous four sector teams Healthcare Biotech Technology and Cleantech presented to the Board throughout the year to enable the Board to review the progress performance and objectives for the next twelve to eighteen months of each sector.
The Board also received presentations from the New Business and Partnerships Team on the Groups sourcing strategy and an update from the US team.
The majority of Board meetings are held at the Groups offices in London.
The Board also aims to have at least one of its scheduled meetings or its annual strategy days at either the Companys offices in Leeds Oxford Sheffield or Cardiff or at the location of one of the Groups partner universities in order to encourage further interaction with the Groups stakeholders.
Meetings between the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors both with and without the presence of the Chief Executive Officer are also held as the need arises.
In addition to the seven scheduled Board meetings the Board would ordinarily have held a twoday strategy meeting in October 2017.
Given the significant corporate transactions during the year including the combination with Touchstone Innovations which only formally completed on 17 October 2017 it was agreed that in place of the annual strategy meeting this year the Board Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED should spend a full day across the two main offices of Touchstone Innovations receiving detailed presentations from each of the Touchstone Chief Executive Officer the Touchstone Chief Investment Officer and the Managing Director of Imperial Innovations on the Touchstone Innovations business and its strategy its key assets and the workings of the Imperial Innovations Technology Transfer Office.
This enabled each member of the Board to gain a proper insight into and ask questions of the previous executive directors of the business of Touchstone
The Board intends to reinstate its annual strategy days in October 2018 to provide an opportunity for all Directors and particularly the Nonexecutive Directors to reflect on the first 12 months of the Group and Touchstone Innovations operating as a combined Group to ensure that the strategy of the combined Group is on course to discuss medium and longer term strategic objectives and the key drivers underpinning these and to review the combined Groups risk framework and risk appetite including considering the major risks facing the combined Group and its strategy and how to assess manage mitigate andor monitor the same.
The schedule of Board and Committee meetings each year is so far as is possible determined before the commencement of that year and all Directors or if appropriate all Committee members are expected to attend each meeting.
Board meetings are often split over two days to ensure sufficient time is allocated for the business of the Committees and the Board and that full engagement is possible across all meetings from those in attendance.
Further such scheduling allowed for more indepth engagement between the Nonexecutive Directors and the Executive Directors and other staff of the Group outside of the formally scheduled meetings.
Supplementary meetings of the Board andor the Committees are held as and when necessary in response to business needs.
In addition the Board including both Executive and Nonexecutive Directors met for two formal dinners and the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors met without the presence of the Executive Directors once during the year.
Not less than five business days prior to each scheduled Board meeting every member of the Board receives detailed Board packs which include an agenda based upon the schedule of matters reserved for its approval along with appropriate reports and briefing papers save in respect of meetings called on short notice or where late papers are permitted to be included with the consent of the
If a director is unable to attend a meeting due to exceptional circumstances he or she will still receive the supporting papers and will usually discuss any matters he or she wishes to raise with the Chairman in advance of the meeting.
The Company Secretary will at all times facilitate access to Board meetings by electronic means videoconference telephone conference or other equivalent methods to ensure maximum attendance at Board meetings throughout the year for all Executive and Non executive Directors.
The Chairman Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Company Secretary and Managing Partners of the Life Sciences and Technology Partnerships previously the heads of two of the four sectors work together to ensure that the Directors receive relevant information to enable them to discharge their duties and that such information is accurate timely and clear.
This information includes monthly management accounts containing an analysis of performance against budget and other forecasts as well as monthly reports from each of the Life Sciences and Technology Partnerships.
Additional information is provided as appropriate or if requested.
At each meeting the Board receives information reports and presentations from the Chief Executive Officer the other Executive Directors and by invitation other members of senior management as required.
Going forward given their attendance as observers from February 2018 the Board will also receive a report direct from each of Managing Partner Life Sciences and Managing Partner Technology.
This ensures that all Directors are aware of and are in a position to monitor effectively the overall performance of the Group its development and implementation of strategy and its management of risk.
Any matter requiring a decision by the Board is supported by a paper analysing the relevant aspects of the proposal including costs benefits potential risks involved and proposed executive management action and recommendation.
72 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Board and committee attendance The following table shows the attendance of Directors at meetings of the Board Audit and Risk Remuneration and Nomination Committees during the year
BOARD MEETINGS
COMMITTEE
REMUNERATION
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
Mike Humphrey Alan Aubrey Mike Townend Greg Smith David Baynes Jonathan Brooks Doug Liversidge
Lynn Gladden Dr Elaine Sullivan
David Begg Mike Humphrey attended the Audit Committee as an observer.
Mr Townend did not attend the board meeting held in July 2017 due to a combination of travel commitments in connection with a business trip to the US and the Board meeting being brought forward at short notice in connection with the Touchstone transaction Including one Board meeting attendance by telephone.
Appointed to the Board on 18 October 2017
Attended
Did not attend Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED Directors conflicts of interest Each director has a statutory duty under the Companies Act 2006 the CA 2006 to avoid a situation in which he or she has or can have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or may potentially conflict with the interests of the Company.
This duty is in addition to the continuing duty that a director owes to the Company to disclose to the Board any transaction or arrangement under consideration by the Company in which he or she is interested.
The
Companys Articles of Association permit the Board to authorise conflicts or potential conflicts of interest.
The Board has established procedures for managing and where appropriate authorising any such conflicts or potential conflicts of interest.
It is a recurring agenda item at all Board meetings and this gives the directors the opportunity to raise at the beginning of every Board meeting any actual or potential conflict of interests that they may have on the matters to be discussed or to update the Board on any change to a previous conflict of interest already declared.
In deciding whether to authorise any conflict the directors must have regard to their general duties under the CA 2006 and their overriding obligation to act in a way they consider in good faith will be most likely to promote the Companys success.
In addition the directors are able to impose limits or conditions when giving authorisation to a conflict or potential conflict of interest if they think this is appropriate.
The authorisation of any conflict matter and the terms of any authorisation may be reviewed by the Board at any time.
The Board believes that the procedures established to deal with conflicts of interest are operating effectively.
Induction awareness and development A comprehensive induction process is in place for new directors.
The programme is tailored to the needs of each individual director and agreed with him or her so that he or she can gain a better understanding of the Group and its businesses.
This process includes an overview of the Group and its businesses structure functions and strategic aims training on key legal matters relevant to the Group and its policies such as matters relevant to Anti Bribery and Whistleblowing policies and procedures site visits to the Groups head office in London and a number of the Groups portfolio companies including where possible at least one or more within the Groups top ten holdings by value which will include as a minimum meeting with such companies management and a presentation from them on their businesses.
In addition the Company facilitates sessions as appropriate with the Groups advisers in particular its sponsor Numis Securities Limited as well as with appropriate external governance specialists to ensure that any new directors are fully aware of and understand their responsibilities and obligations as a director of a FTSE 250 company and of the governance and legislative framework within which they must operate.
The content of the induction process is regularly re evaluated by the Board to ensure it remains tailored to the needs of the business of the Group and the specific profile of any incoming candidate.
Following the completion of an induction process for a new director the Company Secretary will seek feedback from the relevant incoming director to assist with this refreshing of induction processes.
Following his appointment to the Board in October 2017 but given his existing in depth knowledge of both the Touchstone side of the combined Group and its portfolio companies as well as his understanding of the combined Groups business of commercialising science having sat as a nonexecutive director of Touchstone Innovations plc since 20 March 2012 an abbreviated induction programme is currently being formulated with Professor David Begg to enable him to familiarise himself with the key assets on the IP Group side of the combined business as well as its international and regulated businesses.
On an ongoing basis for all Directors the Company Secretary arranges for an external governance specialist to attend one Board meeting annually to present on the key corporate governance changes over the previous 12 months and to signpost expected developments going forwards.
In addition the Board are kept updated on key legislative changes affecting the Group and how the Group is ensuring its compliance including most recently presentations on the preparatory work being undertaken by the Group in advance of the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and the work being done in response to the introduction of the corporate criminal offences in relation to the failure to prevent facilitation of tax evasion.
In order to ensure that Directors continue to further their understanding of the issues facing the Group the Chairman and Nonexecutive Directors are encouraged to continue to visit all of the Groups offices its portfolio companies and its partner universities.
Throughout 2018 it is anticipated that at least one of the Groups Board meetings or its 74 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine strategy days will be held offsite and a day where the Nonexecutive Directors receive presentations from management teams of a number of the Groups portfolio companies has been arranged to further this objective.
In addition the Board is also exposed to the earlystage opportunities in which the Group has invested through presentations at Board meetings by relevant members of the Groups staff.
In 2018 it is intended that further presentations will be provided on a rolling basis by members of the newly created Life Sciences and Technology Partnerships in place of the sector heads as well as on the Groups sourcing strategy and incorporated into the Board agenda in order to continue to update the Board on progress to enhance the awareness of the Board as to how the Group operates on a daytoday basis and explain how such functions assist in the execution of the Groups core strategy of systematically helping create build and support outstanding intellectual propertybased businesses.
As a further aspect of their ongoing development each director also receives feedback on his or her performance following the Boards performance evaluation in each year and the Chairman reviews and agrees with each director their training and development needs for the year ahead.
Access to training and development opportunities including those relevant to the Nonexecutive Directors membership on the Boards Committees is facilitated through the Company Secretary.
Details relating to the assessment of the Boards performance are set out below.
Board effectiveness and performance evaluation In line with best practice under the Code a performance evaluation of the Board its Committees and individual directors is conducted annually to ensure that Board performance continues to be effective that each of the directors demonstrates commitment to his or her respective role and has sufficient time to meet their commitment to the Group.
Further the Code requires FTSE 350 companies to have an externally facilitated evaluation at least every three years.
The Group undertook an externally facilitated process of review for the year ended 31 December 2015 and so its next external review will be due towards the end of 2018.
Accordingly the review for the year ended 31 December 2017 the 20172018 Effectiveness Review was conducted internally by the Company Secretary with support from Deloitte LLP on a limited scope basis.
Deloitte LLP has no connection to the Group other than the provision of adhoc advice to the Remuneration Committee and the undertaking of prior Board evaluation activities.
This limited scope of engagement with Deloitte LLP for the 20172018 Effectiveness Review comprised y The distribution of an online internal survey for the purposes of assessing Board and Committee effectiveness and including case studies around the Groups fundraising its commencement of business in Australasia and its combination with Touchstone Innovations plc and y The completion of an analysis of the online survey data and collation of those results reporting to the Company Secretary on the topline findings.
The anonymity of all respondents was ensured throughout the process in order to encourage an open and frank exchange of views.
The results were collated into a report by Deloitte and shared with the Board in February 2018 where the five areas which had scored lowest in the survey as well as specific comments which had been made were debated by the Board and certain actions were identified to be taken forward as follows y Deloitte LLP are to provide some guidance on what other company boards do by way of setting themselves performance specific goals distinct from the organisational goals to enable the Board to debate this further and settle on any such appropriate goals for itself and y The Company Secretary is to follow up further with the Chairman and the Nonexecutive Directors to discuss and agree what changes andor additions they wish to see to the Board meeting agenda and papers and what specific reports they wish to receive at Board meetings on the combined business going forward andor on each of the companies in the enlarged portfolio from whom and the frequency of such reports.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED As part of its debate the Board considered the merits of holding a ministrategy day in the first 6 months of 2018 however it was agreed that in order to enable the integrated business to properly bed down it was prudent to wait until its annual strategy days in October 2018.
Finally the Board considered the implementation of some of the findings of the 20162017 review and noted the following y In response to feedback regarding individual director assessments an updated format was used this year which focuses on four key areas board skills board behaviours governance and specific roles of the Board and its members and y In response to a request from Board members for opportunities to engage more fully with the Groups portfolio companies a day has been scheduled in April 2018 for the Nonexecutive Directors to undertake site visits of a number of portfolio companies and to meet and receive presentations from members of their management teams.
Overall it was concluded that the Board continues to work effectively with demonstrable improvements being identified from the implementation of the findings of the previous years review.
Director performance assessment and review In addition to the 20172018 Effectiveness Review the Nonexecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director appraised the Chairmans performance following which the Senior Independent Director provided feedback to the Chairman.
Further the performance of each of the Non executive Directors on the Board is reviewed by the Chairman with support from the Company Secretary the performance of the Chief Executive Officer is reviewed by the Chairman and the operational performance of the other Executive Directors is reviewed by the Chief Executive Officer as part of the annual appraisal process.
In addition to the aforementioned annual reviews the performance of the Executive Directors is reviewed by the Board on an ongoing basis as deemed necessary in the absence of the Executive Director under review in order to avoid a conflict of interest.
Director rotation and independence The Nomination Committee and the Company Secretary have agreed a standardised rotation schedule for each of the Nonexecutive Directors including the Chairman with each being appointed for an initial three year term pursuant to the terms of their respective letters of appointment such initial three year team is then subject to renewal for subsequent three year terms and other than the Chairman to a maximum of three rolling three year terms in order to maintain his or her independence from a governance perspective in accordance with the Code.
There is currently no maximum term on the Chairmans appointment but the Nomination Committee has agreed to keep this under review in light of possible amendments to the Code currently being consulted upon over the next 12 months.
During 2017 the second rolling three year terms of each of the tenures of Mike Humphrey and Jonathan Brooks were up for further renewal and the Board approved each of the same upon recommendation of the Nomination Committee to this effect.
Committees of the Board The composition of the three Committees of the Board and the attendance of the members throughout the year is set out in the table on page 73.
Remuneration and Audit and Risk Committees Separate reports on the role composition responsibilities and operation of the Remuneration Committee and the Audit and Risk Committee are set out on pages 80 to 99 and pages 100 to 104 respectively.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee leads the process for Board appointments and the reelection and succession of directors and the Chairman.
Its key objective is to ensure that the Board comprises individuals with the necessary skills knowledge and experience to ensure that the Board is effective in discharging its duties.
It is responsible for making recommendations to the Board concerning the composition and skills of the Board including any changes considered necessary in the identification and nomination of new directors the reappointment of existing directors and the appointment of members to the Boards Committees.
It also assesses the roles of the existing directors in office to ensure there continues to be a balanced Board in terms of skills knowledge experience and 76 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine diversity.
Additionally the Nomination Committee reviews the senior leadership needs of the Group which will enable it to compete effectively in the marketplace.
The Nomination Committee also advises the Board on succession planning for Executive Director appointments although the Board as a whole is responsible for succession generally.
The Committee is chaired by Mike Humphrey.
Its
Jonathan Brooks Professor Lynn Gladden Professor David Begg and Dr Elaine Sullivan ensuring a majority of independent Nonexecutive Directors as prescribed by the Code.
To ensure compliance with the provisions of the Code the independence of the Committee and to avoid any potential conflicts of interest the Committee has agreed that Mike Humphrey will not chair any meetings of the Committee dealing with the appointment of a successor to the chairmanship of the Group.
The Nomination Committee meets as and when required or as requested by the Board and met twice during 2017.
The attendance by each member of the Committee at the meetings during 2017 is set out on page 73.
The Nomination Committee recommended the appointment of Professor David Begg as an additional Nonexecutive Director during the year in connection with the Groups combination with Touchstone Innovations.
The Committee did not appoint an external search consultancy or use open advertising in connection with this Nonexecutive role as it saw no benefit in doing so given its desire for the Board to have the advantage of Professor Beggs personal knowledge of the Touchstone business and its portfolio following the completion of the combination as explained earlier under Board size and composition.
In connection with any future appointments to the Board the Committee will continue to adopt a formal rigorous and transparent procedure including giving full consideration to the balance skills knowledge independence and diversity including gender on the Board in advance of any new search for a director to ensure a suitable balance is maintained see paragraph headed Diversity on page 69 for a further explanation of the considerations made by the Committee in this regard.
Consideration will also always be given to whether identified candidates have enough time available to devote to the role.
Succession Planning The Nomination Committee recognises that putting in place a robust succession planning framework is a key factor in ensuring the ongoing long term success of the business of the Group in mitigating the risk of any unforeseen circumstances and in ensuring that changes in Board or senior executive positions are effectively managed and do not cause significant disruption to the Group.
In parallel to succession planning at the Board and senior executive level developing internal talent at all levels within the Group remains a continuous process.
The
Nomination Committee is responsible for overseeing that suitable leadership and talent development plans and processes are in place to maximise the potential of the Groups employees and that the Group has effective recruitment policies to continue to attract and retain talented employees.
During 2017 the Groups HR Director continued to work with the Nomination Committee to further advance the Groups approach to succession planning although it was acknowledged at the Committees meeting in December 2017 that the formalised plan which had been prepared in 2016 by the Groups HR Director in consultation with the Chairman the Groups Chief Executive Officer and Company Secretary would require a detailed review and updating to reflect the Board and senior management structure of the combined Group following the Touchstone Innovations combination.
It is intended that this review work will be commenced in March 2018 led by the Groups HR Director in consultation with the Chairman and others as necessary subject to the succession matter in question.
In addition the Committee together with the Groups HR Director is responsible for developing and monitoring the Groups own internal talent pipeline.
Whilst it is the opinion of the Committee that sound systems and procedures are already in place to ensure the development of the Groups employees at all levels of the organisation the Committee along with the Executive Directors will continue to oversee further enhancement of the same for the staff of the enlarged Group during 2018 with support from the HR Director and her team.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Corporate governance statement CONTINUED Internal control The Board fully recognises the importance of the Financial Reporting Councils Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
The Groups internal controls which are Groupwide and were in place during the whole of 2017 were reviewed by the Board and were considered to be effective throughout the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Board is responsible for establishing and monitoring internal control systems and for reviewing the effectiveness of these systems.
The Board views the effective operation of a rigorous system of internal control as critical to the success of the Group.
However it recognises that such systems can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The key elements of the Groups internal control system all of which have been in place during the financial year and are up to the date when these financial statements were approved are as follows Control environment and procedures The Group has a clear organisational structure with defined responsibilities and accountabilities.
It adopts the highest values surrounding quality integrity and ethics and these values are documented and communicated clearly throughout the whole organisation.
Detailed written policies and procedures have been established covering key operating and compliance risk areas.
These are reviewed and updated at least annually by the Board.
The Board considers that the controls have been effective for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Identification and evaluation of principal risks and uncertainties The operations of the Group and the implementation of its objectives and strategy are subject to a number of key risks and uncertainties.
The Board actively identifies and evaluates the risks inherent in the business formally reviews these on at least an annual basis or as market or business developments require and ensures that appropriate controls and procedures are in place to monitor and where possible mitigate these risks.
Specifically all decisions relating to strategic partnerships and other collaborations and strategic acquisitions and disposals entered into by the Group are reserved for the Boards review and approval.
The Board formally reviews the performance of the Groups university partnerships and other strategic collaborations and relationships.
In order to ensure the effective facilitation of this review the Board receives a formal presentation and update from the Groups Managing Director New Business and Partnerships Team annually alongside regular reporting within the regular Board papers on a rolling agenda basis.
The Board also reviews equity investments on a quarterly basis although performance of specific investments may be reviewed more frequently if deemed appropriate dependent on their relative size as regards the aggregate portfolio as a whole.
The Board maintains an uptodate Register of Risks setting out mitigations in place in each case.
The key risks and uncertainties faced by the Group as well as the relevant mitigations are set out on pages Were more than one of the risks to occur together the overall impact on the Group may be compounded.
Information and financial reporting systems The Group evaluates and manages significant risks associated with the process for preparing consolidated accounts by having in place systems and controls that ensure adequate accounting records are maintained and transactions are recorded accurately and fairly to permit the preparation of financial statements in accordance with IFRS.
The
Board approves the annual operating budgets and receives details of actual performance measured against the budget each month.
Relations with shareholders The Company is committed to a continuous dialogue with shareholders as it believes that it is essential to ensure amongst its shareholders a greater understanding of and confidence in the short medium and longer term strategy of the Group and in the Boards ability to oversee its implementation.
It is the responsibility of the Board as a whole to ensure that a satisfactory dialogue takes place.
The
Boards primary shareholder contact is through the
Chairman the Chief Executive Officer the Chief
Investment Officer the Chief Operating Officer and the Chief Financial Officer.
The Boards primary contact with the limited partners and advisory boards of its managed funds is through the Chief Investment
Officer and the Chief Executive Officer.
The Senior Independent Director and other Directors make themselves available as appropriate for contact with major shareholders and other stakeholders in order to understand their issues and concerns.
78 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Where considered appropriate major institutional shareholders are consulted on significant changes to the Board and the structure of the Executive Directors remuneration.
In addition during 2017 the Executives Directors and the Chairman had various dialogue with major shareholders in connection with the Touchstone combination in order to develop an understanding of their views.
These views were then communicated to the Board as a whole so they could be considered during the Board discussions and deliberations in connection with the transaction.
The Company uses the Annual General Meeting AGM as an opportunity to communicate with its shareholders.
Notice of the AGM which will be held at 10.30am on 18 June 2018 at IP Group plc The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London EC4N 8AF is enclosed with this report.
In line with the Code the Notice of AGM will be sent to shareholders at least 20 working days before the meeting.
Details of the resolutions and the explanatory notes thereto are included with the Notice.
To ensure compliance with the Code the Board proposes separate resolutions for each issue and proxy forms allow shareholders who are unable to attend the AGM to vote for or against or to withhold their vote on each resolution.
The results of all proxy voting are published on the Groups website after the meeting and declared at the meeting itself to those shareholders who attend.
Shareholders who attend the AGM will have the opportunity to ask questions and all directors are expected to be available to take questions.
The Groups website site is the primary source of information on the Group.
The website includes an overview of the activities of the Group details of its portfolio companies and its key university partnerships and other strategic collaborations and details of all recent Group and portfolio announcements.
Political expenditure Although it is the Boards policy not to incur political expenditure or otherwise make cash contributions to political parties and it has no intention of changing that policy the CA 2006 is very broadly drafted in this area and the Board has raised a concern that it may include activities such as funding conferences or supporting certain bodies involved in policy review and law reform.
Accordingly at the AGM held on 10 May 2017 as per previous AGMs the shareholders passed a resolution on a precautionary basis to authorise the Group to incur political expenditure as defined in Section 365 of CA 2006 not exceeding 50000 in total at any time from 10 May 2017 up to the conclusion of the 2018 AGM.
The Board intends to seek renewed authority for the Group to incur political expenditure of not more than 50000 in total at the Companys 2018 AGM to be held on 18 June 2018 which they might otherwise be prohibited from making or incurring under the terms of CA 2006.
Going concern The Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD MIKE HUMPHREY
29 March 2018 Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Overview 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report REMUNERATION STATEMENT Evolving our principles of remuneration to create a more attractive employment proposition for the enlarged Group.
JONATHAN BROOKS CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE On behalf of your Board I am pleased to present our Directors Remuneration Report DRR for the year ended 31 December 2017.
2017 Performance and incentive outturns The Groups Return on Hard NAV for 2017 was 64.1m a significant improvement on the negative 7.6m return for 2016.
The acquisition of Touchstone completed in October 2017.
The Committee decided that the oneoff acquisition and restructuring costs of 9.1m relating to the Touchstone combination as well as the 0.3m uplift in the Touchstone NAV between completion and 31 December 2017 should be excluded from the determination of the Return on Hard NAV for the purposes of the 2017 award.
The resulting AIS outturn for 2017 is 57.3% of maximum opportunity.
In contrast the cumulative threeyear return on the Groups Hard NAV did not meet the 8% per annum threshold target for the Groups 2015 LTIP awards scheduled to vest in March 2018.
Further while the actual absolute T otal Shareholder Return TSR performance period for the 2015 LTIP awards runs until 31 March 2018 based on the Groups share price at the date of this report the minimum 8% annualised return has not been met.
As a result it is currently anticipated that none of the 2015 awards will vest.
The Committee considers that these outcomes reflect the Committees pay for performance principles and the stretching objective incentive targets.
We provide transparent disclosure of our annual bonus performance targets on both a retrospective and where appropriate prospective basis.
Details of the annual bonus targets for 2017 and forwardlooking targets for 2018 are contained in this report.
Remuneration Principles The enlargement of the Group in 2017 necessitated a review of our existing approach across the entire senior management team to ensure our principles of remuneration continued to be appropriate.
We have reviewed our remuneration approach and are pleased to conclude that in general terms the existing remuneration principles did not require fundamental change though it was necessary to rebalance the incentive components of remuneration for some senior managers as well as modifying the blend of individual and team performance targets in determining AIS outcomes.
No changes were proposed however for the longer term incentive plans which for executive directors and managers remains the LTIP while those employees most able to influence portfolio company performance excluding Executive Directors also participate in the Long Term Incentive Carry Scheme
80 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports The framework for our executive directors is summarised below Salary y Typically salaries approach the bottom end of a market competitive range for similar sized companies
AIS y Maximum 100% of salary y Based on stretching return on Hard NAV targets disclosed retrospectively and prospectively and other relevant leading indicators of performance as determined by the Committee each year y Half of any bonus above a minimum amount deferred into equity over twoyear period y AIS arrangements cascade to all employees in the business impact on the Groups outcomes.
Shareholding guidelines y 200% of salary CEO and 150% other executive directors
Executive Directors base salaries for 2018 As described in the 2016 Remuneration Report the salaries of the executive directors have been increased using a phased approach over several years to reach a level close to the lower quartile when compared to a peer group of companies of similar size and complexity.
Although the Group increased significantly in size and complexity during 2017 the Committee decided that increases in base salaries for 2018 should not exceed the average increase awarded to other UKbased employees at this juncture.
Instead it decided to review the salaries of the executive directors only after all of the organisational changes associated with the enlargement of the Group had been established.
The Committee therefore expects to review the Executive Directors remuneration in the second half of 2018 to ensure they remain marketcompetitive.
The average increase in base salaries for employees in 2018 is 4%.
The Committee has determined that the base pay increases for the executive directors to be implemented in April 2018 will be lower than the average for the wider employee population as follows y The CEOs base salary will be increased by 3.8% to 415000 y The other Executive Directors salaries will be increased by 3.8% to 275000.
More detail on the executive director salary increases is set out on page 88.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED REMUNERATION STATEMENT Executive Directors AIS and LTIP opportunities There will be no change to the maximum AIS or LTIP opportunities for 2018.
However for 2018 in addition to basing the AIS on the improvement in Hard NAV the Committee is introducing three further components that it considers are leading indicators of underlying business performance.
These measures are i cash realisations from the portfolio ii third party capital raised by portfolio companies and iii the level of net operating expenses.
Committee Chairmanship As I described in last years report my intention was to stand down as Chair of the Remuneration Committee during 2017.
The Nominations Committee have now determined that Professor Lynn Gladden who has been a member of the Remuneration Committee since 2014 will assume the role of Chair with effect from the date of the Groups 2018
I will remain a member of the Committee and look forward to continuing to work with Professor Gladden to further develop and monitor the Groups remuneration strategy.
Approval of the Remuneration Report in 2017 The 2016 Directors Remuneration Report received 98.9% of votes cast in favour at our AGM in May 2017 and while this indicated a strong level of support the Group remains as committed as ever to engagement and transparency and I welcome the opportunity for continued discussion of the Groups remuneration with any shareholder either at our AGM or at any other time during the year.
I know that Professor Gladden shares this view and would herself welcome discussion on the Groups remuneration.
Structure of this report The following pages contain an extract of our Remuneration Policy as approved by shareholders a summary of how we intend to implement the policy during 2018 and the detailed disclosure of outcomes in respect of 2017.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD JONATHAN BROOKS CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE 29 March 2018 82 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report REMUNERATION POLICY AND COMPONENTS The Remuneration Policy was approved at the AGM held on 12 May 2016 and was effective as of that date.
An extract of the policy table for executive directors contained in that policy is reproduced below for information only.
The full Remuneration Policy is contained on pages 65 to 74 of the 2015 annual report which is available in the investor relations section of the Groups website.
Where relevant references previously to 2015 or 2016 have been updated to reflect the application in 2016 2017 and 2018.
Remuneration Policy table The table below sets out the key components of the Policy for Executive Directors remuneration
Purpose and link to strategy How this component of Maximum opportunity
Salary To provide an appropriate level of fixed cash income to attract and retain individuals with the personal attributes skills and experience required to deliver the Groups strategy Generally reviewed annually with increases currently effective from 1 April.
Base salaries will be set by the Committee taking into account y scale scope and responsibility of the role y skills and experience of the individual y retention risk y base salary of other employees y base salary of individuals undertaking similar roles in companies of comparable size and complexity and y appropriate market benchmarks.
There is no prescribed maximum annual salary.
Annual salary increases for executive directors will not normally exceed the average increase awarded to other UK based employees.
Increases may be above this level in circumstances where the Committee considers it appropriate for example if there is an increase in the scale scope or responsibility of the role or to allow the base salary of recently appointed executives who are appointed on initially lower levels of base salary to move towards market norms as their experience and contribution increase.
Where a significant discrepancy exists between an executive directors current salary and market levels the Committee will normally phase any increases over a number of years.
Following shareholder consultation in 2015 the Committee has implemented a number of phased salary increases to executive directors over 2015  2018.
None although performance of the individual is considered by the Committee when setting and reviewing salaries annually.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report REMUNERATION POLICY AND COMPONENTS
Purpose and link to strategy How this component of Maximum opportunity
Pension Provide a competitive post retirement benefit in a way that manages the overall cost to the Group in order to retain individuals with the personal attributes skills and experience required to deliver the Groups strategy Contribution to Group Pension Plan defined contribution scheme or to personal pension plan of the relevant executives choosing or an equivalent cash alternative.
No element other than base salary is pensionable.
Maximum pension is 15% of base salary however current operation is 10% of base salary for all executive directors.
Not applicable Benefits Provide a competitive and appropriate benefits package to assist individuals in carrying out their duties effectively and to retain individuals with the personal attributes skills and experience required to deliver the Groups strategy Ongoing benefits typically comprise but are not limited to health and travel insurance income protection and life assurance and may also comprise a car benefit or cash equivalent and telecommunications such as broadband.
The Group also offers certain salary sacrifice schemes including childcare vouchers purchase of additional holiday and Ride to Work.
Executive directors may also participate in any allemployee share plans that may be operated by the Group from time to time on the same terms as other employees.
Additional benefits which may include relocation expenses housing allowance or other benefitsinkind may be provided in certain circumstances if considered appropriate and reasonable by the Committee including as may be required on recruitment.
The cost of benefits provided changes in accordance with market conditions and will therefore determine the maximum amount that would be paid in the form of benefits under the Policy.
There is therefore no overall maximum opportunity under this component of the Policy.
Oneoff benefits e.
25% of base salary other than in exceptional circumstances at the discretion of the
Maximum awards under all employee share plans would be subject to prevailing statutory limit.
Not applicable 84 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports
Purpose and link to strategy How this component of Maximum opportunity
Annual
Incentive
Scheme
AIS
To provide a simple competitive performancelinked annual incentive mechanism that will y attract retain and motivate individuals with the required personal attributes skills and experience y provide a real incentive to achieve our strategic objectives and y align the interests of management and shareholders.
The AIS is reviewed annually prior to the start of each financial year to ensure the detailed performance measures and weightings are appropriate and continue to support the business strategy.
Financial andor nonfinancial performance targets are set at or around the start of each financial year.
Actual AIS amounts are determined via a twostage process.
Firstly performance against the agreed metrics is assessed.
Secondly the Committee reviews these results in the context of underlying business performance and the Groups financial position and may adjust the stage one outcome at its discretion.
Subject to a suitable minimum amount set by the Committee at the start of each year awards will typically be payable 50% in cash and 50% in IP Group shares.
The share element is in the form of conditional awards of shares or nilcost options or equivalent at the Committees discretion and is subject to further timebased vesting over two years 50% after year 1 and 50% after year 2 although the Committee may adjust the % split between cash and shares based on the financial position of the Group.
The IP Group shares element shall be satisfied by awards of options under the deferred bonus share plan DBSP.
In the case of intended fraud or misconduct by a participant that contributes to a significant error in financial information the Company will be entitled to claw back the value of any cash amount paid under the AIS for that year and to cancel the vesting of any deferred share element for a period of up to three years following the date of award or payment.
The maximum annual level of award is 100% of salary.
Given the Groups salary year currently runs from 1 April to 31 March the base salary used will normally be that which is in effect at the end of the annual financial year to which the award relates.
Specific targets and weightings will vary from year to year in accordance with strategic priorities but may include targets relating to y Relative or absolute TSR y Hard net assets y Financial performance y Appropriate nonfinancial measures and y Attainment of personal objectives. performance. one year.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED REMUNERATION POLICY AND COMPONENTS
Purpose and link to strategy How this component of Maximum opportunity
Longterm incentive plan LTIP To provide a competitive performancelinked longterm incentive mechanism that will y attract retain and motivate individuals with the required personal attributes skills and experience y provide a real incentive to achieve our strategic objectives and y align the interests of management and shareholders.
The LTIP is reviewed annually prior to the start of each financial year to ensure the detailed performance measures and weightings are appropriate and continue to support the business strategy.
Financial andor nonfinancial performance targets are set at or around the start of each financial year.
Awards under the LTIP typically comprise conditional awards of shares in IP Group although instruments with similar economic effect may be used if considered appropriate.
From the 2013 LTIP awards onwards any share awards that vest net of any tax and NICs liabilities are subject to a further holding period.
The holding period was one year for the 2013 LTIP and two years for subsequent awards.
In the case of intended fraud or misconduct by a participant that contributes to a significant error in financial information the Company will be entitled to reduce the number of shares in respect of an unvested award andor claw back any shares subject to the post vesting holding period.
Calculations of the achievement of the vesting targets are reviewed and approved by the
The maximum annual level of award is y 300% of salary for the Chief executive officer and y a lower percentage for other Executive Directors Each year the Committee determines the annual award for each executive director within the above Policy limits.
The award level for 2018 shall continue to be 300% of the 201819 base salary for the
Chief Executive Officer and
200% for all other executive directors.
The overall maximum under the LTIP approved by shareholders is 400% of salary.
However the policy limits set out above will apply and this plan limit will only be used in exceptional circumstances such as a buyout on recruitment or where an award could not be made in the relevant year and needs to be made in a subsequent year.
Specific targets may vary from year to year in accordance with strategic priorities but shall be based on y Relative or absolute TSR and y Hard net assets.
These performance criteria shall be presented in a matrix format similar to that set out in the Annual
Report.
The level of vesting for threshold performance is 30% of the maximum.
Where absolute TSR is used as a performance metric awards may be subject to a relative performance underpin against an appropriate benchmark index or comparator group.
Performance will ordinarily be measured based on a performance period of at least three years.
86 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Directors remuneration report ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT Statement of implementation of remuneration policy in the following financial year Following the extensive consultation with shareholders undertaken during 2015 and early 2016 we undertook phased changes to certain of the Executive Directors base salaries so that from 201718 they would be around lower quartile of a peer group of companies of a similar size and complexity to the Group.
In addition new Executive Directors LTIP opportunities were implemented reflecting our performancebased philosophy with a focus on the long term and consistent with a lower basehigher variable approach.
Salary and fixed components With effect from 1 April 2018 the base salaries of the Executive Directors will be base salary % Alan Aubrey CEO 415000 3.8% 15000 Mike Townend CIO 275000 3.8% 10000 Greg Smith CFO 275000 3.8% 10000 David Baynes COO 275000 3.8% 10000 As has been the case for a number of years the Committee considers that as part of a competitive overall package base salaries should be within a marketcompetitive range.
Given IP Groups business model and stage of development this is currently considered to be within lower quartile to median of companies of a similar size and complexity.
While the Group has significantly increased in size and complexity during the Committee has determined that it will continue with its previously stated approach as set out in the Remuneration Policy whereby any increases will not normally exceed the average increase awarded to other UKbased employees.
For context the average increase across all employees in the UK business excluding executive directors and new joiners was higher than the executive director population at 4.86% in 2017 and is anticipated to be approximately 6.35% for 2018.
The
Committee intends to review the Executive Directors base salaries later in 2018 to ensure they remain marketcompetitive.
Pension and benefits will continue to be in line with the levels stated in the policy table.
Incentives
As described above in 2016 the Committee implemented a change in the variable earning opportunity for the executive directors consistent with our pay for performance and low base high longterm variable approach to executive remuneration and intends to continue to apply the same approach in 2018.
Consistent with the maximum opportunity for the 2017 LTIP awards the 2018 LTIP awards will continue to be made at 300% of base salary for the CEO and 200% of base salary for all other Executive Directors.
Performance will continue to be assessed against growth in Hard NAV and TSR performance with the underpin based on relative TSR against the FTSE 250 as per the vesting tables for the 2015 LTIP set out on page 89.
Any awards that vest net of any tax and NICs liabilities will continue to be subject to a further twoyear holding period.
The maximum AIS opportunity will remain at 100% of base salary for all Executive Directors.
The 2017 AIS had a single performance measure being the annual return achieved on the Groups Hard NAV.
The
Committee considers that it remains appropriate for a significant proportion of the AIS to be based on this performance measure since it is one of the most important metrics on which to judge the underlying success of the business.
However for 2018 the Committee is introducing three further components that it considers are leading indicators of underlying business performance.
These measures are i cash realisations from the portfolio ii third party capital raised by portfolio companies and iii the level of net operating expenses.
In line with the Groups Remuneration Policy in excess of 50% of the AIS performance will be based on annual return on Hard NAV.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT As in prior years the Committee has determined the performance metrics that are required to be achieved.
In terms of the Return on Hard NAV target as before the Committee has taken into consideration the blend of assets that constitute the Group Hard NAV particularly the relative level of cash on which it is not currently possible to achieve a return in excess of approximately 1%.
Reflecting our commitment to transparency we are again disclosing this AIS target on a prospective basis.
For 2018 the Committee has determined that threshold vesting for this of 25% of the maximum award will be available provided a minimum return of 6% is achieved while the maximum awards pool will be available should a return of 16% or greater be achieved.
In absolute terms this requires the achievement of a return on hard NAV in excess of 80m before any AIS may be awarded and a return in excess of 210m in order for full awards to be made.
The targets relating to the additional measures outline above as well as the performance against these targets will be disclosed in the 2018 Directors Remuneration Report.
Overall
Chairman and NonExecutive
The fees for the Chairman for 201819 shall be 156000 a 4.0% increase from the annual fee since his appointment in 2015.
The fees of the NonExecutive Directors will be increased to 43500 reflecting a 3.6% increase compared to 201718.
Additional fees for chairmanship of a board committee or for being senior independent director shall increase to 10000.
Single figure for total remuneration audited The following table sets out the single figure for total remuneration for Directors for the financial years ended 31 December 2016 and 2017.
Base salaryfees Benefits Pension Annual Bonus
LTIP
Total
All 000steltelteltel Executive Directors Alan Aubrey Mike Townend     446 284 Greg Smith     443 260 David Baynes
Mike Humphrey       154 153 Jonathan Brooks 57 55         57 55 Doug Liversidge       51 48 Lynn Gladden 42 40         42 40 Elaine Sullivan       43 41 David Begg Pension includes payments made to defined contribution schemes on behalf of the Directors or the value of any cash equivalent if applicable.
The Group did not achieve the threshold performance level required for there to be an AIS bonus pool in 2016.
AIS Bonus reflects total award value however any awards are payable 50% in cash and 50% in IP Group shares with the share element subject to timebased vesting over two years.
The LTIP values for 2017 are based on none of the 2015 LTIP awards vesting in March 2018 based on the performance conditions at 23 March 2017.
The 2014 LTIPs did not vest in 2016.
Further information about the level of vesting for both of these awards is provided in the additional disclosures section pages 89 and 90.
In addition Alan Aubrey retained board fees in 2017 totalling 102499 2016 101667 from portfolio companies in which the Group is a shareholder and that were deducted from his base salary as described further under Outside appointments for executive directors on page 86.
David Baynes received reimbursement of certain travel costs considered commensurate with a car allowance which were subject to PAYENI.
Commuting costs for NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed and are subject to PAYENI.
Prof.
David Begg joined the Groups Board on 18 October 2017.
88 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Additional disclosures for single figure for total remuneration table audited Annual incentive scheme The targets for the 2017 AIS were solely financial in nature and were based on the annual return on hard net assets i. were 706.5m at 31 December 2016.
The targets for 2017 and the outturn against these were as follows
Actual
Performance
Return on Hard NAV 6% return 42.4m 25% of maximum opportunity threshold16% return 113.0m 100% of maximum opportunity 10.3% return 57.3% of maximum opportunity As shown previously the Groups Return on Hard NAV for 2017 including acquisition and restructuring costs of 9.1m was 64.1m a significant improvement on the negative 7.6m return for 2016.
The acquisition of Touchstone completed in October 2017.
The
Committee decided that these oneoff costs relating to the Touchstone combination as well as the 0.3m uplift in the Touchstone NAV between completion and 31 December 2017 should be excluded from the determination of the Return on Hard NAV for the purposes of the 2017 award.
The resulting Return on Hard NAV for 2017 is 10.3% and the Committee allocated 57.3% of the total available award pool.
In accordance with the Groups Remuneration Policy all amounts to individuals above an initial minimum amount paid in cash which for the 2017 AIS will be 25000 will be paid 50% in cash and 50% in shares deferred over two years using the Groups DBSP.
Longterm incentive scheme 2015 LTIP awards due to vest in March 2018 The 2015 LTIP awards are based on the performance of the Groups Hard NAV the Groups net assets excluding intangibles and the Oxford Equity Rights asset for the three financial years ending on 31 December 2017 and Total Shareholder Return TSR from March 2015 to the ordinary vesting date being 31 March 2018 using a onemonth average.
Both performance measures are combined into a matrix format as per the vesting table below.
The total award is subject to an underpin based on the relative performance of the Groups TSR to that of the FTSE 250 index which can reduce the awards by up to 50%.
Vesting matrix estimated 2015 LTIP outturn TSR p.
15% 60% 75% 90% 100% 10% 30% 45% 60% 90% 8% 15% 30% 45% 75% 8% 0% 15% 30% 60% 8% 8% 10% 15% Growth in NAV p.
Performance condition
Performance
Actualforecast
Performance
Hard NAV at 31 Dec 2017 8% 1369m 15% 1540m 1326m 6% p.
Annual TSR share price 8% 261p 15% 12p 22% p.
Comparative
TSR
FTSE 250 14.5% IP Group 51% Hard NAV target increased by Committee to reflect 385.1m Touchstone Hard net assets acquired in 2017 and net proceeds of 359.9m from the Groups 2015 and 2017 placings.
TSR performance shown reflects the Groups onemonth average share price to 23 March 2018.
Actual performance period is the one month average to 31 March 2018.
The actual performance of the Group in terms of Hard NAV growth was below threshold and based on the 1month average share price to 23 March 2018 was below the lower TSR target and that of the FTSE 250 TSR performance.
On this basis the 2015 LTIP award is not expected to meet the minimum performance criteria required for vesting.
The amounts disclosed above in the single remuneration figure table are based on this performance and resulting expected outcome.
Actual vesting will be based on TSR performance to 31 March 2018.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT 2014 LTIP awards that were due to vest in March 2017 The following table sets out the outcomes of the performance measures relating to the 2014 LTIP awards against the vesting criteria.
Vesting matrix actual 2014 LTIP outturn TSR p.
15% 60% 75% 90% 100% 10% 30% 45% 60% 90% 8% 15% 30% 45% 75% 8% 0% 15% 30% 60% 8% 8% 10% 15% Growth in NAV p.
Performance condition
Performance
Actual
Performance
Hard NAV at 31 Dec 2016 8% 750m 15% 885m 6% p.
Annual TSR share price 8% 266p 15% 321p 8% p.
Comparative
TSR
FTSE 250 28% IP Group 25% Hard NAV target increased by Committee to reflect 21.7m Fusion IP net assets acquired in 2014 and 276.1m net proceeds of the Groups placings in 2014 and 2015.
Group TSR performance based on the onemonth average to 31 March 2017.
As can be seen from the performance outcomes table the Hard NAV growth performance measure and Groups Annual TSR did not meet the minimum threshold performance.
Based on the vesting matrix this resulted in none of the 2014 awards vesting.
2017 LTIP awards The 2017 LTIP awards were made based on 29 August 2017 with a face value of 300% of salary for the CEO and 200% of salary for other Executive Directors based on the share price at date of grant and vesting subject to performance.
Awards are calculated by reference to the salary effective for the 201718 salary year.
Any conditionallyawarded shares that vest net of tax shall be subject to a twoyear holding period.
The performance conditions that apply to both of these awards will follow the same matrix structure with the same vesting parameters as that set out above for the previous awards.
Hard NAV growth will be measured over the threeyear period to 31 December 2019 starting point 706.5m.
TSR would ordinarily be measured from the day before the date of award in this case 30 August 2017 to 31 March 2020 with a onemonth average however given the one month average at this time was lower than the Groups recent placing price of 140p the Committee determined that the performance condition should be based on this higher starting point of 140p.
The underpin will be with reference to TSR performance against the FTSE 250 over this same period.
Similarly the number of conditional LTIP awards granted for the Executive Directors was calculated based on the 140p placing price rather than the 115.1p closing price on the day before the awards were made.
Executive Director Type of interest Basis of award % salary Face value
End of performance period Alan Aubrey 2017 LTIP 300% 1200 30% 31 Dec 2019 NAV  31 Mar 2020 TSR Mike Townend 2017 LTIP 200% 530 30% 31 Dec 2019 NAV  31 Mar 2020 TSR Greg Smith 2017 LTIP 200% 530 30% 31 Dec 2019 NAV  31 Mar 2020 TSR David Baynes 2017 LTIP 200% 530 30% 31 Dec 2019 NAV  31 Mar 2020 TSR The number of shares corresponding to the face value is calculated using the share price of 140p for all Executive Directors rather than the 115.1p that was the closing price of the Groups shares on the date of award.
Represents threshold vesting against both elements of the performance matrix.
Lower vesting is possible if only one element of the matrix is partially met or as a result of the application of the relative performance underpin.
90 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Loss of office payments or payments to former directors audited information No payments for loss of office were made to past directors during the year nor were any payments made to former directors for director duties that have not already been included in their historic single figures of remuneration.
Change in remuneration of the Chief Executive Officer compared to Group employees The table below sets out the increase in the remuneration of the CEO and that of our UK employees excluding Directors and new joiners leavers % change in base salary to 2017 % change in bonus to 2017 % change in benefits exc.
CEO 15.9% 100% 50% UK employees 4.4% 100% 6.4% Historical executive pay and Group performance The table and graph below allow comparison of the Total Shareholder Return TSR of the Group and the Chief Executive Officer remuneration outcomes over the last nine years.
The chart below shows the Groups TSR performance against the performance of the FTSE AllShare FTSE SmallCap and FTSE 250 indices over the nineyear period to 31 December 2017.
The Directors have selected these indices as in their opinion these indices comprise the most relevant equity indices of which the Company was a member during a significant proportion of the period in question and against which total shareholder return of IP Group plc should be measured.
45tel25tel50 0telteltel IP Group FTSE Small Cap FTSE All Share FTSE 250 Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT Historical Chief Executive Officer remuneration outcomes The table below summarises the Chief Executive Officer single figure for total remuneration annual bonus pay out and LTIP vesting as a percentage of maximum opportunity for the current year and previous seven years.
Chief Executive Officer Alan Aubreytelteltel
CEO single figure of remuneration 000s 223 193 209 3257 223tel552 Annual bonus payout % of maximum na na na na 100% 0% 100% 0% 57% LTIP vesting % of maximum na 0% na 81% 100% 100% 57% 0% 0% LTIP vesting is based on the current expectations of the performance against the 2015 LTIP targets as discussed on page 89.
Relative spend on pay The chart below shows the total employee costs change in Hard NAV and change in share price from 2016 to 2017.
The information shown in this chart is based on the following Total employee pay Total employee costs from note 9 on page 137 including wages and salaries social security costs pension and sharebased payments.
Change in hard NAV change in the Groups net assets excluding goodwill intangibles and the Oxford Equity Rights asset taken from the statement of financial position on page 117.
Returns to shareholders since the Group does not currently pay a dividend returns to shareholders are represented by the change in the Groups share price over the period from 31 December 2016 to 31 December 2017.
17.0 1326.2 Total employee costs m 79% Hard NAV m 114% 2016 2017 Share price p 20% 92 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Directors shareholdings and share interests audited information The Groups Remuneration Policy contains minimum shareholding requirements for each of its Executive
The Committee has set the current limits at 2.0x salary for the Chief Executive Officer and 1.5x salary for all other Executive Directors.
This level of shareholding is required to be met within four years of each directors date of appointment or by 1 July 2017 if later.
If the guideline is not met by any Executive Director within this timeframe then the Committee will discuss with the relevant Executive Director a plan to ensure that the guideline can be met within a reasonable timeframe.
The Committee will ordinarily require Executive Directors to retain all shares received under the AIS or LTIP other than as required to meet tax and NIC liabilities until the guideline is met.
At the end of the year Alan Aubrey Mike Townend and Greg Smith met this requirement while David Baynes was required to meet the requirement by 19 March 2018 being the date which is four years following his appointment as director.
David Baynes has previously met this requirement and share price fluctuations during the year have resulted in this requirement being marginally off targeted levels at 19 March 2018.
The directors are mindful of Committee guidance on this matter and will work with the Committee to ensure that minimum levels are maintained including as described above retaining all shares received under the AIS or LTIP awards other than as required to meet tax and NIC liabilities.
Interests in shares The Directors who held office during 2017 had the following beneficial interests in the ordinary shares of the Company 31 December 2017 Current directors Number of shares % of share capital Alan Aubrey 2566428 0.24% Mike Townend 1136902 0.11% Greg Smith 288351 0.03% David Baynes 246975 0.02% Jonathan Brooks 64616 0.01% Mike Humphrey 86153 0.01% Doug Liversidge 75297 0.01% Lynn Gladden Elaine Sullivan David Begg 40628 0.00% There have been no changes in the interests of the directors set out above between 31 December 2017 and 29 March 2018.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT LongTerm Incentive Plan Directors participations in the Groups LTIP are Number of shares conditionally held at 1 January
Vested during the year
Potential conditional interest in shares at 31 December Share price at date of conditional award
Alan Aubrey 2014 LTIP 147042   147042  177.5 31Mar17 2015 LTIP 124751    124751 214.5 31Mar18 2016 LTIP 664313    664313 155.8 31Mar19 2017 LTIP  857142   857142 112.5 31Mar20 936106 857142  147042 1646206 Mike Townend 2014 LTIP 117634   117634  177.5 31Mar17 2015 LTIP 99801    99801 214.5 31Mar18 2016 LTIP 327342    327342 155.8 31Mar19 2017 LTIP  378571   378571 112.5 31Mar20 544777 378571  117634 805714 Greg Smith 2014 LTIP 94310   94310  177.5 31Mar17 2015 LTIP 89409    89409 214.5 31Mar18 2016 LTIP 306803    306803 155.8 31Mar19 2017 LTIP  378571   378571 112.5 31Mar20 490522 378571  94310 774783 David Baynes 2014 LTIP 117634   117634  177.5 31Mar17 2015 LTIP 99801    99801 214.5 31Mar18 2016 LTIP 327342    327342 155.8 31Mar19 2017 LTIP  378571   378571 112.5 31Mar20 544777 378571  117634 805714 note that the number of conditional LTIP awards made in 2017 was calculated using the Groups recent 140p placing price 94 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Deferred bonus share plan DBSP Directors interests in nilcost options under the Groups DBSP that have been granted in order to defer AIS bonuses in accordance with our Policy are as follows Options held at 1 January
Exercised during the year
Options
December
Share price at date of award p
Alan Aubrey Deferral from 2013 AIS 33037  33037   192.4 15Apr16 Deferral from 2015 AIS 42710  42710   175.6 31Mar17 Deferral from 2015 AIS 42710    42710 175.6 31Mar18 118457  75747  42710 Mike Townend Deferral from 2013 AIS 22024  22024   192.4 15Apr16 Deferral from 2015 AIS 25981  25981   175.6 31Mar17 Deferral from 2015 AIS 25981    25981 175.6 31Mar18 73986  48005  25981 Greg Smith Deferral from 2013 AIS 15593  15593   192.4 15Apr16 Deferral from 2015 AIS 22637  22637   175.6 31Mar17 Deferral from 2015 AIS 22637    22637 175.6 31Mar18 60867  38230  22637 David Baynes Deferral from 2015 AIS 25981  25981   175.6 31Mar17 Deferral from 2015 AIS 25981    25981 175.6 31Mar18 51962  25891  25981 SaveasYouEarn SAYE The Group operates an HMRCregistered SAYE share save scheme for all UK employees in which two Executive Directors are current participants.
Their currently outstanding option contracts under the SAYE and the respective maturity dates are listed in the table below.
Options
1 January
Exercised during the year
Options
31 December
Share price at date of award
Greg Smith 2014 SAYE 4105     144.7p 198.3p 01Aug17 2015 SAYE 3459   3459  171.7p 235.6p 01Oct18 2017 SAYE  12631   12631 114.0p 141.3p 31Aug20 7564 12631  3459 14736 David Baynes 2014 SAYE 4975    4975 144.7p 198.3p 01Aug17 2015 SAYE 4193   4193  171.7p 235.6p 01Oct18 2017 SAYE  9473   9473 114.0p 141.3p 31Aug20 9168 9473  4193 14448 Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT Other longterm interests  legacy arrangements audited information In addition to the Executive Directors remuneration arrangements the Group also operates coinvestment and carried interest arrangements relating to certain venture capital funds that are under its management.
Under the coinvestment arrangements executive directors make minority capital and loan commitments to IP Venture Fund IPVF alongside the Group.
Executives are entitled to participate in a carried interest scheme in respect of IPVF and The North East Technology Fund LP alongside the Group.
Carried interest provides a preferential return to participants once the partnership in question has returned all funds contributed by limited partners together with a preagreed rate of return.
The carried interest and coinvestment arrangements will generally contain forfeiture provisions in respect of leavers over the investment period of the relevant partnership typically 56 years.
As described in the Policy no new allocations of this kind will be made to executive directors in future however the current outstanding interests in coinvestment and carried interest schemes in connection with the Groups managed funds are as follows IPVF coinvestment arrangements The Executive Directors commitments to and returns from IPVF are set out below.
Commitments are made indirectly through the IP Venture Fund FP LP which is the founder partner of IPVF.
Total commitment
IPVF
Total capital contributed to 1 January
Total capital contributions at 31 December
Total capital amounts repaid to 31 December Executive Directors Alan Aubrey 56 0.18% 55  55  34 Mike Townend 56 0.18% 55  55  34 Greg Smith 35 0.11% 35  35  21 Total 147 0.47% 145  145  89 Carried interest arrangements The Executive Directors interests in carried interest schemes are set out below
Carried interest ii at 1 January
Transferred during the year
Scheme
Interest at 31 December iii
31 December Executive Directors Alan Aubrey IPVF 1.81%    1.81% 340 NETF 1.55%    1.55% Mike Townend IPVF 1.81%    1.81% 340 NETF 1.15%    1.15% Greg Smith IPVF 1.14%    1.14% 214 NETF 0.85%    0.85% Under the IPVF fund LPA payments to participants are made when all limited partners have been repaid their contributions together with a hurdle rate of 8% compound interest.
Under the North East Technology Fund NETF scheme payments to participants are made when all limited partners have been repaid their contributions together with a hurdle rate of 3.5% compound interest.
Scheme interest represents the percentage of the relevant pool of investments in respect of which the participant is entitled to participate in the realised profits assuming the relevant hurdle return has been met.
The schemes contain forfeiture provisions over the investment period of the fund which may reduce the scheme interest accruing to any participant.
The table reflects the maximum scheme interest receivable should no forfeiture occur.
Accrued value of scheme interests is calculated based upon the current fair value of the relevant limited partnerships assets in excess of the capital contributed and the hurdle rate of return.
Any payments will only be made following full repayment of limited partners loan commitments and the hurdle return and accordingly actual payments under the scheme if any may be materially different to those set out above.
96 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports 0.9% 0.6% 0.9% 0.2% 0.4% 7.0% Vested LTIP awards in past 10 years  Executives 0.9% Vested LTIP awards in past 10 years  Other sta 0.6% Outstanding LTIP awards Executives 0.4% Outstanding LTIP and Former Touchstone LTIP awards Other sta 0.9% Additional headroom 7.0% Other share schemes Sharesave DBSP etc.
0.2% Former Fusion IP LTIP While serving as an executive director of Fusion IP plc which was acquired by the Group in 2014 Mr Baynes was conditionally awarded 1000000 shares in Fusion IP plc under the Fusion IP LTIP.
As part of the arrangements for the acquisition of Fusion IP plc Mr Baynes Fusion IP LTIP awards were converted into awards over IP Group shares at the same conversion price per share as the scheme of arrangement was undertaken 0.446 IP Group plc shares for every Fusion IP plc share.
The awards were originally due to vest on 31 December 2017 provided certain performance conditions were met which relate to inter alia the growth in value of Fusion IP plcs net asset value Fusion NAV from the date of acquisition and the continued employment of the individual by the Group.
In summary if Fusion NAV growth of 10% per annum is achieved then 30% of an award shall vest.
Maximum vesting will occur if Fusion NAV growth of 20% per annum is achieved with straightline vesting between 30% and 100% if Fusion NAV growth of 10%20% per annum is achieved.
The options expired on 31 December 2017 as the vesting criteria had not been met.
Number of shares conditionally held at 1 January
Vested during the year
Potential conditional interest in shares at 31 December Share price at date of conditional award Earliest vesting dates David Baynes 446000   446000  na 31 December 2017 Total 446000   446000 Outside appointments for executive directors Any proposed external directorships are considered by the Board to ensure they do not cause a conflict of interest but subject to this executive directors may accept a maximum of two outside nonexecutive appointments and indeed the Board believes that it is part of their ongoing development to do so.
Where an executive director accepts an appointment to the board of a company in which the Group is a shareholder the Group generally retains the related fees.
In the circumstances where the executive director receives such fees directly such sums are generally deducted from their base salary from the Group.
Fees earned for directorships of companies in which the Group does not have a shareholding are normally retained by the relevant director.
Any outside appointments i. executive directors are set out on page 97.
Limits on the number of shares used to satisfy share awards dilution limits All of the Groups incentive schemes that contain an element that may be satisfied in IP Group shares incorporate provisions that in any tenyear period ending on the relevant date of grant the maximum number of the Shares that may be issued or issuable under all such schemes shall not exceed 10% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company from time to time.
The Committee regularly monitors the position and prior to the making of any sharebased award considers the effect of potential vesting of outstanding awards to ensure that the Company remains within these limits.
Any awards which are required to be satisfied by market purchased shares are excluded from such calculations.
No treasury shares were held or utilised in the year ended 31 December 2017.
As at 31 December 2017 the Companys headroom position which remains within such guidelines was as shown in the chart to the right.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors remuneration report CONTINUED ANNUAL REMUNERATION STATEMENT Service agreements The Executive Directors have service contracts that commenced on the dates set out in the chart below and contain a contractual notice period of six months by either party.
The NonExecutive Directors have letters of appointment that commenced on the dates set out in the chart below are generally for an initial fixed term of three years which is reviewed and may be extended for a further three years and are terminable on three months notice by either party.
In accordance with the Code all directors submit themselves for annual re election by shareholders at each AGM.
Alan
Aubrey
Mike
Townend
Greg
Smith
David
Baynes
Jonathan
Brooks
Mike
Humphrey
Doug
Liversidgeteltelteltel Present Eective dates of service contracts of the Executive Directors Eective dates of letters of appointment of the Nonexecutive Directors
Gladden
5 March 2007 2 June 2011 20 March 2014 31 August 2011 24 March 2015
31 December 2017
Sullivan
30 July 2015
Begg
18 October 26 March 2014 20 January 2005 14 October 2011 Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to directors remuneration The full terms of reference of the Committee which are reviewed annually are available on the Groups website at site In summary the Remuneration Committee has specific responsibility for advising the Groups Board on the remuneration and other benefits of executive directors an overall policy in respect of remuneration of other employees of the Group and establishing the Groups policy with respect to employee incentivisation schemes.
The Remuneration Committee currently comprises the following independent nonexecutive directors whose backgrounds and experience are summarised on pages 62 and 63 98 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Jonathan Brooks Chair Mike Humphrey Lynn Gladden Chairdesignate with effect from the 2018 AGM Elaine Sullivan David Begg Doug Liversidge retired from the Board and its committees in December 2017 but served as a member of the Committee throughout 2017.
David
Begg joined the Committee in October 2017.
Committee meetings are administered and minuted by the Company Secretary.
In addition the Committee received assistance from the CFO CEO and COO who attend meetings by invitation except when matters relating to their own remuneration are being discussed.
During the year the key activities carried out by the Committee were y Consideration of the Groups overall remuneration philosophy to ensure it continues to promote the Groups strategy including the blend of fixed and short and longerterm variable pay.
1 April 2018. scheme targets and payouts.
2014 and 2015 awards. for 2017 and 2018 as well as outturns for 2017.
Policy for nondirector employees with particular consideration for matters related to the integration of Touchstone Innovations. y Approval of the Groups DRR.
External advisers The Remuneration Committee is authorised if it wishes to seek independent specialist services to provide information and advice on remuneration at the Companys expense including attendance at Committee meetings.
During the year the Remuneration Committee continued its review of executive remuneration and took into consideration professional advice from Deloitte LLP in respect of the development of the Groups Remuneration Policy and its application and reporting under the revised Directors Remuneration Reporting Regulations.
Deloitte is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and adheres to its Code in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
Fees paid to Deloitte LLP in connection with advice to the Committee in 2017 were 14700.
Deloitte LLP also provided advice to the Group in 2017 in connection with its internal assessment of the effectiveness of the operation of its Board and in connection with valuations of certain of its unlisted portfolio company holdings.
Statement of shareholder voting The table below sets out the proxy results of the votes on the Groups Remuneration Report at the Groups 2017 AGM.
Votes for Votes against
Total votes cast
Remuneration Report 443440166 98.91 4762647 1.06 448328875 13842298 Remuneration disclosure This report complies with the requirements of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Regulations 2008 as amended in 2013 the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code September 2012 and the Listing Rules.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 2017 represented a particularly busy year for the Audit and Risk Committee following the completion of the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors in the first quarter the expansion into Australia and associated fundraising in the summer and the major acquisition of Touchstone Innovations Plc in the latter half of the year.
JONATHAN BROOKS CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE Report of the audit and risk committee Audit and Risk Committee ARC or the Committee responsibilities The Committee monitors the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and reviews all proposed annual and halfyearly results announcements to be made by the Group with consideration being given to any significant financial reporting judgements contained in them.
The Committee also advises the Board on whether it believes the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
The Committee also considers internal controls compliance with legal requirements accounting standards and the Listing Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority and also reviews any proposed change in accounting policies and any recommendations from the Groups Auditor regarding improvements to internal controls and the adequacy of resources within the Groups finance function.
Finally the Committee takes responsibility on behalf of the Board for the review of risk management and controls within the Group as well as conducting an annual robust assessment of these.
A full copy of the Committees Terms of Reference is available from the Companys website at site Committee membership The Committee comprises four independent non executive directors with myself as Chair.
As the Chair of the Committee I am deemed by the Board to have recent and relevant financial experience being a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants and having held senior financial positions in my career.
The Board is satisfied that for the year under review and thereafter that the Audit and Risk Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the company operates.
Exceptionally with the additional work resulting from the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc in 2017 the Committee met five times during the year.
All of the meetings were attended by the four independent Nonexecutive Directors.
The members of the Committee for the entire year were Professor Lynn Gladden Dr Elaine Sullivan and Doug Liversidge with myself as Chair.
Doug Liversidge retired from the Committee and the Board following our final meeting in December and was replaced by Professor David Begg who joined the IP Group board in November 2017 and who attended the meeting in December as an Observer.
The Groups Chairman Chief Financial Officer Group Financial Controller and the external auditor were also invited to attend all of the meetings and did so.
At the end of each of the meetings the Committee met with the auditor without any members of the executive management team being present.
Activities during the year The main activities of the Committee during 2017 can be seen by referring to the summary agenda items in the table overleaf.
During 2017 this was clearly divided between matters of financial oversight and those concerned with the management of risk.
Advisors in early 2017 the expansion into Australia and associated fundraising in the summer and the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations which eventually completed in November.
100 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports Valuation of assets and liabilities This remains the key audit risk for the Group and at each reporting event the Audit and Risk Committee discusses with management and the auditor the approach that has been taken in assessing all key estimates.
The most material area of judgement in the financial statements has always related to the valuation of the unquoted equity investments and the acquisition of Touchstone in November 2017 made this task more difficult.
With respect to the preTouchstone unquoted portfolio the Committee was able to satisfy itself that the portfolio valuations were materially correct after considering findings from the year end valuations review meeting taken together with additional valuation materials including written reports on the Groups portfolio companies.
However the inclusion of the unquoted portfolio from Touchstone was more difficult since several of its unquoted investments had not completed a funding round within the previous year and a number were only held by a small number of investors thus limiting the ability to validate the carrying values by reference to recent funding rounds or an extensive shareholder base.
As a result an extensive and detailed analysis was undertaken backed up where necessary with independent valuation work by third parties and discussions with
At the end of this process it was decided that 12 of these investments should be written down and one should be written up by an aggregate value of 112.5m or 24.4% out of a total Touchstone portfolio preadjusted carrying value of 461.1m.
At year end the fair value of the Groups intangible assets was 182.3m and goodwill was 172.1m compared with 62.2m and 57.1m respectively at the end of 2016.
The goodwill balance is tested annually for impairment.
The intangible assets are reviewed for impairment indicators and impairment tests are performed if any indicators are noted.
Summary agendas for the Audit and Risk Committee meetings in 2017 Primarily auditfocused business Primarily riskfocused business
Audit and Risk Committee y Long term viability statement and going concern review for 2016 financial statements y Third party review of cyber security y Third party review of US Operations y Risk Council terms of reference approval May 2017 y Planning of internal audit projects y Half year results planning y Update on new accounting system y Auditor effectiveness review y Acquisition accounting for Parkwalk y Risk Council update y Review of Group Treasury Policy y Prevention of facilitation of tax evasion y External review of FCAauthorised business controls including presentation by Parkwalk y Consideration of the requirement for a formal internal audit function July 2017 y Half year financial statements and review with auditor of significant accounting judgements y Financial Positions and Prospects Procedures related to potential Touchstone acquisition y Risk Council update y Ratification of provision of nonaudit services by auditor in respect of Touchstone acquisition Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Report of the audit and risk committee CONTINUED Primarily auditfocused business Primarily riskfocused business
December y KPMG Audit planning y Asset valuation methodology post Touchstone acquisition y Accounting impact of Touchstone acquisition y Long term viability statement paper y Annual review of Committee rolling agenda y Annual review of Committee terms of reference y Risk Council update integration risks y GDPR Update y Australian regulated activities update Regulatory Compliance Ensuring compliance for FCA regulated businesses also represents an important control risk from the perspective of the ARC.
Ongoing internal reviews are conducted through the use of a compliance monitoring programme and an annual external evaluation is also conducted by a specialist firm.
This was made more complex with the addition of the Parkwalk Advisors business in January and one regulated entity within the Touchstone group similar to IP Capital in October but during the 2017 review no specific issues were identified.
Review of Annual Report and Accounts and Halfyearly Report The Committee carried out a thorough review of the Groups 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and its 2017 Halfyearly Report resulting in the recommendation of both for approval by the Board.
In carrying out its review the Committee gave particular consideration to whether the Annual Report taken as a whole was fair balanced and understandable concluding that it was.
It did this primarily through consideration of the reporting of the Groups business model and strategy the competitive landscape in which it operates the significant risks it faces the progress made against its strategic objectives and the progress made by and changes in fair value of its portfolio companies during the year.
Going Concern and Long Term Viability Annually the Committee considers the going concern principle on which the financial statements are prepared and also considers and approves the long term viability review prepared by management.
As a business which seeks to establish and invest in new ventures as well as support existing investments with further capital the business model is currently inherently cashconsuming.
With a closing cash balance in 2017 of 326.3m the Group has sufficient cash reserves to continue to provide capital to its existing portfolio and to create and fund new businesses at a similar rate to previous years for at least two years assuming broadly similar levels of net operating expenditure and portfolio realisations.
The Committee as in previous years decided that the long term viability of the Group remained principally related to a number of factors.
These included the scaling of the business across different territories changes in the ability to raise further capital different 102 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Committee Reports outcomes following an Oxford Nanopore exit event with the integration of the former Touchstone business a new risk factor to consider.
The impact of these on each of a series of forecast scenarios was assessed.
In the scenario with significant downside where no further funding was available to the Group for the next three years together with a halving in value of the entire portfolio assuming a corresponding reduction in overheads the business remained viable for three years.
In the light of this both the Committee and the wider Board came to the conclusion that the viability period should not be greater than three years.
Risk and internal controls The key elements of the Groups internal control framework and procedures are set out on page 78.
The principal risks the Group faces are set out on pages 48 to 53.
During the year the Audit Committee devoted part of each meeting to items concerning risk and its management.
With the expansion in Australia combined with the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations the Committee felt that scalability integration and management bandwidth issues were now of much greater importance.
One important change in the management of risk was the decision in 2016 to establish a Risk Council whose permanent members would be the Chief Financial Officer Company Secretary and Group Financial Controller with other executives and management from across the business attending periodically during the year as necessary.
In establishing the Risk Council the purpose was to further formalise managements processes for identifying groupwide risks the controls in place to mitigate such risks and to assess the design and effectiveness of such internal controls as well as to disseminate and embed established practices consistently across the Group.
The Risk Council met six times during its first full year of operation and reported to the Committee following each meeting.
Whistleblowing Policy There is a formal whistleblowing policy which has been communicated to employees.
This policy provides information on the process to follow in the event that any employee feels it is appropriate to make a disclosure.
The Audit Committee is satisfied that the policy provides an adequate basis for employees to make representations in confidence to the Group and for appropriate and proportionate investigations.
Cyber Security and GDPR Recognising the increasing importance of this subject following numerous wellpublicised cyber security breaches suffered by other businesses the Group continued to invest more time and effort in improving its cyber security during 2017.
Cyber security a standing agenda item for the Committee was discussed twice during the year. progress continued to be made.
In addition the Group continued to work with PwC and others to ensure compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation which will come into force in May 2018.
Internal audit The Group does not maintain a separate internal audit function.
This is principally due to the size of the Group where close control over operations is exercised by a small number of executives.
The
Audit and Risk Committee currently considers the outsourced provision of internal audit work as both more efficient and costeffective than having its own central internal audit team.
However the Audit and Risk Committee does review the need to have its own separate internal audit function each year.
The Audit and Risk Committee has developed a framework to gain assurance over the system of internal financial and operational controls.
This comprises y A risk assessment performed by operational management and the Board to identify key areas for assurance.
Committee of the whole system of internal financial and operational controls.
During 2017 the principal internal audit project undertaken was a review of the Groups business in the US.
The Committee engaged a third party professional services firm PwC to examine the risk profile of the US business ensure that it was compliant with all local laws and regulations and had appropriate financial controls and operational systems.
PwC concluded that the systems and processes were at a higher level than they might have expected and that overall the business was being operated within Group policies.
Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Committee reports 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Report of the audit and risk committee CONTINUED External audit The effectiveness of the external audit process is dependent on appropriate risk identification.
In
December the Committee discussed the Auditors audit plan for 2017.
This included a summary of the proposed audit scope and a summary of what the Auditor considered to be the most significant financial reporting risks facing the Group together with the Auditors proposed audit approach to these significant risk areas.
The main areas of audit focus for the year were the valuation of investments in the newly acquired unquoted companies within the former Touchstone portfolio and the corresponding goodwill arising from these the valuation of Istesso Limited following its deconsolidation from the IP Group and as in previous years the valuation of Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited.
Appointment and Independence The Audit Committee advises the Board on the appointment of the external auditor and on its remuneration both for audit and nonaudit work and discusses the nature scope and results of the audit with the external auditor.
The Committee keeps under review the costeffectiveness and the independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
Controls in place to ensure this include monitoring the independence and effectiveness of the audit implementing a policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services and a review of the scope of the audit and fee and performance of the external auditor.
NonAudit Work The Audit Committee approves all fees paid to the auditor for nonaudit work.
In 2017 the Groups Auditor KPMG LLP carried out a nonaudit engagement to perform in respect of the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc.
Given the natural overlap between this work and the financial audit of the groups results the Committee judged KPMG the most effective party to perform this work.
In other matters the Committee prefers to engage other firms to perform consulting engagements to ensure that the independence of the Auditor is not compromised and during 2017 engaged the services of BDO PwC and Deloitte.
An analysis of audit and nonaudit fees is provided in note 6 to the financial statements on page 136.
Auditor Independence A formal statement of independence is received from the auditor each year and the Board and the Audit Committee are satisfied that the independence of the auditor has been maintained.
Auditor Effectiveness The Committee will complete its formal assessment of the effectiveness of the Groups external auditor following the completion of the 2017 audit cycle and will report on this assessment in the 2018 annual report.
With respect to the 2016 audit the Committee formally considered this at its May 2017 meeting and as in the previous year decided that the substantive and detailed approach taken by the auditor Jon Mills of KPMG was entirely appropriate and effective.
As in the previous year the vast majority of the Groups assets were reviewed as part of the audit and once again there was particular emphasis on the valuation of Oxford Nanopore which continued to represent such an important part of the Groups unquoted portfolio.
Specialist corporate finance staff were used for some of the valuation work and overall the auditors riskbased approach drew on both his knowledge of the business and the wider economic and business environment.
I will be available at the AGM to answer any questions about the Committees work.
JONATHAN BROOKS CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 29 March 2018 104 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our Governance Other Statutory Directors report Report of the Directors The Directors present their report together with the audited financial statements for IP Group plc and its subsidiaries for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Corporate governance statement Information that fulfils the requirements of the corporate governance statement can be found in the Corporate Governance Statement on pages 64 to 79 and is incorporated into this Directors report by reference.
Results and dividends During the period the Group made an overall profit after taxation for the year ended 31 December 2017 of 53.4m 2016 14.8m loss.
The directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend 2016 nil.
Directors
The names of directors who currently hold office or did so during 2017 are as follows Executive Directors Alan Aubrey Mike Townend Greg Smith David Baynes Nonexecutive Directors Mike Humphrey Chairman Jonathan Brooks Doug Liversidge resigned on 31 December 2017 Prof Lynn Gladden Dr Elaine Sullivan Prof David Begg appointed with effect from 18 October 2017 Details of the interests of directors in the share capital of the Company are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on page 93.
Principal risks and uncertainties and financial instruments The Group through its operations is exposed to a number of risks.
The Groups risk management objectives and policies are described on pages 46 to 47 and in the Corporate Governance report on page Further information on the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies including those in relation to credit risk liquidity risk and market risk is provided in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements along with further information on the Groups use of financial instruments.
Significant agreements The Group has entered into various agreements to form partnerships with 18 UK universities five US universities and nine universities in Australasia.
In addition the Group has entered into agreements to act as general partner and investment manager to three limited partnerships.
Further details can be found in the strategic report and in the notes to the financial statements.
Share capital and related matters Details of the structure of the Companys share capital and the rights attaching to the Companys shares are set out in note 20 to the consolidated financial statements.
There are no specific restrictions on the size of a holding or on the transfer of shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the Companys Articles of Association the Articles and prevailing legislation.
At the last Annual General Meeting of the Company held on 10 May 2017 the 2017 AGM authority was given to the Directors pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Companies Act 2006 to allot shares and grant rights over securities in the Company up to a maximum amount equivalent to approximately one third of the issued ordinary share capital on 5 April 2017 at any time up to the earlier of the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting AGM of the Company and 1 August 2018.
In addition at the 2017 AGM the Directors were also given authority effective for the same period as the aforementioned authority to allot shares and grant rights over securities in the Company up to a maximum of approximately two thirds of the total ordinary share capital in issue on 5 April 2017 in connection with an offer by way of a fully preemptive rights issue.
The Directors propose to renew both of these authorities at the Companys next AGM to be held on 18 June 2018.
The authorities being sought are in accordance with guidance issued by the Investment Association.
A further special resolution passed at the 2017 AGM granted authority to the Directors to allot equity securities in the Company for cash without regard to the preemption provisions of the Companies Act 2006 both i up to a maximum of approximately twothirds of the total ordinary share capital in issue on 5 April 2017 in connection with a fully pre emptive rights issue and ii up to a maximum of approximately 5% of the aggregate nominal value of the shares in issue on 5 April 2017 each authority exercisable at any time up to the earlier of the Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Other statutory 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Directors report CONTINUED conclusion of the next AGM of the Company and 1 August 2018.
The Directors will seek to renew these authorities for a similar period at the next AGM to be held on 18 June 2018.
Under Part 18 Chapter 5 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has the power to purchase its own shares.
At the 2017 AGM a special resolution was passed which granted the Directors authority to make market purchases of the Companys shares pursuant to these provisions of the Companies Act 2006 up to a maximum of approximately 10% of the Companys issued share capital on 5 April 2017 provided that the authority granted set a minimum and maximum price at which purchases can be made and is exercisable at any time up to the earlier of the conclusion of the next AGM and 1 August 2018.
This authority has not been used during the year.
The Directors will seek to renew the authority within similar parameters and for a similar period at the next AGM to be held on 18 June 2018.
Articles of Association The Companys Articles may be amended by a special resolution of the shareholders.
Substantial shareholders As at 29 March 2018 the Company had been advised of the following shareholders with interests of 3% or more in its ordinary share capital.
Other than as shown so far as the Company and its Directors are aware no other person holds or is beneficially interested in a disclosable interest in the Company.
Shareholder % Invesco Asset Management Limited 28.1 Woodford Investment Management LLP 19.9 Lansdowne 11.8 Imperial College of Science Technology and Medicine 5.2 Bailie Gifford 4.0 Political donations The Group did not make any political donations during 2017.
Corporate and social responsibility Details on the Groups policies activities and aims with regard to its corporate and social responsibilities including details of its greenhouse gas emissions are included in the Sustainability section on pages 54 to 59.
Directors indemnity and liability insurance During the year the Company has maintained liability insurance in respect of its Directors.
Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Articles provide that to the extent that the proceeds of any liability insurance are insufficient to meet any liability in full every Director is entitled to be indemnified out of the funds of the Company against any liabilities incurred in the execution or discharge of his or her powers or duties.
A copy of the indemnity is available for inspection as required by the Companies Act 2006.
Regulation
Top Technology Ventures Limited Touchstone Innovations Investment Management Limited and Parkwalk Advisors Ltd all 100%owned subsidiaries of the Group are authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
Post balance sheet events Material events occurring since the balance sheet date are disclosed in the Strategic Report and in note 29 to the Groups financial statements.
Disclosure of information to auditor Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys Auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys Auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Appointment of auditor A resolution to reappoint KPMG LLP together with a resolution to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the AGM to be held on 18 June 2018.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD ANGELA LEACH COMPANY SECRETARY 29 March 2018 106 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Statement of directors responsibilities Our Governance Other Statutory Stock Code IPO site Our Governance Other statutory In respect of the Annual Report and the Financial
The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the group and parent company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare group and parent company financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the group financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements in accordance with UK Accounting Standards.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the group and parent company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the group and parent company financial statements the directors are required to y select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently y make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent y for the group financial statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU y for the parent company financial statements state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the parent company financial statements y assess the group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and y prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the group and the parent company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report
Directors Report Directors Remuneration Report
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Groups website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement of the Directors in respect of the annual financial report We confirm that to the best of our knowledge y the financial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the y assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and y the Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
We consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the groups position and performance business model and strategy.
ON BEHALF OF THE BOARD MIKE HUMPHREY
29 March 2018 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 108
To deliver attractive financial returns from our assets 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Independent auditors report 110 Group primary statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 116 Consolidated statement of financial position 117 Consolidated statement of cash flows 118 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 119 Group notes Notes to the consolidated financial statements 120 Company statements Company balance sheet 167 Statement of changes in equity 168 Notes to the company financial statements 169 Company information 183 OUR FINANCIALS Stock Code IPO site 109 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of IP Group plc the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the Group consolidated statement of financial position the consolidated statement of cash flows the consolidated statement of changes in equity the Company balance sheet and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 1.
In our opinion y the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended y the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European
Disclosure Framework and y the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the audit committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the shareholders on 13 May 2014.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is for the four financial years ended 31 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Valuation of unquoted equity investments 860.3m 2016 433.8m Risk vs 2016 Refer to pages 100 to 104 Audit Committee Report pages 125 to 127 accounting policy and pages 143 to 145 financial disclosures. available.
In October 2017 the Group acquired Touchstone Innovations plc.
This acquisition lead to significant increase in the number of unquoted equity investments held by the Group.
Unquoted investments are measured at fair value which is estimated by the directors based on methods such as prices of recent investment and discounted cash flows.
Where price of recent investment is used due to the relatively low number of investors partaking in funding rounds there is a risk that recent funding round prices on which fair value is based are not sufficiently at arms length to ensure an independent market valuation representative of fair value.
Whether it remains appropriate to use the price of the recent funding rounds depends on the specific circumstances of the investment the stability of the external environment and the period since the last funding round occurred.
There are a number Independent auditors report TO THE MEMBERS OF IP GROUP PLC ONLY 110 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site of assumptions made by the directors when using alternative valuation methods such as a discounted cash flows including the probability of achieving milestones and the discount rate used.
There is a concentration of risk within the unquoted valuation of Oxford Nanopore of which the Groups stake is valued at 274.1m 2016 246.2m comprising 24% of the portfolio 2016 40% and 17% of total assets 2016 36%.
This risk is applicable to the parent company which also holds investments where no quoted market price is available.
IPEV guidelines For those valued using the price of recent investment as an appropriate basis for the measurement of the fair value at the time evaluating the independence of the funding round on which this valuation is based and corroborating the price to signed Share Subscription Agreements For those valued based on a funding round aged greater than 12 months corroborating judgements through discussions with the investment team and independent support such as investee board minutes For those valued using alternative valuation methods such as a discounted cash flows corroborating the underlying information back to independent support such as signed license agreements y Our corporate finance expertise For a selection of investments when alternative valuation methods are used assessing the principles and integrity of the method using our own valuation specialist y Independent research Conducting research into publicly available information including news websites and the companies own website for indicators of fair value changes since the last funding round was set y Valuation meetings attendance Observing the Directors and senior finance personnel to assess their discussion and review of the investment valuations and methodology choice y Assessing transparency Considering the appropriateness in accordance with relevant accounting standards of the disclosures related to unquoted investments. equity investments to be acceptable.
Carrying value of goodwill 172.1m 2016 57.1m Risk vs 2016 Refer to pages 100 to 104 Audit Committee Report page 124 accounting policy and pages 139 to 140 financial disclosures. cash flow model.
The estimated recoverable amount is subjective due to the inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting future cash flows in the UK university spinout company market.
Significant levels of judgement are inherent within the assumptions used including the discount rate gains on future investments the annual investment rate and the weighted average holding period of the Groups investments. against IAS 36. recoverable amount of goodwill to be acceptable.
Our Financials Auditors report 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc Goodwill recognition 108.5m Risk vs 2016 New Refer to page pages 100 to 104 Audit Committee Report page 124 accounting policy and pages 159 to 161 financial disclosures. separately from goodwill.
All assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations plc are measured at acquisitiondate fair value.
The valuation of the unquoted portfolio has been estimated by the directors based on methods such as prices of recent investment and discounted cash flows.
The Directors have exercised judgement in identifying and estimating the fair value of the unquoted investments.
For any movements in fair value of the assets at the acquisition date there would be a corresponding impact on the amount of goodwill recognised.
Our sector experience We considered the rationale for the acquisition to challenge the identification of intangible assets and goodwill.
We inspected available documents including the acquisition agreements and due diligence reports inspected board minutes and discussed with Directors Assessing methodology Assessing the principles and integrity of the valuation methods used by the directors to determine fair value of net assets at the acquisition date Assessing Transparency We assessed the Groups disclosures regarding the acquisition and estimation assumptions and whether they have been disclosed appropriately.
Our results We found the identification and valuation of goodwill acquired to be acceptable.
Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 16.8m 2016 8.0m determined with reference to a benchmark of Group total assets of which it represents 1% 2016 1%.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 12.9m 2016 5.4m determined with reference to a benchmark of total assets of which it represents 1% 2016 1%.
We reported to the Audit and Risk Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements relating to the statement of financial position exceeding 840000 2016 400000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 38 components 2016 33 the Group audit team subjected 15 2016 8 to audits to component materiality for Group audit purposes.
Due to nature of the Groups operations and the audit approach aggregation risk was deemed to be low and component materiality was set at 16.3m 2016 These 15 entities account for 95.7% of the Groups portfolio revenue and return 2016 89.3% 86.2% of total profits and losses that made up the Groups profit before tax 2016 78.6% and 98.5% of the Groups total assets 2016 97.4%.
For the remaining components we performed specified riskfocused audit procedures on specific balances and we performed analysis at an aggregated group level to reexamine our assessment that there were no significant risks of material misstatement within these.
Independent auditors report CONTINUED TO THE MEMBERS OF IP GROUP PLC ONLY 112 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site
Our Financials Auditors report
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if y we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements or y if the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 53 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information y we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report y in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and y in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors Remuneration Report
In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to y the directors confirmation within the viability statement page 53 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity y the Principal Risks disclosures describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and y the directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Independent auditors report CONTINUED TO THE MEMBERS OF IP GROUP PLC ONLY 114 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if y we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our financial statements audit and the directors statement that they consider that the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or y the section of the annual report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the Corporate Governance Statement does not properly disclose a departure from the eleven provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Based solely on our work on the other information described above y with respect to the Corporate Governance Statement disclosures about internal control and risk management systems in relation to financial reporting processes and about share capital structures we have not identified material misstatements therein and the information therein is consistent with the financial statements and y in our opinion the Corporate Governance Statement has been prepared in accordance with relevant rules of the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the Financial Conduct
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion y adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or y the parent Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or y certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or y we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 107 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site
Our Financials Auditors report
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or other irregularities see below or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Irregularities  ability to detect We identified areas of laws and regulations that could reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the financial statements from our sector experience through discussion with the directors and other management as required by auditing standards and from inspection of the Groups regulatory correspondence.
We had regard to laws and regulations in areas that directly affect the financial statements including financial reporting including related company legislation and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations as part of our procedures on the related financial statements items.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance throughout the audit As with any audit there remained a higher risk of nondetection of noncompliance with relevant laws and regulations irregularities as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
JONATHAN MILLS SENIOR STATUTORY AUDITOR for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL 29 March 2018 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 116 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Portfolio return and revenue Change in fair value of equity and debt investments 15 49.0 7.0 Gainloss on disposal of equity investments 0.1 0.5 Gain on deconsolidation of subsidiary 45.1 Change in fair value of limited and limited liability partnership interests 23 0.2 0.3 Change in fair value of contingent value right 17  1.4 Other portfolio income Licensing income 3.4 0.2 Revenue from services and other income 6.1 2.6 Administrative expenses Research and development costs 2.9 1.0 Carried interest plan charge 1.3 Sharebased payment charge 22 2.4 1.5 Amortisation of intangible assets 13 3.9 5.6 Acquisition and restructuring costs 8 9.1 0.4 Other administrative expenses 30.8 14.5 Operating profitloss 7 53.1 15.4 Finance income 1.0 1.1 Finance costs 0.7 0.5 Profitloss before taxation 53.4 14.8 Taxation 10 Profitloss for the year 53.4 14.8 Other comprehensive income Exchange differences on translating foreign operations  0.1 Total comprehensive incomeloss for the year 53.4 14.7 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 49.7 13.5 Noncontrolling interest 3.7 1.2 Earnings per share Basic p 11 7.05 2.39 Diluted p 11 7.04 2.39 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group primary statements Consolidated statement of financial position AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Goodwill 12 172.1 57.1 Acquired intangible assets 13 10.2 5.1 Property plant and equipment 2.0 0.2
Equity investments 15 1085.4 594.9 Debt investments 15 45.2 19.1 Limited and limited liability partnership interests 23 11.0 4.2 Total noncurrent assets 1325.9 680.6 Current assets Trade and other receivables 16 8.3 2.6 Deposits 95.0 Cash and cash equivalents 231.3 112.3 Total current assets 334.6 114.9 Total assets 1660.5 795.5 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES Equity attributable to owners of the parent Called up share capital 20 21.1 11.3 Share premium account 683.1 504.7 Merger reserve 508.6 12.8 Retained earnings 291.7 239.6 Total equity attributable to equity holders 1504.5 768.4 Noncontrolling interest 4.0 0.3 Total equity 1508.5 768.7 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 19.7 2.1 EIB debt facility 19 6.3 Noncurrent liabilities EIB debt facility 19 97.7 14.9 Carried interest plan liability 8.8 Loans from limited partners of consolidated funds 19 13.1 9.8 Provisions for liabilities and charges 6.4 Total equity and liabilities 1660.5 795.5 Registered number The accompanying notes form an integral part of the financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 116 to 119 were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 29 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by GREG SMITH CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER ALAN AUBREY
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 2582904
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 118 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Consolidated statement of cash flows FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
Represented
Operating activities Operating profitloss for the period 53.1 15.4 Adjusted for Change in fair value of equity and debt investments 15 49.0 7.0 Change in fair value of limited and limited liability partnership interests 0.2 0.3 Change in fair value of contingent value right  1.4 Gainloss on disposal of equity investments 0.1 0.5 Gain on deconsolidation of subsidiary 45.1 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 0.9 0.1 Amortisation of intangible noncurrent assets 13 3.9 5.6 Long term incentive carry scheme charge 1.3 Fees settled in the form of equity 0.5 0.4 Sharebased payment charge 2.4 1.5 Changes in working capital Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 6.1 0.2 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 7.7 1.8 Increase in noncurrent liabilities 8.6 2.7 Other operating cash flows Net interest received 0.3 0.9 Net cash inflowoutflow from operating activities 22.4 11.4 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 1.6 0.1 Purchase of equity and debt investments 15 71.2 69.7 Investment in limited and limited liability partnerships 1.4 0.1 Net cash flow to deposits 95.0 70.0 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking 107.8 Proceeds from sale of equity investments 6.6 14.7 Net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities 54.8 14.8 Financing activities Proceeds from the issue of share capital 184.7 Transaction costs related to issue of share capital 3.7 Proceeds from drawdown of EIB facility 19 15.0 Net cash inflow from financing activities 196.0 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 118.8 3.4 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 112.3 108.8 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes 0.2 0.1 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 231.3 112.3 Represented from prior year.
See note 1 for details.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group primary statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 Attributable to equity holders of the parent
Share premium
Retained earnings iii
Non controlling interest iv
Comprehensive income    13.5 13.5 1.2 14.7
Comprehensive income    49.7 49.7 3.7 53.4 Issue of equity 9.8 178.4 495.8  684.0  684.0
At 31 December 2017 21.1 683.1 508.6 291.7 1504.5 4.0 1508.5 i Share premium  Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value net of directly attributable issue costs. undertakings. sharebased payments credits. in May 2013 as well as the equity invested in partiallyowned subsidiaries that is held by third parties.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 120 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements Accounting Policies Basis of preparation The Annual Report and Accounts of IP Group plc IP Group or the Company and its subsidiary companies together the Group are for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the financial statements are set out below.
The policies have been consistently applied to all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards International Accounting Standards and Interpretations collectively IFRS issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB as adopted by the European Union adopted IFRSs.
The preparation of financial statements in compliance with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires Group management to exercise judgement in the most appropriate selection of the Groups accounting policies.
The areas where significant judgements and estimates have been made in preparing the financial statements and their effect are disclosed in note 3.
The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis as the directors are satisfied that the Group and parent Company have the resources to continue in business for the foreseeable future.
In making this assessment the directors have considered a wide range of information relating to present and future conditions including future projections of profitability cash flows and capital resources.
Changes in accounting policies i New standards interpretations and amendments effective from 1 January 2017 No new standards interpretations and amendments effective for the first time from 1 January 2017 have had a material effect on the Groups financial statements.
The following new standards which have not been applied in these financial statements will or may have an effect on the Groups future financial statements IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 was issued on 28 May 2014 and provides a global standard on revenue recognition which aligns the IFRS and US GAAP guidance.
It replaces existing revenue recognition guidance including IAS 18 revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and IFRIC 13 Customer Loyalty Programmes.
The Group has assessed the potential impact on its consolidated financial statements resulting from the application of IFRS 15 and does not foresee any material effect when the Standard is applied.
While early adoption is permitted IFRS 15 has an effective date of 1 January 2018 with the year ending 31 December 2018 being the first annual financial statements to which the standard applies.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 will eventually replace IAS 39 in its entirety.
The process has been divided into three main components being classification and measurement impairment and hedge accounting.
The Group provisionally assesses the potential effect to be immaterial given the majority of its financial assets are currently held at fair value through profit or loss.
The effective date is 1 January 2018.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Accounting Policies continued IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 Leases was issued on 13 January 2016 and replaces IAS 17 Leases.
IFRS 16 requires all operating leases in excess of one year where the Group is the lessee to be included on the Groups statement of financial position and recognised as a rightofuse ROU asset and a related lease liability representing the obligation to make lease payments.
The ROU asset will be amortised on a straightline basis with the lease liability being amortised using the effective interest method.
Optional exemptions are available under IFRS 16 for shortterm leases lease terms less than 12 months and for smallvalue leases.
Based on the preliminary assessment the Group expects its existing operating lease arrangements as a lessee to be recognised as ROU assets with corresponding lease liabilities under the new standard.
The Group has assessed the potential impact on its consolidated financial statements resulting from the application of IFRS 16 and does not foresee any material effect when the Standard is applied.
Early adoption is permitted if IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with customers has been applied but IFRS 16 has an effective date of 1 January 2019 with the year ending 31 December 2019 being the first annual financial statements to which the standard applies.
None of the other new standards interpretations and amendments not yet effective are expected to have a material effect on the Groups future financial statements.
Basis of consolidation i Business Combinations The Group accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method from the date that control is transferred to the Group see ii Subsidiaries below.
Both the identifiable net assets and the consideration transferred in the acquisition are measured at fair value at the date of acquisition and transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions is tested annually for impairment.
In instances where the Group owns a noncontrolling stake prior to acquisition the step acquisition method is applied and any gain or losses on the fair value of the preacquisition holding is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Where the Group has control over an entity it is classified as a subsidiary.
As per IFRS 10 an entity is classed as under the control of the Group when all three of the following elements are present power over the entity exposure to variable returns from the entity and the ability of the Group to use its power to affect those variable returns.
Control is reassessed whenever facts and circumstances indicate that there may be a change in any of these elements of control.
In situations where the Company has the practical ability to direct the relevant activities of the investee without holding the majority of the voting rights it is considered that de facto control exists.
In determining whether de facto control exists the Group considers all relevant facts and circumstances including y The size of the Companys voting rights relative to both the size and dispersion of other parties who hold voting rights y Substantive potential voting rights held by the company and by other parties y Other contractual arrangements and y Historic patterns in voting attendance.
The consolidated financial statements present the results of the Company and its subsidiaries as if they formed a single entity.
Intercompany transactions and balances between Group companies are therefore eliminated in full.
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the results of business combinations using the acquisition method.
In the statement of financial position the acquirees identifiable assets and liabilities are initially recognised at their fair values at the acquisition date.
Contingent liabilities dependent on the disposed value of an associated investment are only recognised when the fair value is above the associated threshold.
The results of acquired operations are included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income from the date on which control is obtained.
They are consolidated until the date on which control ceases.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
122 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting Policies continued iii Associates Associates are entities over which the Group has significant influence but does not control generally accompanied by a shareholding of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
No associates are presented on the consolidated statement of financial position as the Group elects to hold such investments at fair value in the consolidated statement of financial position.
This treatment is permitted by IAS 28 Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures which permits investments held by entities that are akin to venture capital organisations to be excluded from its measurement methodology requirements where those investments are designated upon initial recognition as at fair value through profit or loss and accounted for in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Changes in fair value of associates are recognised in profit or loss in the period of the change.
The Group has no interests in associates through which it carries on its business.
The disclosures required by Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 for associated undertakings are included in Note 10 of the Company financial statements.
Similarly those investments which may not have qualified as Associate but fall within the wider scope of significant holdings and so are subject to Section 409 disclosure acts are also included in Note 10 of the Company financial statements.
Group entities act as general partner and investment manager to the following Limited Partnerships
Interest
IP Venture Fund II LP IPVFII 33.3 IP Venture Fund LP IPVF 10.0 The North East Technology Fund LP NETF The Group receives compensation for its role as investment manager to these Limited Partnerships including fixed fees and performance fees.
The directors consider that these amounts are in substance and form normal market rate compensation for its role as investment manager.
In order to determine whether these Limited Partnerships were required to be consolidated the presence of the three elements of control noted in part ii was examined.
The Groups significant stake in IPVFII creates a significant exposure to the variability of returns from those interests and the Groups ability to direct the operations of the fund would result in IP Group obtaining the benefits of its activities.
As such IPVFII meets the criteria in IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements and is consequently consolidated.
In the case of IPVF the directors consider that the minority Limited Partnership interest does not create an exposure of such significance that it indicates that the Group acts as anything other than an agent for the other Limited Partners in the arrangement.
This is further supported by the presence of a strict investment policy and the inability for the general partner to change the restrictive terms of that policy other than with agreement of 100% of IPVFs Limited Partners.
Similarly the lack of a stake in NETF indicates the Groups role as an agent for the limited partner.
As a result the Directors consider that the Group does not have the power to govern the operations of these limited partnerships so as to obtain benefits from their activities and accordingly do not meet the definition of a subsidiary under IFRS 10 Consolidated Financial Statements.
However the Group does have the power to exercise significant influence over its limited partnerships and accordingly the Groups accounting treatment for the interest in IPVF is consistent with that of associates as described earlier in this report i. or loss on initial recognition.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Accounting Policies continued In addition to Limited Partnerships where Group entities act as general partner and investment manager the Group has interests in three further entities which are all managed by third parties
Interest
UCL Technology Fund LP UCL Fund 46.4 Technikos LLP Technikos 18.0 Apollo Therapeutics LLP Apollo Fund 8.3 The Group has a 46.4% interest in the total capital commitments of the UCL Technology Fund LP UCL
The Group has committed 24.8m to the fund alongside the European Investment Fund EIF University College London and other investors.
Participation in the fund provides the Group with visibility of potential intellectual property from across University College Londons research base.
The Group has a 18.0% interest in the total capital commitments of Technikos LLP Technikos.
The Group has an 8.3% interest in the total capital commitments of Apollo Therapeutics LLP Apollo a 40.0m venture between AstraZeneca GlaxoSmithKline Johnson and Johnson and the technology transfer offices of Imperial College London via Imperial Innovations Limited University College London via UCL Business plc and the University of Cambridge via Cambridge Enterprise Limited.
The venture supports the translation of academic therapeutic science into innovative new medicines by combining the skills of the university academics with industry expertise at an early stage.
The total comprehensive income assets and liabilities of nonwholly owned subsidiaries are attributed to owners of the parent and to the noncontrolling interests in proportion to their relative ownership interests.
Portfolio return and revenue Change in fair value Change in fair value of equity and debt investments represents revaluation gains and losses on the Groups portfolio of investments.
Gains on disposal of equity investments represent the difference between the fair value of consideration received and the carrying value at the start of the accounting period on the disposal of equity investments.
Change in fair value of Limited Partnership investments represents revaluation gains and losses on the Groups investments in Limited Partnership funds.
Changes in fair values of assets do not constitute revenue.
Licence income Income from licensing and similar income is recognised on an accruals basis in accordance with the terms of the relevant licensing agreements.
Income from milestone income is recognised once performance obligations are satisfied on an accruals basis and in accordance with the terms of the relevant licensing agreements.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
124 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting Policies continued Revenue from services and other income All revenue from services is generated within the United Kingdom and is stated exclusive of value added tax.
Revenue from services and other income comprises Advisory fees Fees earned from the provision of business support services are recognised as the related services are provided.
Corporate finance advisory fees are generally earned as a fixed percentage of total funds raised and recognised at the time the related transaction is successfully concluded.
In some instances these fees are settled via the issue of equity in the company receiving the corporate finance services at the same price per share as equity issued as part the financing round to which the advisory fees apply.
Fund management services Fund management fees include fiduciary fund management fees which are generally earned as a fixed percentage of total funds under management and are recognised as the related services are provided and performance fees payable from realisation of agreed returns to investors which are recognised as performance criterion are met.
Dividends
Dividends receivable from equity shares are included within other portfolio income and recognised on the exdividend date or where no exdividend date is quoted are recognised when the Groups right to receive payment is established.
Property plant and equipment All property plant and equipment is shown at cost less subsequent depreciation and impairment.
Cost includes expenditure that is attributable to the acquisition of the items.
Depreciation on assets is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost of each asset to its residual value over its estimated useful life as follows Fixtures and fittings Over 3 to 5 years Computer equipment Over 3 to 5 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each reporting date.
Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill on acquisitions of subsidiaries is included in intangible assets and allocated from the acquisition date to each of the Groups cashgenerating units CGUs that are expected to benefit from the business combination.
Goodwill may be allocated to CGUs in both the acquired business and in the existing business.
Other intangible assets Other intangible assets represent contractual arrangements and memorandums of understanding with UK universities acquired through acquisition of subsidiaries.
At the date of acquisition the cost of these intangibles as a share of the larger acquisition was calculated and subsequently the assets are held at amortised cost.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Accounting Policies continued Impairment of intangible assets including goodwill Goodwill is not subject to amortisation but is tested for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are tested for impairment when events or a change in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of the assets fair value less costs to sell and the value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairments assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are identifiable cash flows i.
CGUs.
Financial assets In respect of regular way purchases or sales the Group uses trade date accounting to recognise or derecognise financial assets.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the assets have expired or the Group has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership.
The Group classifies its financial assets into one of the categories listed below depending on the purpose for which the asset was acquired.
None of the Groups financial assets are categorised as held to maturity or available for sale.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are either financial assets held for trading or financial assets which are designated at fair value through profit or loss on initial recognition.
This category includes equity investments debt investments equity rights contingent value rights and investments in limited partnerships.
Investments in associated undertakings which are held by the Group with a view to the ultimate realisation of capital gains are also categorised as at fair value through profit or loss.
This measurement basis is consistent with the fact that the Groups performance in respect of investments in equity investments limited partnerships and associated undertakings is evaluated on a fair value basis in accordance with an established investment strategy.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are initially recognised at fair value and any gains or losses arising from subsequent changes in fair value are presented in profit or loss in the statement of comprehensive income in the period which they arise.
Fair value hierarchy The Group classifies financial assets using a fair value hierarchy that reflects the significance of the inputs used in making the related fair value measurements.
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a financial asset is classified is determined on the basis of the lowest level input that is significant to that assets fair value measurement.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels Level 1  Quoted prices in active markets.
Level 2  Inputs other than quoted prices that are observable such as prices from market transactions.
Level 3  One or more inputs that are not based on observable market data.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
126 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting Policies continued Equity investments The fair values of quoted investments are based on bid prices in an active market at the reporting date.
The fair value of unlisted securities is established using valuation techniques.
These include the use of recent arms length transactions discounted cash flow analysis and earnings multiples.
Wherever possible the Group uses valuation techniques which make maximum use of marketbased inputs.
Accordingly the valuation methodology used most commonly by the Group is the price of recent investment contained in the International Private Equity and Venture Capital Valuation Guidelines the IPEVCV Guidelines endorsed by the British and European Venture Capital Associations.
The following considerations are used when calculating the fair value of unlisted securities
Where the investment being valued was itself made recently its cost may provide a good indication of fair value unless there is objective evidence that the investment has since been impaired such as observable data suggesting a deterioration of the financial technical or commercial performance of the underlying business.
Price of recent investment The Group considers that fair value estimates which are based entirely on observable market data will be of greater reliability than those based on assumptions and accordingly where there has been any recent investment by third parties the price of that investment will generally provide a basis of the valuation.
The length of period for which it remains appropriate to use the price of recent investment depends on the specific circumstances of the investment and the stability of the external environment.
Given the nature of the Groups investments in seed startup and earlystage companies where there are often no current and no shortterm future earnings or positive cash flows it can be difficult to gauge the probability and financial impact of the success or failure of development or research activities and to make reliable cash flow forecasts.
Consequently the most appropriate approach to determine fair value is a methodology that is based on market data that being the price of a recent investment.
Where the Group considers that the price of recent investment unadjusted is no longer relevant and there are limited or no comparable companies or transactions from which to infer value the Group carries out an enhanced assessment based on milestone analysis andor industry and sector analysis.
In applying the milestone analysis approach to investments in companies in early or development stages the Group seeks to determine whether there is an indication of change in fair value based on a consideration of performance against any milestones that were set at the time of the original investment decision as well as taking into consideration the key market drivers of the investee company and the overall economic environment.
Where the equity structure of a portfolio company involves different class rights in a sale or liquidity event the Group takes these different rights into account when forming a view on the value of its investment.
Where the Group considers that there is an indication that the fair value has changed an estimation is made of the required amount of any adjustment from the last price of recent investment or an alternative valuation technique is used where this is deemed more appropriate.
Where a deterioration in value has occurred the Group reduces the carrying value of the investment to reflect the estimated decrease.
If there is evidence of value creation the Group may consider increasing the carrying value of the investment however in the absence of additional financing rounds or profit generation it can be difficult to determine the value that a purchaser may place on positive developments given the potential outcome and the costs and risks to achieving that outcome and accordingly caution is applied.
Factors that the Group considers include inter alia technical measures such as product development phases and patent approvals financial measures such as cash burn rate and profitability expectations and market and sales measures such as testing phases product launches and market introduction.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Accounting Policies continued Other valuation techniques Where it is no longer deemed appropriate to use the price of recent investment as a valuation basis the Group uses alternative methodologies in the IPEVCV Guidelines such as discounted cash flows DCF or price earnings multiples.
DCF involves estimating the fair value of a business by calculating the present value of expected future cash flows based on the most recent forecasts in respect of the underlying business.
When using the earnings multiple methodology earnings before interest and tax EBIT are generally used adjusted to a maintainable level.
A suitable earnings multiple is derived from an equivalent business or group of businesses for which the average priceearnings multiple for the relevant sector index can generally be considered a suitable proxy.
This multiple is applied to earnings to derive an enterprise value which is then discounted by up to 60% for nonmarketability and other risks inherent to businesses in early stages of operation.
No reliable estimate Where a fair value cannot be estimated reliably the investment is reported at the carrying value at the previous reporting date unless there is objective evidence that the investment has since been impaired.
Debt investments Debt investments are generally unquoted debt instruments which are convertible to equity at a future point in time.
Such instruments are considered to be hybrid instruments containing a fixed rate debt host contract with an embedded equity derivative.
The Group designates the entire hybrid contract at fair value through profit or loss on initial recognition and accordingly the embedded derivative is not separated from the host contract and accounted for separately.
The fair value of debt on initial recognition is measured at fair value which is equal to cost and subsequent remeasurement will be recognised as changes in fair value in the statement of comprehensive income.
Contingent value rights In instances where the Group receives contingent financial consideration upon the disposal of a financial asset the resulting asset shall be recognised and designated as at fair value through profit and loss and treated accordingly.
These assets are nonderivative financial assets with fixed and determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of services to customers trade receivables and are carried at cost less provision for impairment.
Deposits
Deposits comprise longerterm deposits held with financial institutions with an original maturity of greater than three months.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand and shortterm deposits held with financial institutions with an original maturity of three months or less.
The directors have reconsidered the classification of cash flows related to amounts held on deposit and have presented the net cash flow to Deposits within Investing activities rather than as an adjustment within cash flows from operating activities.
Comparatives have been represented accordingly.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
128 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Accounting Policies continued Financial liabilities Current financial liabilities are composed of trade payables and other shortterm monetary liabilities which are recognised at amortised cost.
Noncurrent liabilities are composed of loans from Limited Partners of consolidated funds outstanding amounts drawn down from a debt facility provided by the European Investment Bank carried interest plans liabilities provisions for liabilities and charges liabilities recognised in relation to Higher Education Innovation Fund HEIF and University Challenge Seed Fund UCSF investment revenue sharing schemes and deferred consideration payable on acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors.
The loans from Limited Partners of consolidated funds are repayable only upon the applicable funds generating sufficient returns to repay the Limited Partners.
Management anticipates that the funds will generate the required returns and consequently recognises the full associated liabilities.
Noncurrent liabilities are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred and subsequently at amortised cost.
The Group operates a carried interest plan or LongTerm Incentive Carry Scheme LTICS for eligible employees.
Before any payment to a participant becomes due under the scheme the Group must first have received back the amount of their investment in the relevant vintage together with a hurdle rate of 8% per annum compound on their investment.
At the point at which the hurdle rate has been exceeded a provision is included for the unrealised gain due to members of the scheme vintage.
The provision is measured by reference to the fair value of the relevant investments with movements in the provision taken to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
The Group provides for liabilities in respect of revenue sharing with Imperial College London arising under the Technology Pipeline Agreement TPA and other parties.
Provision for revenueshare based on fair value on the future realisation of quoted and unquoted investments is recognised as part of the movement in fair value through profit or loss.
Deferred and contingent consideration payable on acquisition are comprised of amounts due to the sellers of Parkwalk Advisors.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups financial liabilities are a reasonable approximation to their fair value.
Share capital Financial instruments issued by the Group are treated as equity if the holders have only a residual interest in the Groups assets after deducting all liabilities.
The objective of the Group is to manage capital so as to provide shareholders with above average returns through capital growth over the medium to longterm.
The
Group considers its capital to comprise its share capital share premium merger reserve and retained earnings.
Top T echnology Ventures Limited Parkwalk Advisors Ltd and Touchstone Investment Management Limited are Group subsidiaries which are subject to external capital requirements imposed by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA and as such must ensure that it has sufficient capital to satisfy these requirements.
The Group ensures it remains compliant with these requirements as described in their respective financial statements.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Accounting Policies continued Employee benefits i Pension obligations The Group operates a company defined contribution pension scheme for which all employees are eligible.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Group in independently administered funds.
The
Group currently makes contributions on behalf of employees to this scheme or to employee personal pension schemes on an individual basis.
The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
The contributions are recognised as employee benefit expenses when they are due.
The Group engages in equitysettled sharebased payment transactions in respect of services receivable from employees by granting employees conditional awards of ordinary shares subject to certain vesting conditions.
Conditional awards of shares are made pursuant to the Groups LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP awards and or the Groups Annual Incentive Scheme AIS.
The fair value of the shares is estimated at the date of grant taking into account the terms and conditions of the award including marketbased performance conditions.
The fair value at the date of grant is recognised as an expense over the period that the employee provides services generally the period between the start of the performance period and the vesting date of the shares.
The corresponding credit is recognised in retained earnings within total equity.
The fair value of services is calculated using the market value on the date of award and is adjusted for expected and actual levels of vesting.
Where conditional awards of shares lapse the expense recognised to date is credited to the statement of comprehensive income in the year in which they lapse.
Where the terms for an equitysettled award are modified and the modification increases the total fair value of the sharebased payment or is otherwise beneficial to the employee at the date of modification the incremental fair value is amortised over the vesting period.
Deferred tax Full provision is made for deferred tax on all temporary differences resulting from the carrying value of an asset or liability and its tax base.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or deferred tax liability settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the deferred tax asset will be recovered in the future.
Leases
Leases where the lessor retains substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership are classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are charged to administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
130 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017
Financial Risk Management
As set out in the Principal risks and uncertainties section on pages 46 to 53 the Group is exposed through its normal operations to a number of financial risks the most significant of which are market liquidity and credit risks.
In general risk management is carried out throughout the Group under policies approved by the Board of
The following further describes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
The Group is exposed to equity securities price risk as a result of the equity and debt investments and investments in Limited Partnerships held by the Group and categorised as at fair value through profit or loss.
The Group mitigates this risk by having established investment appraisal processes and asset monitoring procedures which are subject to overall review by the Board.
The Group has also established corporate finance and communications teams dedicated to supporting portfolio companies with fundraising activities and investor relations.
The Group holds investments which are publicly traded on AIM 20 companies and investments which are not traded on an active market.
The net portfolio gains in 2017 of 94.2m represents a 15.3% change against the opening balance 2016 net increase of 6.5m 1.4% change and a similar increase or decrease in the prices of quoted and unquoted investments is considered to be reasonably possible.
The table below summarises the impact of a 1% increase decrease in the price of both quoted and unquoted investments on the Groups posttax profit for the year and on equity.
2017 2016
Unquoted
Total
Quoted
Unquoted
Total
Equity investments and investments in limited partnerships ii Interest rate risk The EIB debt facility bears interest at a fixed rate of 1.98% with an additional variable spread equal to the six month GBP Libor rate as at the first date of each sixmonth interest period.
The first 15.0m tranche was disbursed on 17 December 2015 and the average floating interest rate including the fixed element for 2016 was 2.66% 2015 2.48% The Group also holds an additional debt facility totalling 104.0m with the EIB as a consequence of the combination with Touchstone Innovations during the year.
The first tranche of their EIB loan is linked to quarterly LIBOR rate.
The loan was disbursed on 30 July 2013 and the floating interest rate including LIBOR was 3.3%.
There are no hedging instruments in place to cover against interest rate fluctuation as exposure is deemed insignificant.
The second tranche of the Touchstone EIB loan is based on a fixed interest rate of 4.235%.
Touchstone entered a second loan agreement for 50.0m with a fixed interest rate of 3.026%.
The other primary impact of interest rate risk to the Group is the impact on the income and operating cash flows as a result of the interestbearing deposits and cash and cash equivalents held by the Group.
The Group is exposed to concentration risk via the significant majority of the portfolio being UK based companies and thus subject to the performance of the UK economy.
The Group is increasing its operations in the US and the determination of the associated concentrations is determined by the number of investment opportunities that management believe represent a good investment.
The Group mitigates this risk in coordination with liquidity risk by managing its proportion of fixed to floating rate financial assets.
The table overleaf summarises the interest rate profile of the Group.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes
Financial Risk Management continued
2017 2016
Floating rate
Total
Fixed rate
Interest
Total
Financial assets Equity investments   1085.4 1085.4   594.9 594.9 Debt investments   45.2 45.2 0.2  18.9 19.1 Limited and limited liability partnership interests   11.0 11.0   4.2 4.2 Deposits 95.0   95.0 Cash and cash equivalents 7.5 223.8  231.3 30.0 82.3  112.3 Trade receivables   1.9 1.9   2.3 2.3 Other receivables   6.4 6.4   0.3 0.3 Financial liabilities Trade payables   2.0 2.0   0.7 0.7 Other accruals and deferred EIB debt facility 65.0 39.0  104.0  14.9  14.9 Carried interest plan liability   8.8 8.8 Provisions for liabilities and charges Loans from limited partners of consolidated funds At 31 December 2017 if interest rates had been 1% higherlower posttax profit for the year and other components of equity would have been 1.8m 2016 0.8m higherlower as a result of higher interest received on floating rate cash deposits.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
132 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017
Financial Risk Management continued
The Group seeks to manage liquidity risk to ensure sufficient liquidity is available to meet foreseeable needs and to invest cash assets safely and profitably.
The Groups Treasury Management Policy asserts that at any one point in time no more than 60% of the Groups cash and cash equivalents will be placed in fixedterm deposits with a holding period greater than three months.
Accordingly the Group only invests working capital in shortterm instruments issued by reputable counterparties.
The Group continually monitors rolling cash flow forecasts to ensure sufficient cash is available for anticipated cash requirements.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its deposits cash and cash equivalents debt investments and trade receivables.
The Group seeks to mitigate its credit risk on cash and cash equivalents by making shortterm deposits with counterparties or by investing in treasury funds with an AA credit rating or above managed by institutions.
Shortterm deposit counterparties are required to have most recently reported total assets in excess of 5bn and where applicable a prime shortterm credit rating at the time of investment ratings are generally determined by Moodys or Standard and Poors.
Moodys prime credit ratings of P1 P2 and P3 indicate respectively that the rating agency considers the counterparty to have a superior strong or acceptable ability to repay shortterm debt obligations generally defined as having an original maturity not exceeding 13 months.
An analysis of the Groups deposits and cash and cash equivalents balance analysed by credit rating as at the reporting date is shown in the table opposite.
All other financial assets are unrated.
Credit rating Total deposits and cash and cash equivalents 326.3 112.3 The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk with exposure spread over a large number of counterparties and customers.
The Group has detailed policies and strategies which seek to minimise these associated risks including defining maximum counterparty exposure limits for term deposits based on their perceived financial strength at the commencement of the deposit.
The maximum single counterparty limit for deposits at 31 December 2017 was 50m 2016 50m.
The Groups exposure to credit risk on debt investments is managed in a similar way to equity price risk as described earlier through the Groups investment appraisal processes and asset monitoring procedures which are subject to overall review by the Board.
The maximum exposure to credit risk for debt investments receivables and other financial assets is represented by their carrying amount.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Significant Accounting Estimates and Judgements The directors make judgements and estimates concerning the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors such as expectations of future events and are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and assumptions which have the most significant effects on the carrying amounts of the assets and liabilities in the financial statements are discussed below.
The estimates required in order to determine the appropriate valuation methodology of unquoted equity investments have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities.
These estimates include making assessments of the future earnings potential of portfolio companies appropriate earnings multiples to apply and marketability and other risk discounts as further described in note 2.
Touchstone Innovations As described in i above the valuation of unquoted equity investments requires management to make estimates to determine an appropriate valuation methodology of unquoted equity investments.
Additionally the directors have used their judgement in determining whether valuation changes affect the fair value at the date of acquisition or in the period post acquisition.
Again these estimates are further described in note 2.
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or whenever there is an indication that the carrying amount may not be recoverable based on managements judgements regarding the future prospects of the business estimates of future cash flows and discount rates.
When assessing the appropriateness of the carrying value of goodwill the recoverable amount is determined using a number of valueinuse and fairvaluelesscosts tosell calculations.
The use of these methods requires the estimation of future cash flows and the selection of a suitable discount rate in order to calculate the present value of these cash flows as well as the selection of applicable and reasonable multiples.
For the purpose of testing goodwill for impairment the Group considers each of its cashgenerating units separately to which goodwill is allocated.
Any impairment losses in respect of goodwill will not be reversed.
Discussion of sensitivity analyses is included in the relevant note for each of the above estimates and judgements.
Revenue from Services All revenue from services is derived from either the provision of advisory and venture capital fund management services or from licensing activities royalty revenues and patent cost recoveries.
Operating Segments For both the year ended 31 December 2017 and the year ended 31 December 2016 the Groups revenue and profitloss before taxation were derived almost entirely from its principal activities within the UK.
Though the Group has initiated operations in the US and Australasia the associated revenues and costs are currently immaterial and accordingly no additional geographical disclosures are given.
For management reporting purposes the Group is currently organised into three operating segments i the commercialisation of intellectual property via the formation of longterm partner relationships with universities ii the management of venture funds focusing on earlystage UK technology companies and iii the inlicensing of drugable intellectual property from research intensive institutions which due to a share reorganisation in December 2017 was deconsolidated as a Group company and will be recognised on the statement of financial position as part of the IP Group investment portfolio going forward.
These activities are described in further detail in the Strategic report on pages 7 to 59.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
134 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Operating Segments continued Year ended 31 December 2017
Venture capital fund management
Consolidated
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Portfolio return and revenue Change in fair value of equity and debt investments 49.0   49.0 Gain on disposal of equity investments 0.1   0.1 Gain on deconsolidation of subsidiary   45.1 45.1 Change in fair value of limited and limited liability partnership interests 0.2   0.2 Other portfolio income Licensing income   3.4 3.4 Revenue from services and other income 1.1 0.9  2.0 Revenue from fund management services  4.1  4.1 Carried interest plan charge 1.3   1.3 Amortisation of intangible assets 3.9   3.9 IFRS3 charge in respect of acquisition of subsidiary 4.4   4.4 Acquisition and restructuring costs 9.1   9.1 Administrative expenses 25.9 2.3 3.5 31.7 Operating profit 5.4 2.7 45.0 53.1 Finance income 1.0   1.0 Finance costs 0.7   0.7 Profit before taxation 5.7 2.7 45.0 53.4
Profit for the year 5.7 2.7 45.0 53.4 STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION Assets 1643.4 17.1  1660.5 Liabilities 147.8 4.2  152.0 Net assets 1495.6 12.9  1508.5 Other segment items Capital expenditure 1.6   1.6 Depreciation 0.9   0.9 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Year ended 31 December 2016
Venture capital fund management
Consolidated
STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Portfolio return and revenue Change in fair value of equity and debt investments 7.0   7.0 Loss on disposal of equity investments 0.5   0.5 Change in fair value of limited and limited liability partnership interests 0.3   0.3 Change in fair value of contingent value right 1.4   1.4 Other portfolio income Licensing income 0.2   0.2 Revenue from services and other income 0.8 0.9  1.7 Revenue from fund management services  0.9  0.9 Amortisation of intangible assets 5.6   5.6 Acquisition costs 0.4   0.4 Administrative expenses 14.9 0.7 1.4 17.0 Operating loss 15.1 1.1 1.4 15.4 Finance income 0.6   0.6 Loss before taxation 14.5 1.1 1.4 14.8
Loss for the year 14.5 1.1 1.4 14.8 STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION Liabilities 26.5 0.1 0.2 26.8 Net assets 751.9 10.8 6.0 768.7 Other segment items Capital expenditure Depreciation 0.1   0.1 Operating Segments continued 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
136 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Auditors Remuneration Details of the auditors remuneration are set out below Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 118 74 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys interim accounts 50 The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 100 87 Total fees for audit services 268 161 Auditrelated assurance services  21 Total assurance services 268 182 Tax compliance services Taxation advisory services All other services 23 18 Total nonassurance services .
Operating Profit Operating profit has been arrived at after charging or crediting Amortisation of intangible assets 3.9 5.6 Depreciation of tangible assets 0.9 0.1 Employee costs see note 9 17.0 9.5 Operating leases see note 21 1.1 0.5 Gain on deconsolidation of subsidiary 45.1 Gainloss on disposal of equity investments 0.1 0.5 Acquisition and Restructuring Costs Acquisition and restructuring costs in the year comprised Financial and corporate broking advice 5.0 Legal advice 1.0 0.3 Other professional advice 0.2 0.1 Other costs 2.9 Acquisition and restructuring costs are largely comprised of professional fees incurred for the acquisition of Touchstone Innovations which was affected by means of a takeover under the City Code.
Other costs include a provision for employee redundancies an onerous lease provision for London office space surplus to requirements and accelerated depreciation on the fixed assets within the Touchstone office.
Costs incurred in the prior year were wholly incurred in respect of the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Employee Costs Employee costs including executive directors comprise Salaries 10.2 7.0 Defined contribution pension cost 0.5 0.4 Sharebased payment charge see note 22 2.4 1.5 Other bonuses accrued in the year 2.5 Social security 1.4 0.6 The average monthly number of persons including executive directors employed by the Group during the year was 115 all of whom were involved in management and administration activities 2016 70.
Details of the Directors remuneration can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 99.
Taxation
Current tax Deferred tax The Group primarily seeks to generate capital gains from its holdings in spinout companies over the longer term but has historically made annual net operating losses from its operations from a UK tax perspective.
Capital gains achieved by the Group would ordinarily be taxed upon realisation of such holdings.
The Directors continue to believe that the Group qualifies for the Substantial Shareholdings Exemption SSE.
The Directors consider that the SSE regime has been simplified and enhanced during the period with a number of changes being enacted in the Finance No.2 Act 2017 that are effective for disposals on or after 1 April 2017.
From the Groups perspective the key changes were to remove the requirement for the investing entity in this case IP Group to be a sole trading entity or member of a trading group and extending the minimum 10% holding period to any 12month period in the six years prior to disposal.
The Group welcomed these changes and the directors anticipate that they will have a favourable impact on the Group giving greater certainty over the exemption of qualifying gains under SSE and increasing the Groups flexibility over the timing of future portfolio company disposals.
The changes in the Finance No.2 Act 2017 also included a restriction on companies use of brought forward losses.
As a result the amount of profit that can be mitigated by brought forward losses will be restricted to 50% of the amount of profits in excess of 5m.
The Directors do not currently consider that these proposed changes will result in the recognition of a deferred tax liability in respect of any unrealised gains that do not qualify for SSE but note that such liabilities may arise in the future.
Assets held in Luxembourg which were acquired via the combination with Touchstone in the year are also subject to capital gains and ordinarily the Group would be taxed on their realisation.
The participation exemption similar to the UK SSE scheme described above is available for certain share disposals.
Dividends and gains arising to Imperial Innovations Srl through its interest in Touchstone Innovations Businesses LLP should be exempt from tax under Luxembourg law provided the conditions for the participation exemption are met for each investment or each investment can be attributed to a UK permanent establishment.
Tax residence of Imperial Innovations Srl will be maintained in Luxembourg and no UK tax should arise on the applicable gains.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
138 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Taxation continued The amount for the year can be reconciled to the profit per the statement of comprehensive income as follows Profit before tax 53.4 14.8 Tax at the UK corporation tax rate of 20.0% 2015 20.3% 10.3 3.0 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1.6 0.9 Non taxable income on deconsolidation of Istesso group 8.7 Fair value movement on investments qualifying for SSE 9.4 1.3 Movement on sharebased payments 0.3 0.1 Unrecognised other temporary differences Movement in tax losses arising not recognised 5.9 3.3 Total tax charge At 31 December 2017 deductible temporary differences and unused tax losses for which no deferred tax asset has been recognised totalled 246.9m 2016 141.7m.
An analysis is shown below 2017 2016
Deferred tax
Deferred tax Sharebased payment costs and other temporary differences Unused tax losses 231.8 39.4 127.6 21.7 At 31 December 2017 deductible temporary differences and unused tax losses for which a deferred tax asset liability has been recognised totalled nil 2016 nil.
An analysis is shown below 2017 2016
Deferred tax
Deferred tax Temporary timing differences 7.1 1.2 2.6 4.4 Unused tax losses 7.1 1.2 2.6 0.4 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Earnings per Share
Earnings for the purposes of basic and dilutive earnings per share 49.7 13.5 Number of shares Number of shares Number of shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of basic earnings per share 704227751 565056171 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares Options or contingently issuable shares 657673 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 704885424 565056171 Potentially dilutive ordinary shares include contingently issuable shares arising under the Groups LTIP arrangements and options issued as part of the Groups Sharesave schemes and Deferred Bonus Share Plan for annual bonuses deferred under the terms of the Groups annual incentive scheme.
Goodwill
At 1 January 2017 57.1 Recognised on acquisition of subsidiary undertakings see note 27 115.0 At 31 December 2017 172.1 Goodwill arising on business combinations is reviewed for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill may be impaired.
Recoverable amounts for CGUs are based on the higher of value in use and fair value less costs of disposal.
Value in use in calculated from cashflow projections for the CGUs to which the goodwill has been allocated.
The goodwill allocated to each CGU is summarised in the table below.
University partnership CGU 169.6 55.0 Fund management CGU 2.1 2.1 Parkwalk Advisors CGU 0.4 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
140 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Goodwill continued Impairment review of the university partnership CGU The key assumptions of the DCF models used to assess the value in use are shown below.
For the purposes of impairment testing the university partnership CGU comprises those elements connected with the Groups university partnership business.
The Directors consider that for each of the key variables which would be relevant in determining a recoverable value for the university partnership CGU there is a range of reasonably possible alternative values.
The key variable ranges are set out below 2017 2016 Number of spinout companies per year 1315 1015 Annual investment rate 50m60m 40m75m Rate of return achieved 15%20% 15%22% Proportion of IPO exits 25%30% 25%35% Proportion of disposal exits 25%28% 25%32% IPO and Disposal valuations 30m35m 25m35m Long term growth rate 1.5%1.7% 1.9% Discount rate 10%15% 9%11% When determining the key variables management has where possible and appropriate used historical performance data as a basis.
In instances where the forecasted volumes and scale of activity do not align with the Groups prior performance management applies its judgement in determining these variables.
Two different valueinuse models were assessed in order to evaluate the recoverable value of the CGU neither of which resulted in an impairment being required.
Impairment review of venture capital fund management CGU The key assumptions of the DCF model used to assess the value in use are shown below Discount rate 9%11% 9%11% Number of funds under management 3 4 Management fee 2%3.25% 2%3.25% Cost inflation 2.5% 1.5% Long term growth rate 1.9% The valueinuse models were assessed in order to evaluate the recoverable value of the CGU does not indicate an impairment being required.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Intangible Assets
At 1 January 2017 21.6 Additions acquired through business combinations 9.0 At 31 December 2017 30.6 Accumulated amortisation At 1 January 2017 16.5 Charge for the year 3.9 At 31 December 2016 20.4 Net book value At 31 December 2017 10.2 At 31 December 2016 5.1 The intangible assets represent contracts with customers and other contractual arrangements with UK universities acquired through acquisition of subsidiaries.
The contractual arrangements have fixed terms and consequently the intangible assets have a finite life which align with the remaining terms which at the end of the period range from 2 months to 29 months.
The individual contractual arrangements are amortised in a straight line over the remainder of their terms with the expense being presented directly on the primary statements.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
142 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Categorisation of Financial Instruments At fair value through profit or loss Financial assets Held for trading
Loans and receivables
At 31 December 2017 Equity investments  1085.4  1085.4 Debt investments  45.2  45.2 Other financial assets Limited and limited liability partnership interests  11.0  11.0 Trade and other receivables   8.3 8.3 Deposits   95.0 95.0 Cash and cash equivalents   231.3 231.3 Total  1141.6 334.6 1476.2 At 31 December 2016 Equity investments  594.9  594.9 Debt investments  19.1  19.1 Other financial assets Limited and limited liability partnership interests  4.2  4.2 Trade and other receivables   2.6 2.6
Cash and cash equivalents   112.3 112.3 All financial liabilities are categorised as other financial liabilities and recognised at amortised cost.
The Group does not consider that any change in fair value of financial assets in the year is attributable to credit risk 2016 nil.
All net fair value gains in the year are attributable to financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss on initial recognition 2016 all net fair value gains attributable to financial assets designated at fair value through profit or loss on initial recognition.
All interest income is attributable to financial assets not classified as fair value through profit and loss.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Net Investment Portfolio Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 3a Level 3b
Equity investments in unquoted spinout companies
Equity investments in unquoted spinout companies
Equity investments in unquoted spinout companies
At 1 January 2017 161.1   368.0 19.1 65.8 614.0 Investments during Acquired with
Innovations plc 35.3   131.6 19.9 165.4 352.2
Other transfers between hierarchy levels during the year 13.4   266.7  253.3 Disposals 1.2    0.8 7.8 7.4 Adjustments for deconsolidation of subsidiaries     8.4 42.7 51.1 Fees settled via equity    0.5   0.5 Change in fair value in the year At 31 December 2017 225.1   302.2 45.2 558.1 1130.6 At 1 January 2016 201.3   308.6 9.1 33.2 552.2 Investments during
Other transfers between hierarchy levels during the year    39.8 6.7 33.1 Disposals 15.0   0.2 0.1  15.3 Fees settled via equity    0.4   0.4 Change in fair value in the year At 31 December 2016 161.1   368.0 19.1 65.8 614.0 i The change in fair value in the year includes a loss of 1.1m 2016 gain of 0.7m in exchange differences on translating foreign currency investments.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
144 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Net Investment Portfolio continued In order to align the Groups reporting with that of Touchstone Innovations we have classified our investments which were previously level 2 as level 3a and we have represented the 2016 investment level data accordingly.
The Groups policy is to classify equity investments in unquoted spinout companies as Level 3a where prices have been determined from recent investments in the last twelve months.
The impact of changing the qualifying criteria for Level 3a to be determined from recent investments in the last six months would mean 23.0% 2016 4.4% of the equity investments in unquoted spinout companies would be reclassified to Level 3b.
Fair values of unquoted spinout companies classified as Level 3b in the fair value hierarchy have been determined in part or in full by valuation techniques that are not supported by observable market prices or rates.
This includes where prices have been determined from the most recent market transaction but that transaction occurred more than twelve months prior to the balance sheet date and a variety of other valuation techniques.
Investments in 190 2016 54 companies have been classified as Level 3b.
If the fair value of all Level 3b investments were to decrease by 10% the net assets figure would decrease by 28.4m 2016 6.6m with a corresponding increase if the unobservable inputs were to increase by 10%.
If the assumptions used in the valuation techniques for the Groups holding in each company are varied by using a range of possible alternatives there is no material difference to the carrying value of the respective spinout company.
The effect on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the period is also not expected to be material.
Due to the significant increase in the size of the unquoted investment portfolio during the year which resulted from the acquisition of Touchtone Innovations the Group have reconsidered the observability of the inputs in all unquoted valuations within the Group and aligned the classification of the level 3 investments with that previously reported by Touchstone Innovations.
The prior year presentation has been reclassified accordingly.
For assets and liabilities that are recognised at fair value on a recurring basis the Group determines whether transfers have occurred between levels in the hierarchy by reassessing categorisation based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement as a whole at the end of each reporting period.
Transfers between tiers are then made as if the transfer took place on the first day of the period in question except in the cases of transfers between tiers based on an initial public offering IPO of an investment wherein the changes in value prior to the IPO are calculated and reported in tier 3a and those changes post are attributed to tier 1.
Transfers between Level 3a and Level 1 occur when a previously unquoted investment undertakes an initial public offering resulting in its equity becoming quoted on an active market.
In the current period transfers of this nature amounted to 13.4m 2016 nil.
Transfers between Level 1 and Level 3a would occur when a quoted investments market becomes inactive or the portfolio company elects to delist.
There have been no such instances in the current period 2016 one instance nil value.
Transfers between Level 3b and Level 3a occur when an investment which previously had a most recent investment of over twelve months ago undertakes an investment resulting in an observable market rate.
In the current period transfers of this nature amounted to 26.7m 2016 7.3m.
Transfers between Level 3a and Level 3b occur when an investments recent investment becomes more than twelve months old with the price being deemed unobservable.
In the current period transfers of this nature amounted to 280.0m 2016 45.3m.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Net Investment Portfolio continued Change in fair value in the year Fair value gains 99.3 57.3 Fair value losses 50.3 50.3 The Companys interests in subsidiary undertakings are listed in note 2 to the Companys financial statements.
Trade and Other Receivables Trade debtors 1.9 2.3 Prepayments 1.4 0.3 Other receivables 5.0 The Directors consider the carrying amount of trade and other receivables to approximate their fair value.
All receivables are interest free repayable on demand and unsecured.
Contingent Value Rights As a result of the disposal of Proximagen Group plc in August 2012 the Group received contingent consideration in the form of contingent value rights CVRs based upon future net revenues of two associated drug programmes.
In line with the Groups policies these have previously been recognised as financial assets at fair value through profit and loss.
The Group considers this asset to be Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy throughout the current and previous financial years.
This asset is fair valued at nil 2016 nil and the directors do not expect any value to be realised in the future.
Trade and Other Payables Current liabilities Trade payables 2.0 0.7 Social security expenses 0.7 0.3 Deferred consideration payable 4.3 Redundancy and restructuring cost accrual 2.4 Bonus accrual 2.8 Other accruals and deferred income 7.5 1.1 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
146 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017
Noncurrent liabilities EIB debt facility 97.7 14.9 Loans drawn down from the Limited Partners of consolidated funds 13.1 9.8 Current liabilities EIB debt facility 6.3 Loans drawn down from the Limited Partners of consolidated funds The loans from Limited Partners of consolidated funds are interest free and repayable only upon the applicable funds generating sufficient returns to repay the Limited Partners.
Management anticipates that the funds will generate the required returns and consequently recognises the full associated liabilities.
EIB debt facility On 8 July 2015 the Group secured a 30m 8year debt facility from the European Investment Bank.
The facility is to be disbursed in two tranches.
The Group will use the proceeds to continue to fund UK university spinout companies as they develop and mature.
The first tranche of 15.0m was drawn down on 17 December 2015.
There were 0.1m of initial transaction costs incurred in the arrangement of the facility.
This balance was set against the loan amount and is to be subsequently amortised over the term of the loan.
The associated charge to the statement of comprehensive income for 2017 was nil 2016 nil.
The loan is based on a fixed rate of 1.98% with an additional variable spread equal to the six month GBP Libor rate as at the first date of each sixmonth interest period.
The capital is repayable in ten equal payments over a fiveyear period with the first payment due on 7 January 2019.
The second tranche of 15.0m was drawn down on 7 December 2017.
The capital is repayable in ten equal payments over a fiveyear period with the first payment due on 7 January 2019.
The loan is based on a fixed interest rate of 3.016% and is repayable over a ten year period.
The Group also holds an additional debt facility with the EIB as a consequence of the combination with Touchstone Innovations during the year.
The first tranche of a 30.0m debt facility was drawn down on 30 July 2013.
Transaction costs of 0.2m were incurred to obtain the loan and were set against the loan amount.
These costs are subsequently amortised over the life time of the loan.
The loan is based on a floating interest rate related to LIBOR and is repayable in 10 equal annual instalments over a twelve year period.
The second tranche was drawn down on 30 June 2015.
Transaction costs of 0.2m were incurred to obtain the loan and were set against the loan amount.
These costs are subsequently amortised over the life time of the loan.
The loan is based on a fixed interest rate of 4.235% and is repayable over a ten year period.
On 13 July 2015 Touchstone entered a second loan agreement of 50.0m available to draw down in up to four tranches with a minimum tranche value of 10.0m.
There is a nonutilisation fee calculated on the daily undrawn uncancelled balance of the loan from the date falling six months after the date of the agreement at a rate of 0.10% per annum.
This facility was fully drawn down in February 2017 and is repayable over an eightyear period.
The Touchstone loans contain a debt covenant requiring that the ratio of the total fair value of investments plus cash and qualifying liquidity to debt should a no time fall below 41.
The loan also stipulates that on any date the aggregate of all amounts scheduled for payment to the EIB in the following six months should be kept in a separate bank account.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Borrowings continued The IP Group loans contain covenants requiring that the ratio between the value of the portfolio along with the value of the Groups cash net of any outstanding liabilities and the outstanding debt facility does not fall below 61.
The Group must maintain that the amount of unencumbered funds freely available to the Group is not less than 15.0m.
The Group is also required to maintain a separate bank account which must at any date maintain a minimum balance equal to that of all payments due to the EIB in the forthcoming six months.
Share Capital 2017 2016 Issued and fully paid Number m Number m Ordinary Shares of 2p each At 1 January 565221967 11.3 564648168 11.3 Issued under share placings 131913567 2.6 Issued as consideration in acquisitions 359304235 7.2 Issued under employee share plans 943832  573799 At 31 December 1057383601 21.1 565221967 11.3 The Company has one class of ordinary shares with a par value of 2p Ordinary Shares which carry equal voting rights equal rights to income and distributions of assets on liquidation or otherwise and no right to fixed income.
In June 2017 the Group issued 131357140 new Ordinary Shares as part of a fund raising which raised 184.7m before expenses at a price of 1.40 per share.
Later in August an additional subscription for 556427 Ordinary Shares was made at the same terms as the previous share placing bring total funds raised to 181.0m net of expenses.
In October 2017 the Groups offer to acquire 100% of the share capital of Touchstone Innovations plc became unconditional in all respects and 357518520 new Ordinary Shares were issued to the existing Touchstone shareholders in exchange for shares in IP Group plc.
Also in October 2017 the Group issued 1785715 new Ordinary Shares as consideration to the sellers of Parkwalk Advisors see Note 27.
In June and November 2017 the Group issued 436689 new Ordinary Shares in order to settle the exercise of options that had been issued under the Groups Deferred Bonus Share Plan DBSP see Note 22.
Finally in November 2017 the Group issued 507143 new Ordinary Shares in exchange for Touchstone Innovations shares that were issued under the rules of the Imperial Innovations 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP see Note 22.
Prior to the completion of the allshare acquisition by IP Group the Remuneration Committee of Touchstone Innovations plc determined that one third of the shares comprised in the 2016 awards granted over shares in Touchstone under the 2016 LTIP would become immediately exercisable upon the IP Group offer becoming wholly unconditional notwithstanding that the performance conditions had not been met at that time.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
148 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Operating Lease Arrangements Payments under operating leases recognised in the statement of comprehensive income for the year 1.1 0.5 At the reporting date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Within one year 1.7 0.6 In the second to fifth years inclusive 4.6 3.1 Operating lease payments represent rentals by the Group for its office properties.
Leases are negotiated for an average term of five years and rentals are fixed for an average of one year.
ShareBased Payments In 2017 the Group continued to incentivise employees through its LTIP and AIS.
Both are described in more detail in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 99.
Deferred Bonus Share Plan DBSP Awards made to employees under the Groups AIS above a certain threshold include 50% deferred into IP Group equity through the grant of nilcost options under the Groups DBSP.
The number of nilcost options granted under the Groups DBSP is determined by the share price at vesting date.
The DBSP options are subject to further timebased vesting over two years typically 50% after year one and 50% after year two.
An analysis of movements in the DBSP options outstanding is as follows Number of options
Number of options
At 1 January 837995  187869 AIS deferral shares award during the year   781148 Exercised during the year 436689  101622 Lapsed during the year 6812  29400 At 31 December 394494  837995 Exercisable at 31 December   86247 The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had an exercise price in the range of nil 2016 nil and a weightedaverage remaining contractual life of 0.3 years 2016 0.8 years.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for share options exercised in 2017 was 139.17p 2016 178.90p.
As the 2017 AIS financial performance targets were met and as the number of DBSP options to be granted in order to defer such elements of the AIS payments as are required under our remuneration policy are based on a percentage of employees salary the sharebased payments line includes the associated sharebased payments expense incurred in 2017.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes ShareBased Payments continued LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP Awards under the LTIP take the form of conditional awards of ordinary shares of 2p each in the Group which vest over the prescribed performance period to the extent that performance conditions have been met.
The Remuneration Committee imposes objective conditions on the vesting of awards and these take into consideration the guidance of the Groups institutional investors from time to time.
Further information on the Groups LTIP is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 99.
The 2017 LTIP awards were made on 29 August 2017.
The awards will ordinarily vest on 31 March 2020 to the extent that the performance conditions have been met.
The awards are based on the performance of the Groups Hard NAV and Total Shareholder Return TSR.
Both performance measures are combined into a matrix format to most appropriately measure performance relative to the business as shown in the Directors Remuneration Report within the Groups 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
The total award is subject to an underpin based on the relative performance of the Groups TSR to that of the FTSE 250 index which can reduce the awards by up to 50%.
The 2017 LTIP matrix is designed such that up to 100% of the award prior to the application of the underpin will vest in full in the event of both Hard NAV increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2019 and TSR increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from the date of award to 31 March 2020 using an industrystandard average price period at the beginning and end of the performance period.
Further the matrix is designed such that 30% of the award shall vest again prior to the application of the underpin if the cumulative increase is 8% per annum for both measures over their respective performance periods threshold performance.
A straightline sliding scale is applied for performance between the distinct points on the matrix of vesting targets.
The 2016 LTIP awards were made on 16 May 2016.
The awards will ordinarily vest on 31 March 2019 to the extent that the performance conditions have been met.
The awards are based on the performance of the Groups Hard NAV and Total Shareholder Return TSR.
Both performance measures are combined into a matrix format to most appropriately measure performance relative to the business as shown in the Directors Remuneration Report within the Groups 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
The total award is subject to an underpin based on the relative performance of the Groups TSR to that of the FTSE 250 index which can reduce the awards by up to 50%.
The 2016 LTIP matrix is designed such that up to 100% of the award prior to the application of the underpin will vest in full in the event of both Hard NAV increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from 1 January 2016 to 31 December 2018 and TSR increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from the date of award to 31 March 2019 using an industrystandard average price period at the beginning and end of the performance period.
Further the matrix is designed such that 30% of the award shall vest again prior to the application of the underpin if the cumulative increase is 8% per annum for both measures over their respective performance periods threshold performance.
A straightline sliding scale is applied for performance between the distinct points on the matrix of vesting targets.
The 2015 LTIP awards were made on 21 May 2015.
The awards will ordinarily vest on 31 March 2018 to the extent that the performance conditions have been met.
The awards are based on the performance of the Groups Hard NAV and Total Shareholder Return TSR.
Both performance measures are combined into a matrix format to most appropriately measure performance relative to the business as shown in the Directors Remuneration Report within the Groups 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
The total award is subject to an underpin based on the relative performance of the Groups TSR to that of the FTSE 250 index which can reduce the awards by up to 50%.
The 2015 LTIP matrix is designed such that up to 100% of the award prior to the application of the underpin will vest in full in the event of both Hard NAV increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2017 and TSR increasing by 15% per year on a cumulative basis from the date of award to 31 March 2018 using an industrystandard average price period at the beginning and end of the performance period.
Further the matrix is designed such that 30% of the award shall vest again prior to the application of the underpin if the cumulative increase is 8% per annum for both measures over their respective performance periods threshold performance.
A straightline sliding scale is applied for performance between the distinct points on the matrix of vesting targets.
The 2014 LTIP awards did not meet the threshold performance target and lapsed on 31 March 2017.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
150 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 ShareBased Payments continued The movement in the number of shares conditionally awarded under the LTIP is set out below Number of options
Number of options
At 1 January 5614837  3378595 Lapsed during the year 1227666  349655 Forfeited during the year 3766  144294 Vested during the year   457877 Notionally awarded during the year 4682712  3188078 At 31 December 9066117  5614837 Exercisable at 31 December The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had an exercise price in the range of nil 2016 nil and a weightedaverage remaining contractual life of 1.6 years 2016 1.6 years.
The fair value of LTIP shares notionally awarded during 2017 was calculated using Monte Carlo pricing models with the following key assumptions 2017 2016 Share price at date of award 1.151 1.558 Exercise price nil nil Fair value at grant date 0.34 0.41 Expected volatility median of historical 50day moving average 36% 31% Expected life years 3.0 2.83 Expected dividend yield 0% 0% Riskfree interest rate 0.4% 1.0% Former Touchstone LTIP Also in 2017 as a result of the combination with Touchstone award holders under existing Touchstone long term incentive share schemes were entitled to receive 2.2178 new IP Group shares in exchange for each Touchstone share an exchange ratio set out in the Offer Document for the acquisition the Exchange Ratio.
2016 schemes It was proposed that given the short period of time since grant awards would not become exercisable in connection with the Offer and therefore that no progress towards meeting performance targets had been made.
Instead award holders were offered the opportunity to release their awards in exchange for the grant of a replacement award of equivalent value over shares in IP Group and the exercise price was set at 3.33 pence divided by the Exchange Ratio .
The vesting dates on the replacement awards remained the same as the original award being 1 December 2020 1 December 2022 and 1 December 2022.
The replacement awards are subject to performance conditions adjusted from those attaching to the original Touchstone award as follows a the Net Asset Value NAV condition will be adjusted to reflect Touchstones portfolio being part of the enlarged group following the acquisition and b the Total Shareholder Return TSR condition will be adjusted so that TSR shall be measured by reference to the performance of IP Group shares over the performance period with the starting share price for such purpose being adjusted by dividing the existing starting share price of 290 pence by the exchange ratio detailed above.
The TTO specific targets remain the same.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes ShareBased Payments continued Number of options
Number of options
At 1 January Replacement shares awarded on 17 October 2017 2875606 Forfeited during the year Vested during the year At 31 December 2875606 Exercisable at 31 December The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had an exercise price of 0.015 2016 nil and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 2.7 years 2016 na.
2006 schemes Holders of 2006 Touchstone awards were offered the opportunity to release each of their awards in exchange for the grant of a replacement award of equivalent value over shares in IP Group.
The exercise period and time based vesting provisions for the replacement awards remained the same as the original Touchstone awards but the shareholder return performance condition will be updated by reference to the Exchange Ratio.
Awards under the 2006 scheme were exercisable to some extent at the time of the grant of replacement awards subject to meeting the applicable vesting conditions.
Number of options
Number of options
At 1 January Replacement shares awarded on 17 October 2017 1808001 2.13 At 31 December 1808001 2.13 Exercisable at 31 December 1808001 2.13 The options outstanding at 31 December 2017 had an exercise price of 2.13 2016 nil and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 6.9 years 2016 7.9 years.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
ShareBased Payments continued Former Fusion IP LTIP In 2014 three former employees of Fusion IP plc were each conditionally awarded 1000000 shares in Fusion IP plc under the Fusion IP LTIP.
As part of the arrangements for the acquisition of Fusion IP plc the Fusion IP LTIP awards were converted into awards over IP Group shares at the same conversion price per share as the scheme of arrangement was undertaken 0.446 IP Group plc shares for every Fusion IP plc share.
The awards were scheduled to vest on 31 December 2017 provided certain performance conditions are met which related to inter alia the growth in value of Fusion IP plcs net asset value Fusion NAV from the date of acquisition and the continued employment of the individual by the Group.
The options expired on 31 December 2017 as vesting criteria had not been met.
The movement in the number of shares conditionally awarded under the Former Fusion IP LTIP is set out below 2017 2016 At 1 January 1338000 1338000 Expired during the year 1338000 At 31 December  1338000 Fair value charge The fair value charge recognised in the statement of comprehensive income during the year in respect of all sharebased payments including the DBSP LTIP and Former Fusion IP LTIP was 2.4m 2016 1.5m.
Limited and Limited Liability Partnership Interests At 1 January 2016 4.4 Additions during the year 0.1 Realisations in the year Change in fair value during the year 0.3 At 1 January 2017 4.2 Additions during the year 1.4 Acquired on acquisition of subsidiary 5.6 Realisations in the year Change in fair value during the year 0.2 At 31 December 2017 11.0 The Group considers interests in Limited and Limited Liability Partnerships to be Level 3b in the fair value hierarchy throughout the current and previous financial years.
If the assumptions used in the valuation techniques for the Groups holding in each company are varied by using a range of possible alternatives there is no material difference to the carrying value of the respective spinout company.
The effect on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the period is also not expected to be material.
152 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Related Party Transactions The Group has various related parties arising from its key management subsidiaries equity stakes in portfolio companies and management of certain Limited Partnership funds.
The Group manages a number of investment funds structured as Limited Partnerships.
Group entities have a Limited Partnership interest see note 1 and act as the general partners of these Limited Partnerships.
The Group therefore has power to exert significant influence over these Limited Partnerships.
The following amounts have been included in respect of these Limited Partnerships Statement of comprehensive income Revenue from services 0.7 0.9 Statement of financial position Investment in limited partnerships 2.6 2.8 Amounts due from related parties 0.7 0.2 b Key management personnel i Key management personnel transactions Key management had investments in the following spinout companies as at 31 December 2017
Company
Secretary Company name
1 January
Number of shares held at 31 December 2017 % Alan Aubrey Accelercomm Limited 333  333 0.3% Alesi Surgical Limited 18  18 0.2% Amaethon Limited  A Shares 104  104 3.1% Amaethon Limited  B Shares 11966  11966 1.0% Amaethon Limited  Ordinary shares 21  21 0.3% Avacta Group plc 202761  202761 0.3% Boxarr Limited 1732  1732 0.3% Capsant Neurotechnologies Limited 11631  11631 0.8% Crysalin Limited 1447  1447 0.1% Ditto AI Limited iv 119965750  119965750 17.7% Diurnal Group plc 15000  15000 0.1% EmDot Limited 15  15 0.9% Getech Group plc 15000  15000 0.1% Gunsynd plc 767310  767310 0.1% hVivo plc 37160  37160 0.1% Ilika plc 69290  69290 0.1% Istesso Limited 1185150  1185150 1.7% Karus Therapeutics Limited 223  223 0.1% Microbiotica Limited 3750 6250 10000 0.1% Mirriad Advertising plc 33333  33333 0.1% MDL 2016 Limited  Ordinary shares 3226  3226 0.4% MDL 2016 Limited  A shares 229  229 0.5% Modern Water plc 519269  519269 0.7% Cronin Group plc 2172809  2172809 0.4% Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
154 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017
Company
Secretary Company name
1 January
Number of shares held at 31 December 2017 % Alan Aubrey continued Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 101208  101208 0.4% Perachem Holdings plc 108350  108350 0.8% Salunda Limited 53639  53639 0.1% Structure Vision Limited 212  212 1.0% Surrey Nanosystems Limited 453  453 0.3% Tissue Regenix Group plc 2389259  2389259 0.3% Xeros Technology Group plc 40166  40166 0.1% Zeetta Networks Limited 424  424 0.1% Mike Townend Amaethon Limited  A Shares 104  104 3.1% Amaethon Limited  B Shares 11966  11966 1.0% Amaethon Limited  Ordinary shares 21  21 0.3% Applied Graphene Materials plc 7619  7619 0.1% Avacta Group plc 20001  20001 0.1% Capsant Neurotechnologies Limited 11282  11282 0.8% Creavo Technologies Limited 117  117 0.1% Crysalin Limited 1286  1286 0.1% Ditto AI Limited iv Diurnal Group plc 15000  15000 0.1% EmDot Limited 14  14 0.8% Getech Group plc 20000  20000 0.1% Istesso Limited 1185150  1185150 1.7% Ilika plc 10000  10000 0.1% Itaconix plc iii 64940  64940 0.1% Mirriad Advertising plc 25000  25000 0.1% Mode Diagnostics Limited 1756  1756 0.1% Modern Water plc 575000  575000 0.7% Cronin Group plc 932944  932944 0.2% Oxford Advanced Surfaces Limited 5000  5000 0.2% Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 30967  30967 0.1% Perachem Holdings plc 113222  113222 0.8% Structure Vision Limited 212  212 1.0% Surrey Nanosystems Limited 404  404 0.2% Tissue Regenix Group plc 1950862  1950862 0.3% Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 35 1189 1224 0.1% Xeros Technology Group plc 35499  35499 0.1% Greg Smith Alesi Surgical Limited 2  2 0.1% Avacta Group plc 3904  3904 0.1% Capsant Neurotechnologies Limited 896  896 0.1% Crysalin Limited 149  149 0.1% Ditto AI Limited iv Diurnal Group plc 15000  15000 0.1% EmDot Limited 4  4 0.2% Encos Limited 5671  5671 0.3% Related Party Transactions continued 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes
Company
Secretary Company name
1 January
Number of shares held at 31 December 2017 % Greg Smith Getech Group plc 8000  8000 0.1% continued hVivo plc 61340  61340 0.1% Istesso Limited 313425  313425 0.5% Perachem Holdings plc 4830  4830 0.1% Mirriad Advertising plc 16667  16667 0.1% MDL 2016 Limited  Ordinary shares 361  361 0.1% MDL 2016 Limited  A shares 28  28 0.1% Modern Water plc 7250  7250 0.1% Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 1581  1581 0.1% Summit Therapeutics plc 798  798 0.1% Surrey Nanosystems Limited 88  88 0.1% Tissue Regenix Group plc 50000  50000 0.1% Xeros Technology Group plc 1392  1392 0.1% David Baynes Alesi Surgical Limited 4  4 0.1% Arkivum Limited 377  377 0.1% Creavo Technologies Limited 46  46 0.1% Diurnal Group plc 73000  73000 0.1% Mirriad Advertising plc 16667  16667 0.1% Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 174  174 0.1% Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 26  26 0.1% Zeetta Networks Limited 424  424 0.1% Angela Leach Alesi Surgical Limited 2  2 0.1% Avacta Group plc 1897  1897 0.1% Boxarr Limited 102  102 0.1% Capsant Neurotechnologies Limited 1858  1858 0.1% Creavo Technologies Limited 23  23 0.1% Cronin Group plc 68101  68101 0.1% Ditto AI Limited iv Diurnal Group plc 11500  11500 0.1% Gunsynd plc 7990  7990 0.1% First Light Fusion Limited 17 10 27 0.1% Getech Group plc 2083  2083 0.1% hVivo plc 25903  25903 0.1% Istesso Limited 322923  322923 0.5% Mirriad Advertising plc 16667  16667 0.1% MDL 2016 Limited  Ordinary Shares 606  606 0.1% MDL 2016 Limited  A Shares 102  102 0.2% Modern Water plc 15570  15570 0.1% Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited 1782  1782 0.1% Structure Vision Limited 21  21 0.1% Surrey Nanosystems Limited 90  90 0.1% Tissue Regenix Group plc 276791  276791 0.1% Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 5  5 0.1% Ultrahaptics Holdings Limited 5  5 0.1% Xeros Technology Group plc 5666  5666 0.1% Mirriad Advertising plc was formerly known as Mirriad Advertising Limited ii Cloud Sustainability Limited was acquired during the year by Ditto AI Limited iii Itaconix plc was formerly known as Revolymer plc iv Ditto AI Limited was formerly known as Empircom Limited Istesso Limited was formerly known as Modern Biosciences plc Related Party Transactions continued 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
156 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Related Party Transactions continued ii Key management personnel compensation Key management personnel compensation comprised the following Shortterm employee benefits 2144 1489 Postemployment benefits ii Other longterm benefits Termination benefits Sharebased payments iii Total 3097 2183 Represents key management personnels base salaries benefits including cash in lieu of pension where relevant and the cash settled element of the Annual Incentive Scheme.
Represents employer contributions to defined contribution pension and life assurance plans iii Represents the accounting charge for share based payments reflecting LTIP and DBSP options currently in issue as part of these schemes.
See note 22 for a detailed description of these schemes.
The Group earns fees from the provision of business support services and corporate finance advisory to portfolio companies in which the Group has an equity stake.
Through the lack of control over portfolio companies these fees are considered armslength transactions.
The following amounts have been included in respect of these fees Statement of comprehensive income Revenue from services 1.9 1.6 Statement of financial position Trade receivables 0.5 0.7 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Related Party Transactions continued ii Investments The Group makes investments in the equity and debt of unquoted and quoted investments where it does not have control but may be able to participate in the financial and operating policies of that company.
It is presumed that it is possible to exert significant influence when the equity holding is greater than 20%.
The
Group has taken the investment entity exception as permitted by IFRS 10 and has not equity accounted for these investments in accordance with IAS 28 but they are related parties.
The total amounts included for investments where the Group has significant influence but not control are as follows Statement of comprehensive income Net gainslosses on disposals 0.7 Change in fair value of equity and debt investments 49.0 17.9 Statement of financial position Equity and debt investments 619.5 200.7 d Subsidiary companies Subsidiary companies that are not 100% owned either directly or indirectly by the parent Company have intercompany balances with other Group companies totalling as follows Statement of financial position Intercompany balances with other Group companies 3.2 10.7 These intercompany balances represent funding loans provided by Group companies that are interest free repayable on demand and unsecured.
Capital Management The Groups key objective when managing capital is to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders.
The Group sets the amount of capital in proportion to risk.
The Group manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of its underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of issued new shares or dispose of interests in more mature portfolio companies.
During 2017 the Groups strategy which was unchanged from 2016 was to maintain healthy cash and short term deposit balances that enable it to provide capital to all portfolio companies as determined by the Groups investment committee whilst having sufficient cash reserves to meet all working capital requirements in the foreseeable future.
The Group has an external debt facility with associated covenants that are described in Note 19.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
158 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Capital Commitments Commitments to university partnerships A number of the Groups partnerships with research intensive universities in the UK include certain arrangements to provide seed capital to spinout companies arising from such universities.
As at 31 December 2017 the balances were as follows
Year of commencement of partnership
Invested to date m
University of Southampton 2002 5.0 3.6 1.4 Kings College London ii 2003 5.0 1.8 3.2 University of York  CNAP iii 2003 0.8 0.2 0.6 University of Leeds iv 2005 4.2 1.5 2.7 University of Bristol 2005 5.0 1.2 3.8 University of Surrey vi 2006 5.0 0.5 4.5 University of York iii 2006 5.0 0.3 4.7 Queen Mary University of London vii 2006 5.0 0.8 4.2 University of Bath viii 2006 5.0 0.4 4.6 University of Glasgow ix 2006 5.0 2.0 3.0 University of Manchester 2013 7.5 0.5 7.0 Under the terms of an agreement entered into in 2002 between the Group the University of Southampton and certain of the University of Southamptons subsidiaries IP2IPO Limited agreed to make 5.0m available for the purposes of making investments in University of Southampton spinout companies.
Under the terms of an agreement entered into during 2003 between the Group and Kings College London KCL and Kings College London Business Limited formerly KCL Enterprises Limited the Group agreed to make 5.0m available for the purposes of making investments in spinout companies.
Under the terms of this agreement KCL was previously able to require the Company to make a further 5.0m available for investments in spinout companies on the tenth anniversary of the partnership.
However the 2003 agreement was terminated and replaced by a revised agreement between the same parties on 12 November 2010.
Under the revised agreement the Group agreed to target investing the remaining commitment of 3.2m over a threeyear period KCL cannot however require the Group to make any additional funds available.
Other changes effected by the revised agreement included the removal of the Groups automatic entitlement to initial partner equity in every spinout company andor a share of KCLs licensing fees from intellectual property commercialisation and to the termination rights of the parties.
In 2003 the Group entered into an agreement with the University of York.
The agreement relates to a specialist research centre within the University of York the Centre for Novel Agricultural Products CNAP.
The Group has committed to invest up to a total of 0.8m in spinout companies based on CNAPs intellectual property.
In
2006 the Group extended its partnership with the University of York to cover the entire university.
The Group has committed to invest 5.0m in University of York spin outs over and beyond the 0.8m commitment as part of the Groups agreement with CNAP.
The agreement with the University of York was amended during 2013 so as to alter the process by which the Group evaluates commercialisation opportunities and the level of initial partner equity the Group is entitled to as a result.
Further the Groups automatic entitlement to share in any of the University of Yorks proceeds from outlicensing has been removed from the agreement.
The Group extended its partnership with the University of Leeds in July 2005 by securing the right with associated contractual commitment to invest up to 5.0m in University of Leeds spinout companies.
This agreement was varied in March 2011 to amongst other things remove the Groups entitlement to a share of out licensing income generated by the University of Leeds except in certain specific circumstances where the Group is involved in the relevant outlicensing opportunity.
Under the terms of the variation agreement subject to quality and quantity of the investment opportunities the Group IP Assist Services Limited and the University of Leeds have agreed to target annual investments of at least 0.7m in aggregate and subject to earlier termination or the parties otherwise agreeing alternative target to review this target on 30 April 2017.
In December 2005 the Group entered into an agreement with the University of Bristol.
The Group has committed to invest up to a total of 5.0m in University of Bristol spinout companies.
Under the terms of an agreement entered into in 2006 between the Group and the University of Surrey the Group has committed to invest up to a total of 5.0m in spinout companies based on the University of Surreys intellectual property.
In July 2006 the Group entered into an agreement with Queen Mary University of London QM to invest in QM spinout companies.
The Group has committed to invest up to a total of 5.0m in QM spinout companies.
The agreement was amended in January 2014 primarily to remove the Groups entitlement to licence fees save where it is involved in the development or licensing of the relevant IP and in most cases to replace the Groups automatic entitlement to a share of the initial equity in any spinout company with an equivalent warrant exercisable at the seed stage of the relevant company.
In September 2006 the Group entered into an agreement with the University of Bath to invest in University of Bath spinout companies.
The Group has committed to invest up to a total of 5.0m in University of Bath spinout companies.
The agreement with the University of Bath was amended during 2009 so as to remove the Groups automatic entitlement to a share of the initial equity or licence fees as applicable received by the University of Bath from the commercialisation of its intellectual property in the event that the Group and its employees have not been actively involved in developing the relevant opportunity.
In October 2006 the Group entered into an agreement with the University of Glasgow to invest in University of Glasgow spinout companies.
The Group has committed to invest up to a total of 5.0m in University of Glasgow spinout companies.
In February 2013 the Group entered into a commercialisation agreement with the University of Manchester.
Initially the Group had agreed to make available an initial facility of up to 5.0m to provide capital to new proof of principle projects excluding graphene projects intended for commercialisation through spinout companies.
During January 2014 the Group extended its agreement to include funding for graphene projects increased the capital commitment by a further 2.5m bringing the total to 7.5m and extended the agreement to 2019.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Capital Commitments continued Commitments to limited partnerships Pursuant to the terms of their Limited Partnership agreements the Group has committed to invest the following amounts into Limited Partnerships as at 31 December 2017
Year of commencement of partnership
Invested to date
IP Venture Fund 2006 3.1 3.0 0.1 IP Venture Fund II L.
UCL Technology Fund LP 2016 24.8 6.1 18.7 Apollo Therapeutics LLP 2016 3.3 0.4 2.9 Acquisition of subsidiaries The Group completed two corporate transactions in 2017 the combination with AIMlisted Touchstone Innovations plc in October and the acquisition of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd in January.
Touchstone Innovations creates builds and invests in technology companies and licensing opportunities developed from scientific research from the Golden Triangle the geographical region broadly bounded by London Cambridge and Oxford and Parkwalk is the UKs leading university spinout focused EIS fund manager.
Touchstone Innovations plc On 17 October 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the ordinary shares in Touchstone Innovations in exchange for 357518520 ordinary shares in IP Group plc.
The acquisition has been accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consolidated financial statements for the year ending 31 December 2017 include the results of Touchstone Innovations for the period post the acquisition date.
Fair value net assets liabilities Net assets acquired Acquired intangible assets 6.9 Investment portfolio 352.2 Other noncurrent assets 6.7 Trade and trade receivables 2.9 Cash and cash equivalents 119.1 Current liabilities 7.5 Noncurrent liabilities 88.3 Net assets 392.0 Goodwill 108.5 Total consideration 500.5 Consideration satisfied by Issue of share capital 357518520 IP Group ordinary shares at 140.0 pence per share Being the closing price of IP Group plc shares on 17 October 2017 the date of acquisition 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
160 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Acquisition of subsidiaries continued Goodwill recognised on acquisition of Touchstone relates to the value attributable to its access to early stage commercialisation activities with top tier UK universities and the benefits from increased scale and critical mass and a more diverse portfolio the Group expects to benefit from.
None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
In the period since acquisition Touchstone contributed 3.8m in portfolio return and revenue and profit of 0.3m to the Groups results.
Ordinarily the Group would also disclose the group consolidated revenue and profit had the acquisition occurred on 1 January 2017 in accordance with IFRS 3 however management have determined it impractical to do so.
It has been determined to be impractical as the retrospective application requires assumptions about what managements intent would have been for the period and also requires significant estimates of amounts and it is impossible to distinguish objectively information about those estimates that provides evidence of circumstances that existed on the dates as at which those amounts are to be recognised measured and disclosed and would have been available when the financial statements for that prior period were authorised for issue from other information.
Specifically this relates to the valuation of unquoted equity investments.
In accordance with the terms of the acquisition agreement the Group exchanged equitysettled share based payment awards held by employees of Touchstone for equity settled share based payment awards of IP Group.
The details of the acquirees awards and replacement awards were as follows Acquirees awards Replacement awards Terms and conditions Scheme 1 Grant date 26112014 na Vesting date 26112019  26112024 26112019  26112024 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.4 0.4 Scheme 2 Grant date 04112015 na Vesting date 26112019  26112024 26112019  26112024 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.4 0.4 Scheme 3 Grant date 23112016 na Vesting date 02122019 02122019 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.2m 0.2m Scheme 4 Grant date 23112016 na Vesting date 02122020 02122020 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.2m 0.2m 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes Acquirees awards Replacement awards Scheme 5 Grant date 23112016 na Vesting date 02122021 02122020 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.2m 0.2m Scheme 6 Grant date 17102017 na Vesting date 02122022 02122022 Service conditions Continued employment Continued employment Fair value at acquisition 0.3m 0.3m The value of the total replacement awards was 1.7m.
The Group incurred acquisition costs of 6.2m and a further 2.9m of restructuring costs in relation to the combination with Touchstone.
Further details on acquisition and restructuring costs are included in note 8.
Parkwalk Advisors Ltd On 31 January 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the share capital of Parkwalk Advisors Ltd Parkwalk the UKs leading university spinout focused EIS fund manager.
The initial consideration comprises 5.0m payable in cash 2.5m payable in the form of newly issued IP Group ordinary shares and an additional working capital payment of 1.8m.
Fair value net assets liabilities Net assets acquired Net assets 1.5 Acquired intangible assets 2.1 Net assets 3.6 Goodwill 5.7 Total consideration 9.3 Consideration satisfied by Cash 6.8 Issue of share capital 2.5 Total consideration paid includes the cost of cash paid shares issued to date and the present value of contingent amounts expected to be paid Goodwill recognised on the acquisition of Parkwalk is attributable to the technical skills experience and track record of its investment and marketing teams in its niche sector as specialist EIS fund manager its significant assets under management and its strong links to leading UK universities.
None of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
Acquisition of subsidiaries continued 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
162 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Acquisition of subsidiaries continued For the period from acquisition to 31 December 2017 Parkwalk contributed net revenue of 3.2m and profit of 1.6m to the Groups results.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017 management estimates that the consolidated net revenue would have been 4.5m and consolidated profit would have been 1.9m.
In determining these amounts management has assumed that the fair value adjustments determined provisionally that arose on the date of acquisition would have been the same if the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017.
Consideration of 9.3m has been recognised to date and a further 4.4m cost has been recognised in relation to the deferred and contingent consideration payable to the sellers in the year and deemed under IFRS3 to represent a payment for postacquisition services.
The Group incurred acquisition costs of 0.1m in relation to the acquisition of Parkwalk in January and a further 0.4m was incurred in 2016 which comprised legal and due diligence fees.
Further details on acquisition and restructuring costs are included in note 8.
Alternative Performance Measures APM IP Group management believes that the alternative performance measures included in this document provide valuable information to the readers of the financial statements as they enable the reader to identify a more consistent basis for comparing the business performance between financial periods and provide more detail concerning the elements of performance which the managers of the Group are most directly able to influence or are relevant for an assessment of the Group.
They also reflect an important aspect of the way in which operating targets are defined and performance is monitored by the directors.
These measures are not defined by IFRS and therefore may not be directly comparable with other companies APMs including those in the Groups industry.
APMs should be considered in addition to and are not intended to be a substitute for or superior to IFRS measurements.
The Directors believe that these APMs assist in providing additional useful information on the underlying trends performance and position of the Group.
APMs are used to enhance the comparability of information between reporting periods and aid the user in understanding the Groups performance.
Consequently APMs are used by the Directors and management for performance analysis planning reporting and incentivesetting purposes.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Alternative Performance Measures APM continued
APM
Reference for reconciliation Definition and purpose Hard NAV Primary statements Hard NAV is defined as the total equity of the Group less intangible assets.
Total equity 1508.5 768.7 Excluding intangible assets highlights the Groups assets that management can be reasonably expected to influence in the short term and therefore reflects the shortterm resources available to drive future performance.
Additionally excluding intangible assets allows better comparison with the Groups competitors many of which operate under fund structures and therefore would not include intangible assets.
The measure shows tangible assets managed by the Group.
It is used as a performance metric for directors and employees as a part of annual incentives in the Group.
Excluding
Goodwill 172.1 57.1
Hard NAV 1326.2 706.5 Hard NAV per share
Hard NAV per share is defined as Hard NAV as defined above divided by the number of shares in issue.
The measure shows tangible assets managed by the Group per share in issue.
It is a useful measure to compare to the Groups share price.
Hard NAV 1326.2m 706.5m Shares in issue 1057383601 565648168 Hard NAV per share Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Calculation
APM
Reference for reconciliation Definition and purpose Return on Hard NAV
Return on Hard NAV is defined as the total comprehensive income or loss for the year excluding charges which do not impact on Hard NAV specifically amortisation of intangible assets share based payment charges and the charge in respect of deferred and contingent consideration deemed to represent post acquisition services under
Return on Hard NAV is defined as the total comprehensive income or loss for the year excluding charges which do not impact on Hard NAV specifically amortisation of intangible assets share based payment charges and the charge in respect of deferred and contingent consideration deemed to represent post acquisition services under
The measure shows a summary of the income statement gains and losses which directly impact Hard NAV.
Total comprehensive income
Amortisation of intangible assets Share based payment charge IFRS3 charge in respect of acquisition of subsidiary Return on Hard NAV Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs
Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs is defined as Return on Hard NAV as above excluding acquisition and restructuring costs.
The measure shows the profit for the year excluding accounting adjustments and material oneoff costs in relation to the corporate transactions.
It allows for easier comparison with previous periods and normalises the performance return for the reader.
Return on Hard
Excluding
Acquisition and restructuring costs Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs Alternative Performance Measures APM continued 164 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Alternative Performance Measures APM continued
APM
Reference for reconciliation Definition and purpose Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs and
Primary statements Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs and Touchstone profits since acquisition for AIS performance targets is defined as Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs as above further excluding Touchstone net results in the period from acquisition to year end.
This measure has been agreed by the Remuneration Committee as the most appropriate basis for short term performance or AIS targets in the year due to the costs and performance not controllable by employees eligible for the scheme.
Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs
Touchstone profit from 17 October 2017 Return on Hard NAV excluding acquisition and restructuring costs and
Net portfolio gains Note 15 Net portfolio gains are defined as the movement in the value of holdings in the portfolio due to share price movements or impairments in value gains or losses on realisation of investments and gains or losses on disposals of subsidiaries.
The measure shows a summary of the income statement gains and losses which are directly attributable to the portfolio which is a headline measure for the Groups performance.
This is a key driver of the Return on Hard NAV which is the performance metric for directors and employees annual incentives.
Change in fair value of equity and debt investments Gain on disposal of equity investments Gain on disposal of subsidiary Net portfolio gains Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Group notes 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the consolidated financial statements
Post Balance Sheet Events Between 31 December 2017 and the date of these reports and accounts the fair value of the Groups holdings in companies whose shares are listed on the AIM market experienced a net fair value decrease of 30.1m.
In March 2018 portfolio company Oxford Nanopore Technologies Limited announced it had raised 100m in new investment.
Funds were raised from global investors including GIC Singapore CCB International China Hostplus Australia and existing investors.
The funds will be used to support the companys next stage of commercial expansion.
166 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Company balance sheet AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017
ASSETS
Fixed assets Investment in subsidiary undertakings 2 637.3 127.6 Equity and debt investments 3 52.3 1.0 Other investments 4 0.8 0.6 Loans to subsidiary undertakings 5 592.9 409.0 Trade and other receivables  0.1 Total assets 1283.3 538.3 EQUITY AND LIABILITIES Capital and reserves Called up share capital 6 21.1 11.3 Share premium account 6 683.1 504.7 Merger reserve 6 508.6 12.8 Retained earnings 6 36.1 5.7 Total equity 1248.9 523.1 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 1.1 0.3 Noncurrent liabilities EIB debt facility 29.9 14.9 Deferred and contingent consideration payable on acquisition 3.4 Total liabilities 34.4 15.2 Total equity and liabilities 1283.3 538.3 Registered number The accompanying notes form an integral part of the financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 167 to 182 were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 29 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by GREG SMITH CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER ALAN AUBREY
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Statement of changes in equity AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Attributable to equity holders of the parent
Share premium
Retained earnings iii
At 1 January 2016 11.3 504.7 12.8 4.5 524.3 Comprehensive income    1.2 1.2 At 1 January 2017 11.3 504.7 12.8 5.7 523.1 Comprehensive income    41.8 41.8 Issue of equity 9.8 178.4 495.8  684.0 At 31 December 2017 21.1 683.1 508.6 36.1 1248.9 Share premium  Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value net of directly attributable issue costs.
Merger reserve  Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value in relation to the qualifying acquisition of subsidiary undertakings.
Retained earnings  Cumulative net gains and losses recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income net of associated sharebased payments credits.
168 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the company financial statements Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements Accounting Policies These financial statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
In preparing these financial statements the Company applies the recognition measurement and disclosure requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs but makes amendments where necessary in order to comply with Companies Act 2006 and has set out below where advantage of the FRS 101 disclosure exemptions has been taken.
Under section s408 of the Companies Act 2006 the company is exempt from the requirement to present its own profit and loss account.
In these financial statements the company has applied the exemptions available under FRS 101 in respect of the following disclosures a Cash Flow Statement and related notes disclosures in respect of transactions with wholly owned subsidiaries disclosures in respect of capital management the effects of new but not yet effective IFRSs and disclosures of compensation of Key Management Personnel.
As the consolidated financial statements include the equivalent disclosures the Company has also taken the exemptions under FRS 101 available in respect of the following disclosures IFRS 2 Share Based Payments in respect of group settled share based payments and certain disclosures required by IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement and the disclosures required by IFRS 7 Financial Instrument Disclosures.
The Company proposes to continue to adopt the reduced disclosure framework of FRS 101 in its next financial statements.
The accounting policies set out below have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently to all periods presented in these financial statements.
Investments
Investments are held at fair value through profit and loss vision for impairment in value and are held for long term investment purposes.
The valuation methods applied are the same as those at the Group level details of which can be found in note 1 to the Groups financial accounts on pages 120 to 129.
Intercompany loans All intercompany loans are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Where intercompany loans are intended for use on a continuing basis in the Companys activities and there is no intention of their settlement in the foreseeable future they are presented as fixed assets.
Financial instruments Currently the Company does not enter into derivative financial instruments.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised and cease to be recognised on the basis of when the related titles pass to or from the
Investments in Subsidiary Undertakings At 1 January 2017 127.6 Acquisition of subsidiary undertakings in the year 509.7 At 31 December 2017 637.3 Details of the Companys subsidiary undertakings as at 31 December 2017 are detailed in Note 9 of the Company financial statements.
10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Equity and debt investments At 1 January 2017 1.0 Fair value gains in the year 0.2 Derecognition of subsidiary during the year At 31 December 2017 52.3 Details of the Companys associated undertakings and significant holdings as at 31 December 2017 are detailed Note 10 of the Company financial statements.
Other Investments At 1 January 2017 0.6 Investment during the year 0.2 At 31 December 2017 0.8 Loans to Subsidiary Undertakings At 1 January 2017 409.0 Reclassification of intercompany debt to debt investments on derecognition of subsidiary during the year Net advancement of loans to subsidiary undertakings during the year 186.0 At 31 December 2017 592.9 The amounts due from subsidiary undertakings are interest free repayable on demand and unsecured.
Share Capital and Reserves
Share premium
Profit and loss reserve At 1 January 2017 11.3 504.7 12.8 5.7 Profit for the year    41.8 Issue of equity 9.8 178.4 495.8 At 31 December 2017 21.1 683.1 508.6 36.1 Details of the Companys authorised share capital and changes in its issued share capital can be found in note 20 to the consolidated financial statements.
Details of the movement in the share premium account can be found in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
Profit and Loss Account As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Companys profit and loss account has not been included in these financial statements.
The Companys profit for the year was 41.8m 2016 1.2m loss.
Details of the auditors remuneration are disclosed in note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.
Directors Emoluments Employee Information and ShareBased Payments The remuneration of the Directors is borne by Group subsidiary undertakings.
Full details of their remuneration can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 80 to 99.
Full details of the sharebased payments charge and related disclosures can be found in note 22 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company had no employees during 2017 or 2016.
Notes to the company financial statements
170 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Details of subsidiary undertakings Name of subsidiary undertakings
Proportion of voting power held % Proportion of nominal value held % Held by
IP2IPO Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct IP2IPO Management Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO Carry Partner Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO Americas Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO FI Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO US Partners Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP Group Inc.
100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Top Technology Ventures Limited iii Fusion IP plc 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct Fusion IP Sheffield Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Fusion IP Cardiff Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP Venture Fund GP Limited iii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP Venture Fund II GP LLP iii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP Ventures Scotland Limited iii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect North East Technology GP Limited iii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO Portfolio GP Limited iii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP Capital Limited ii 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO AsiaPacific Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct IP Assist Services Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct IP2IPO Australia Pty Limited 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct Parkwalk Advisors Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Direct Touchstone Innovations plc 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Touchstone Innovations Investment Management Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Imperial Innovations Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Touchstone Innovations Investments Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Innovations Limited Partner Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Imperial College Company Maker Ltd 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Imperial Innovations Srl 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Touchstone Innovations Businesses LLP 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Imperial Innovations LLP 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect MOBILion Systems Inc 63.2 63.2 63.2 Indirect FedImpact LLC 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect IP2IPO Nominees Limited ii IP2IPO Services Limited ii LifeUK IP2IPO Limited ii IP Industry Partners Limited ii Union Life Sciences Limited  Ordinary shares 95.0 95.0 95.0 Indirect Union Life Sciences Limited  Preference shares ix Union Life Sciences Limited  Total 95.0 95.0 99.9 Indirect Biofusion Licensing Sheffield Limited iivi 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Fusion IP Nottingham Limited iivi 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Fusion IP Two Limited iivi 100.0 100.0 100.0 Indirect Asterion Limited 66.8 66.8 66.5 Indirect Medella Therapeutics Limited 60.0 60.0 60.0 Indirect PH Therapeutics Limited 60.0 60.0 60.0 Indirect Extraject Technologies Limited 60.0 60.0 60.0 Indirect Stratium Limited 52.9 52.9 52.9 Indirect IP Venture Fund II L.
33.3 33.3 33.3 Indirect i All holdings are via Ordinary Shares unless separate classes are specified in the table. ii Dormantnontrading company. iii Companylimited liability partnership engaged in fund management activity. iv Acquired as part of the Fusion IP plc acquisition.
Groups position as fund manager to IP Venture Fund II L. consolidated. vi Not consolidated due to immateriality. vii Shares which have no economic or voting rights attributed to them.
Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the company financial statements
All companies above have their registered offices at The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London EC4N 8AF unless separately listed below IP Group Inc 1105 North Market Street Suite 1800 Wilmington DE 19801 USA.
IP Ventures Scotland Limited 50 Lothian Road Festival Square Edinburgh EH3 9WJ.
IP Assist Services Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 9DF.
MOBILion Systems Inc.
1105 N.
Market St Suite 1800 Wilmington DE 19801 USA.
Asterion Limited The Sheffield Bioincubator 40 Leavygreave Road Sheffield South Yorkshire SE 7RD.
Medella Therapeutics Limited The Sheffield Bioincubator 40 Leavygreave Road Sheffield South Yorkshire SE 7RD.
PH Therapeutics Limited The Sheffield Bioincubator 40 Leavygreave Road Sheffield South Yorkshire SE 7RD.
Extraject Technologies Limited Suite 18 Cardiff Medicentre Heath Park Cardiff CF14 4UJ.
Progenteq Limited Suite 18 Cardiff Medicentre Heath Park Cardiff CF14 4UJ.
Stratium Limited 15th Floor Brunel House 2 Fitzalan Road Cardiff CF24 0EB.
Parkwalk Advisors Ltd 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG Touchstone Innovations plc 7 Air Street London W1B 5AD Touchstone innovations Investment Management Limited 7 Air Street London W1B 5AD Touchstone Innovations Investments Ltd 7 Air Street London W1B 5AD Imperial Innovations Limited 7 Air Street London W1B 5AD Imperial College Company Maker Ltd 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG Imperial Innovations LLP 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG Innovations Limited Partner Ltd 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG Touchstone Innovations Businesses LLP 17 Boulevard Prince Henri Luxembourg L1724 Imperial Innovations Sarl 17 Boulevard Prince Henri Luxembourg L1724 IP2IPO Australia Pty Limited Level 11 1 Margaret Street Sydney NSW 2000 Australia.
All companies above are incorporated in England and Wales with the exception of IP Ventures Scotland Limited which is incorporated in Scotland IP Group Inc and MobilION Inc which were incorporated in Delaware USA IP2IPO Australia Pty Limited which is incorporated in Australia and Touchstone Innovations Sarl and Imperial Innovations Sarl both incorporated in Luxembourg.
All companies above undertake the activity of commercialising intellectual property unless stated otherwise.
All companies are consolidated into the Groups financial performance and position following the acquisition method bar those specified which are omitted due being immaterial.
Details of subsidiary undertakings continued 172 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
IP Venture Fund ii The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London EC4N 8AF 10.0% Group 8Power Limited Future Business Centre Kings Hedges Road Cambridge United Kingdom CB4 2HY 33.0% Group Abingdon Health Limited National AgriFood Innovation Campus Sand Hutton York YO41 1LZ 33.6% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Preferred ordinary shares 47.0% Group Absynth Biologics Limited Biohub at Alderley Park Macclesfield Cheshire SK10 4TG 62.0% Group A Ordinary shares 43.8% Group B Ordinary shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 52.0% Group Accelercomm Limited 2 Venture Road Southampton Science Park Chilworth Southampton SO16 7NP 25.6% Group Actual Experience plc Quay House The Ambury Bath Somerset BA1 1UA 22.2% Group Alesi Surgical Limited Cardiff Medicentre Heath Park Cardiff CF14 4UJ 28.7% Group B shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 57.0% Group Preferred B shares 9.7% Group Preferred Ordinary shares 40.3% Group Amaethon Limited Heslington Hall Heslington York North Yorkshire YO10 5DD 27.6% Group A Ordinary shares 52.9% Group B Ordinary shares 27.6% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Anacail Limited A shares Ordinary shares First Floor South Suite Telford Pavilion West Of Scotland Science Park Maryhill Road Glasgow Scotland G20 0XA 40.3% Group 40.7% Group 39.9% Group Anywhere HPLC Limited 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG 50.0% Group Aperio Pharma Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 46.1% Group Apcintex Limited Co Medicxi 25 Great Pulteney Street London England W1F 9LT 43.2% Group A Preference shares 43.2% Group B Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Aptatek Biosciences Inc.
Corporation Trust Centre 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 40.0% Group Aqdot Limited Lab 1 Iconix 2 Iconix Park London Road Cambridge CB22 3EG 73.9% Group EIS shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Preferred shares 73.9% Group Arkivum Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London EC4N 8AF 39.3% Group Art of Xen Limited A Preference shares B Preference shares Ordinary shares NHS Liaison Unit 4th Floor Mckenzie House 3036 Newport Road Cardiff CF24 0DE 99.8% Group 100.0% Group 100.0% Group 0.0% Group Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Notes to the company financial statements
Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Atazoa Limited Helen Wadsworth Skempton Building Imperial College Room 205 Skempton Building Imperial College London London SW7 2AZ 49.9% Group Auspherix Limited Ordinary shares Series A1 Preferred shares Series A 2 Preferred shares Stevenage Bioscience Catalyst Gunnels Wood Road Stevenage Hertfordshire England SG1 2FX 49.6% Group 0.0% Group 0.0% Group 49.6% Group Autifony Therapeutics Limited Ordinary shares A Ordinary shares A2 Preference shares A3 Preference shares Stevenage Bioscience Catalyst Gunnels Wood Road Stevenage Hertfordshire England SG1 2FX 26.4% Group 1.7% Group 0.0% Group 28.9% Group 31.3% Group Avacta Group plc Unit 20 Ash Way Thorp Arch Estate Wetherby LS23 7FA 22.9% Group Azellon Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 32.5% Group A Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 32.5% Group Azuri Technologies Limited St.
Johns Innovation Centre Cowley Road Cambridge CB4 0WS 42.6% Group A Preference shares 48.5% Group Ordinary shares 37.4% Group Boxarr Limited 65 London Road St.
Albans Hertfordshire AL1 1LJ 44.3% Group Calcico Therapeutics Limited A shares Ordinary shares Seed Preference shares Oxford Science Park Magdalen Centre Robert Robinson Avenue Oxford OX4 4GA 40.7% Group 50.0% Group 0.0% Group 33.3% Group Cagen Limited 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London United Kingdom SW7 2PG 45.0% Group Capsant Neurotechnologies
The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 50.0% Group A shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 40.8% Group Cardian Limited A Preferred shares Ordinary shares 30 Broad Street Broad Street Great Cambourne Cambridge England CB23 6HJ 39.2% Group 100.0% Group 16.4% Group Cardiovascular Imaging Solutions Limited 53 Cavendish Road London SW12 0BL 24.9% Group CCapture Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 36.7% Group A shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 40.8% Group Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued 174 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Cell Medica Limited 1 Canal Side Studios 814 St Pancras Way London NW1 0QG 24.6% Group A Preference shares 16.4% Group B Preference shares 30.0% Group C Preference shares 22.8% Group BCM Preference shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 30.2% Group Celltron Networks Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 30.0% Group Ceres Power Holdings plc Viking House Foundry Lane Horsham West Sussex RH13 5PX 25.4% Group Charterdirect shipping Limited Cs Lng Limited Cs Lng Limited 3rd Floor 207 Regent Street London United Kingdom W1B 3HH 35.0% Group Chip Diagnostics Inc.
251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 38.9% Group Chrysalix Technologies Limited 52 Princes Gate London United Kingdom SW7 2PG 40.0% Group City Orbit Limited Level 2 Bessemer Building Imperial Incubator London SW7 2AZ 50.0% Group Concirrus Limited Ordinary shares Series A shares The Leathermarket Unit 17.2 Leathermarket Street London United Kingdom SE1 3HN 64.1% Group 0.0% Group 100.0% Group Convincis Limited 52 Princes Gate London SW7 2PG 49.9% Group Cortexica Vision Systems
3rd Floor Wework Southbank Central Stamford Street London England SE1 9LQ 30.0% Group Creavo Medical Technologies
Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 38.1% Group A shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 38.5% Group Z shares 0.0% Group Crescendo Biologics Limited A Preference shares AI Preference shares Ordinary shares Seed shares X shares Meditrina Building Babraham Research Campus Cambridge CB22 3AT 22.1% Group 33.0% Group 0.0% Group 0.0% Group 0.0% Group 0.0% Group Cronin Group plc The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 27.7% Group OAS Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 27.7% Group Cryptographiq Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 9DF 100.0% Group Crysalin Limited The Walbrook Buliding 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 25.3% Group A shares 0.0% Group B shares 0.0% Group C shares 0.0% Group D shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 27.0% Group Cynash Inc.
251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 55.6% Group Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Defenition Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 49.5% Group B Ordinary shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 48.5% Group Digitalstitch Limted 10 John Street London WC1N 2EB 25.7% Group Ditto AI Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 38.5% Group A Ordinary shares 0.0% Group B Ordinary shares 76.6% Group B Redeemable nonvoting shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 33.5% Group Preferred Ordinary shares 0.0% Group R edeemable Pr ef er enc e shares 100.0% Group Diurnal Group plc Cardiff Medicentre Heath Park Cardiff CF14 4UJ 44.7% Group B shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 44.7% Group Preference shares 0.0% Group Dukosi Limited Unit 4 Bush House Cottages Edinburgh Technopole Milton Bridge Penicuik Midlothian EH26 0BA 47.3% Group Dynamic Vision Systems
Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds England LS2 9DF 21.5% Group Econic Technologies Limited Block 19s Alderley Park Macclesfield Cheshire England SK10 4TG 53.4% Group A Ordinary shares 86.3% Group A Preference shares 41.2% Group B Preference shares 50.0% Group Ordinary shares 14.6% Group Edgetic Limited Ordinary shares Research Cost shares Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds United Kingdom LS2 9DF 56.1% Group 56.1% Group 0.0% Group Eight19 Limited A Preference shares Ordinary shares Unit 9a Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge Cambridgeshire CB4 0FE 50.0% Group 54.2% Group 0.0% Group Embody Orthopaedic Limited Imperial Innovations 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London England SW7 2PG 31.4% Group Emcision Limited 3rd Floor 1 Ashley Road Altrincham Cheshire WA14 2DT 20.3% Group Enachip Inc.
PHS Corporate Services Inc.
1313 N Market Street STE 5100 Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 33.3% Group Enterprise Therapeutics
Sussex Innovation Centre Science Park Square Falmer Brighton England BN1 9SB 43.1% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Series A shares 47.6% Group Entia Limited 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London SW7 2PG 24.4% Group Notes to the company financial statements
Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued 176 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 Our Financials Company Statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Epsilon3 Bio Limited A Preferred shares Ordinary shares Moneta Building Babraham Research Campus Babraham Cambridge Cambridgeshire CB22 3AT 22.6% Group 28.1% Group 0.0% Group Escubed Limited Unit 651 EH Street 5 Thorp Arch Estate Wetherby England LS23 7FZ 20.0% Group Exyn Technologies Inc.
203 NE Front Street STE 101 Milford Kent DE 19963 46.6% Group Fault Current Limited The Maltings East Tyndall Street Cardiff Bay Cardiff CF24 5EZ 43.1% Group A shares 80.6% Group Ordinary shares 42.3% Group Featurespace Limited A Preference shares B Preference shares C Preference shares D Preference shares E Preference shares Ordinary shares X Ordinary shares Broers Building 2nd Floor 21 J J Thomson Avenue Cambridge CB3 0FA 27.9% Group 32.3% Group 64.4% Group 63.4% Group 39.6% Group 8.6% Group 0.0% Group 0.0% Group First Light Fusion Limited A Ordinary shares Ordinary shares Unit 10 Mead Road Yarnton Kidlington Oxfordshire OX5 1QU 34.9% Group 0.0% Group 36.0% Group Fluid Pharma Limited B Ordinary shares Ordinary shares Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 40.3% Group 87.1% Group 39.6% Group Garrison Technology Limited 117 Waterloo Road London England SE1 8UL 25.1% Group A Preference shares 94.9% Group A1 Preference shares 25.0% Group A2 Preference shares 32.9% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Genomics plc King Charles House Park End Street Oxford United Kingdom OX1 1JD 23.8% Group Glythera Limited Inex Herschel Annex Kings Road Newcastle Upon Tyne NE1 7RU 32.2% Group A Ordinary shares 50.0% Group Ordinary shares 23.1% Group Gripable Limited 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London England SW7 2PG 37.3% Group Hexxcell Limited 52 Princes Gate London SW7 2PG 30.8% Group I2L Research Limited Capital Business Park Wentloog Cardiff CF3 2PX 31.0% Group A Ordinary shares 84.0% Group B Ordinary shares 13.3% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Ieso Digital Health Limited A Ordinary shares A Preference shares B Ordinary shares Ordinary shares The Stable Block The Grange 20 Market Street Swavesey Cambridge CB24 4QG 49.5% Group 85.1% Group 45.2% Group 0.0% Group 23.7% Group Impression Technologies
Unit E Lyons Park 46 Sayer Drive Coventry United Kingdom CV5 9PF 56.6% Group Ordinary shares 55.4% Group Series A shares 62.5% Group Series B shares 50.0% Group Inflowmatix Limited A Ordinary shares A Preferred shares Deferred shares Ordinary shares Penningtons Manches Llp Apex Plaza Forbury Road Reading Berkshire United Kingdom RG1 1AX 63.4% Group 0.0% Group 100.0% Group 0.0% Group 34.4% Group Inivata Limited A Preference shares Ordinary shares Series A shares The Portway Granta Park Great Abington Cambridge England CB21 6GS 30.5% Group 37.5% Group 0.0% Group 31.8% Group Instrumems Inc.
Corporation Trust Centre 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 43.4% Group Ionix Advanced Technologies
Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 34.5% Group B Ordinary shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 34.4% Group Ipalk SAS 112 rye des hautes variennes 45200 Amilly France 23.5% Group IR Pharma Limited 1st Floor Sir Alexander Fleming Building Imperial College London Exhibition Road London SW7 2AZ 28.0% Group Istesso Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbroook London United Kingdom EC4N 8AF 42.8% Parent A shares 100.0% Parent Ordinary shares 39.6% Parent Ixico plc 4th Floor Griffin Court 15 Long Lane London EC1A 9PN 21.0% Group Kesios Therapeutics Limited A Preferred shares Ordinary shares Preferred shares 30 Broad Street Great Cambourne Cambridge Cambridgeshire CB23 6HJ 46.0% Group 25.5% Group 25.5% Group 100.0% Group Lomare Technologies Limited 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London England SW7 2PG 40.0% Group Lorem Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Renaissance Centre 405 North King Street Suite 500 Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 34.6% Group Lumiode Inc.
Corporation Trust Centre 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 49.9% Group Notes to the company financial statements
Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued 178 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Magnomatics Limited Park House Bernard Road Sheffield S2 5BQ 45.7% Group A shares 52.1% Group B shares 100.0% Group C shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 27.3% Group Medaphor Group plc The Cardiff Medicentre Heath Park Cardiff CF14 4UJ 36.1% Group A shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 36.1% Group Metabometrix Limited Mrs Judy Collingham 10 Fern Hill Dersingham Kings Lynn Norfolk England PE31 6HT 23.0% Group Microbiotica Limited Ordinary shares Seed shares Biodata Innovation Centre Wellcome Genome Campus Hinxton Cambridge Cambridgeshire CB10 1DR 33.4% Group 0.0% Group 49.8% Group Mirriad Advertising plc 6th Floor One London Wall London EC2Y 5EB 27.7% Group Ordinary shares 24.1% Group Preference shares 52.4% Group Mission Therapeutics Limited Babraham Hall Babraham Cambridge CB22 3AT 21.5% Group A Preference shares 22.5% Group B Preference shares 22.5% Group C Preference shares 22.5% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Mixergy Limited 30 Upper High Street Thame Oxfordshire OX9 3EZ 20.4% Group MoA Technology Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds England LS2 9DF 22.5% Group MDL 2016 Limited 1 West Regent Street Glasgow G1 2AP 41.4% Group Nascient Limited A shares Ordinary shares Preferred shares 30 Broad Street Great Cambourne Cambridge Cambridgeshire CB23 6HJ 69.4% Group 0.0% Group 50.0% Group 94.4% Group Nexeon Limited 136 Eastern Avenue Milton Park Abingdon Oxfordshire OX14 4SB 33.7% Group NGenics Global Limited The Catalyst Baird Lane Heslington York North Yorkshire YO10 5GA 22.5% Group Oxehealth Limited Sadler Building Heatley Road Oxford Science Park Oxford Oxfordshire England OX4 4GE 36.9% Group Oxford Drug Design Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 29.0% Group Deferred shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 29.0% Group OxSyBio Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 49.7% Group A shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 49.5% Group Oxular Limited A Preferred shares Ordinary shares Magdalen Centre Robert Robinson Avenue Oxford England OX4 4GA 23.1% Group 44.0% Group 0.0% Group Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Perachem Holdings plc 55 Drury Lane London WC2B 5RZ 46.6% Group C on v ertible Pr ef er enc e shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 46.6% Group Perlemax Limited The Sheffield Bioincubator 40 Leavygreave Road Sheffield S3 7RD 34.5% Group Perpetuum Limited Series B shares Series C shares Series C1 shares Ordinary shares Preference shares 2 Venture Southampton Science Park Chilworth Southampton SO16 7NP 29.9% Group 13.4% Group 46.9% Group 0.0% Group 38.5% Group 0.0% Group Phase Focus Limited 40 Leavy Greave Road Sheffield S3 7RD 35.4% Group A shares 26.1% Group B shares 33.3% Group H shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 52.1% Group Plaxica Limited The Wilton Centre Wilton Redcar United Kingdom TS10 4RF 45.7% Group Process Systems Enterprise
5th Floor East 2628 Hammersmith Grove London W6 7HA 23.3% Group PsiOxus Therapeutics Limited A Preference shares B Preference shares Ordinary shares 410 The Quadrant Abingdon Science Park Abingdon England OX14 3YS 26.3% Group 52.7% Group 24.8% Group 4.9% Group Pulmocide Limited 21.0% Group A Ordinary shares 0.0% Group A Preference shares 4.3% Group B Preference shares 69.3% Group Quantima Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds West Yorkshire United Kingdom LS2 9DF 33.3% Group Quantum Motion Technologies
Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 9DF 22.4% Group B Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 22.4% Group Relitect Limited 1 West Regent Street Glasgow Scotland G1 2AP 33.4% Group Riotech Pharmaceuticals
49 Arrivato Plaza Hall Street St Helens United Kingdom WA10 1GH 25.0% Group Riptron Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 9DF 33.3% Group Salunda Limited 6 Avonbury Business Park Howes Lane Bicester Oxfordshire United Kingdom OX26 2UA 26.3% Group Notes to the company financial statements
Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued 180 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Sam Labs Limited A Ordinary shares B Ordinary shares C Ordinary shares Ordinary shares Joachim Horn Limewharf 25a Gallery Vyner Street London Hackney England E2 9DG 26.4% Group 52.4% Group 0.0% Group 38.5% Group 0.0% Group Saw DX Limited 11 The Square University Avenue Glasgow G12 8QQ 35.0% Group Sensixa Limited 53 Cavendish Road London SW12 0BL 35.9% Group Seren Photonics Limited A shares B shares C shares Ordinary shares Deferred shares 37b UK Technology Centre Pencoed Technology Park Pencoed Bridgend Mid Glamorgan CF35 5HZ 62.6% Group 57.4% Group 0.7% Group 100.0% Group 56.9% Group 0.0% Group Silicon Microgravity Limited Clarendon House Clarendon Road Cambridge CB2 8FH 31.8% Group A Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Seed Preferred shares 71.9% Group Spinetic Energy Limited The Old Post Office 4143 Market Place Chippenham Wiltshire England SN15 3HR 30.4% Group Structure Vision Limited 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 42.5% Group Sub Salt Solutions Limited 52 Princes Gate London SW7 2PG 38.0% Group A Ordinary shares 100.0% Group Ordinary shares 43.7% Group Surrey NanoSystems Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London England EC4N 8AF 21.6% Group A Ordinary shares 17.4% Group Ordinary shares 35.4% Group Therapeutic Frontiers Limited Gowran House 56 Broad Street Chipping Sodbury Bristol BS37 6AG 25.8% Group Thisway Global Limited 2nd Floor Platinum Building St Johns Innovation Park Cowley Road Cambridge England CB4 0DS 21.5% Group B Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Series A shares 57.2% Group Topivert Limited 265 Strand London WC2R 1BH 29.5% Group A Preference shares 34.0% Group Growth shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 50.0% Group Ubiquigent Limited Dundee University Incubator Dundee Technopole James Lindsay Place Dundee DD1 5JJ 54.5% Group Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued Stock Code IPO site Our Financials Company statements 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Name of undertaking Registered address
Held by
Group
Ultrahaptics Holdings Ltd The West Wing Glass Wharf Bristol BS2 0EL 37.9% Group B Ordinary shares 0.0% Group Ordinary shares 47.3% Group Preference shares 30.4% Group Ultramatis Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 30.0% Group Uniformity Labs Inc.
41400 Christy Street Fremont CA 94538 USA 25.1% Group Uniphy Limited Leeds Innovation Centre 103 Clarendon Road Leeds LS2 9DF 39.1% Group Veryan Holdings Limited A Ordinary shares B Ordinary shares C Ordinary shares Deferred shares M Ordinary shares Ordinary shares 9400 Garsington Road Oxford Business Park Oxford Oxfordshire OX4 2HN 46.8% Group 58.2% Group 49.4% Group 54.6% Group 12.5% Group 0.0% Group 18.1% Group Wave Optics A Ordinary shares B Ordinary shares B1 Ordinary shares Ordinary shares Wave Optics Ltd Milton Park Innovation Cente 99 Park Drive Milton Park Milton Abingdon Oxfordshire England OX14 4RY 23.8% Group 0.0% Group 37.5% Group 25.9% Group 0.0% Group Yoyo Wallet Limited 78 2nd Floor Whitfield Street London England W1T 4EZ 44.1% Group Ordinary shares 13.1% Group Series 1 seed 31.9% Group Series 2 seed 79.6% Group Series A 83.8% Group Series B 33.3% Group Zeetta Networks Limited The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook London United Kingdom EC4N 8AF 26.6% Group Zoompast Limited Ordinary shares Preference shares 52 Princes Gate Exhibition Road London England SW7 2PG 31.3% Group 12.3% Group 33.9% Group All holdings are via Ordinary Shares unless separate classes are specified in the table.
A fund in which the Group is a limited partner.
Proportion of nominal value stated is equivalent to capital contributed to the partnership in question.
All companies above are incorporated in the United Kingdom with the exception of Aptatek Biosciences
Chip Diagnostics Inc Cynash Inc.
Enachip Inc.
Exyn Technologies Inc.
Instrumems Inc.
Lorem
Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Lumiode Inc and Uniformity Labs Inc. which were incorporated in Delaware USA.
The significant influence noted above has been determined in line with IAS 28 and Schedule 4 of The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
Notes to the company financial statements
Details of significant holdings and associated undertakings continued 182 IP Group plc Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 December 2017 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine 2582904 10 May 2018 341 PM Proof Nine Company registration number Registered office The Walbrook Building 25 Walbrook
EC4N 8AF Directors Mike Humphrey Nonexecutive Chairman Alan John Aubrey Chief Executive Officer Michael Charles Nettleton Townend Chief Investment Officer Gregory Simon Smith Chief Financial Officer David Baynes Chief Operating Officer Jonathan Brooks Nonexecutive Director Professor Lynn Gladden CBE Nonexecutive Director Dr Elaine Sullivan Nonexecutive Director Professor David Knox Houston Begg Senior Independent Director Company secretary Angela Leach Brokers Numis Securities Limited The London Stock Exchange Building 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT Registrars Link Asset Services 6th Floor 65 Gresham Street
EC2V 7NQ Bankers Royal Bank of Scotland PO Box 333 Silbury House 300 Silbury Boulevard Milton Keynes MK9 2ZF Solicitors Pinsent Masons LLP 30 Crown Place Earl Street
EC2A 4ES Independent auditor KPMG LLP 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL Company information
