WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 WORLDWIDE PROVIDER OF STEM CELL SERVICES Overview  1 About WideCells WideCells Group PLC is building an integrated stem cell services company focused on making stem cell treatments accessible and affordable.
The Directors believe that the use of cord blood stem cells for transplant will drive one of the next important phases in medicine and the Group is developing market leading products in complementary strategic areas which are designed to take advantage of substantial market opportunities in one of the fastest growing segments in the healthcare industry.
Keeping this in mind WideCells Group PLC has been developing its three divisions CellPlan The worlds rst stem cell healthcare insurance plan providing nancial cover for a second medical opinion and recommendation of the best transplant centre worldwide private cord blood transplantation costs travel to treatment centre where required accommodation expenses and concierge service to manage the whole transplant process.
WideCells The WideCells Institute of Stem Cell Technology ISCT has been established and is based in the University of Manchester Innovation Centre.
The focus is on stem cell research and regenerative medicine.
The WideCells ISCT also has a Cryogenics division specialising in cell freezing and long term stem cell storage.
Wideacademy An education and training division to promote understanding of the benets of stem cell storage and treatment across the global medical patient and cord blood client and lay community.
To support the growth of these divisions WideCells Group has built an experienced Board and Senior Management Team which was strengthened during the period through the appointment of three new board members and the creation of a new Scientic Advisory Committee.
Cord Blood Stem Cell Facts Umbilical cord blood the blood remaining in the umbilical cord and placenta following the birth of a baby provides the most effective source of haemopoietic stem cells for families.
Collection of cord blood at birth is simple safe and painless compared to other sources of haemopoietic stem cells such as bone marrow which requires a general anaesthetic and a surgical procedure to collect.
WideCells is focused on promoting the collection and storage of umbilical cord blood and tissue.
Since 2005 there has been a 300% increase in the number of illnesses that can be treated using cord blood stem cells reecting its use in the treatment of blood disorders.
Cord blood is currently in clinical trial for the treatment of cerebral palsy which is a neurological disorder.
82 different blood disorders have been treated using cord blood stem cell transplantation.
Despite initial cord blood collection processing and storage often costing no more than a few thousand pounds cord blood stem cell transplantation for blood disorders costs hundreds of thousands of pounds.
WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2 Launched a portfolio of stem cell services designed to make stem cell treatments accessible and affordable worldwide Focused on driving global sales and revenues across the Groups three divisions Innovative insurance product CellPlan the worlds rst insurance plan and medical concierge service for the cord blood stem cell industry Secured a number of commercial agreements with stem cell banks to facilitate rollout and launched a bespoke ecommerce platform Fully live in the UK with initial sales secured as part of a test launch to customers of Biovault a leading storage facility Launch in Spain underway Agreements in place to launch in Thailand Singapore India and Brazil in H2 2018 Stem cell storage and pioneering research work operated via WideCells Ltds stateoftheart Institute of Stem Cell Technology ISCT in Manchester UK Awarded Human Tissue Authority HTA research licence July 2017 to undertake paid forresearch work on stem cell therapy and regenerative medicine  three projects already secured which are collectively worth 300000 Includes governmentbacked Innovate UK Knowledge Transfer Partnership with Manchester Metropolitan University to undertake research on a new form of stem cell technology in March 2018.
Includes governmentbacked Innovate UK Knowledge Transfer Partnership with Manchester Metropolitan University to undertake research on a new form of stem cell technology in March 2018.
Additional upside via sale of INDUS a novel synthetic bone graft which promotes new bone formation  became a licenced provider in July 2017 with sales commencing in Q4 2017 Stem cell education and training division Wideacademy Advanced from vision to commercialisation with revenue generation on track to commence in H2 2018 First phase of bespoke platform launched February 2018 with full commercial launch targeted for H2 2018 Spearheaded by Former Director of Education at Apple Alan Greenberg Strengthened board and management team to drive new phase of revenue growth and created a Scientic Advisory Committee to continue to drive product development Recognised industry leader  won and been nominated for several awards Ranked 21 in the Global DISRUPT 100 list showing potential to inuence change and create new global markets Won Power Business of the Year at The Manchester Awards 2017 Won CorporateLiveWire  Healthcare and Life Sciences Awards 2017 showing excellence in stem cell research services Nominated for the UK Life Science IPO of the year Current cash position anticipated to be bolstered through placing and live bookbuild to raise 1.80 million Raised aggregate gross proceeds of approximately 1.4 million in two separate private placings since the Initial Listing in July 2016 Highlights Overview  3
Overview
About WideCells 01 Highlights 02 Chairmans Review 07 Chief Executives Statement 10 Strategic Report 12 Financial statements Other information
Independent Auditors Report 38
Consolidated income statement and statement of other comprehensive income 42 Consolidated statement of nancial position 43 Consolidated statement of cash ows 44 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 45 Notes to the Group nancial statements 47 Company balance sheet 67 Statement of changes in equity 68 Notes to the Financial Statements 69 Company information 78
Board of Directors 20
Remuneration Report 23
Corporate Governance 30 Directors Report 34 wideacademy Overview WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 6 Overview  7 We believe that the stemcell sector is reaching a tipping point in terms of the markets understanding of its potential to treat rare and lifethreatening conditions the global stem cell market is currently valued at c.
S96 billion and is predicted to grow to US170 billion by 2020 and US270.5 billion by 2025 implying a CAGR of 13.8%.
We are proud to be recognised as an intrinsic part of this medical revolution.
Our integrated stem cell support services proposition includes CellPlan the rstofitskind stem cell insurance plan WideCells our storage focused division leading the way in the development and use of cell banking services and Wideacademy which is driving education and awareness on the stem cells sector.
Each division made signicant advances during the year as outlined below.
As testimony to our commitment to both innovation and education in June 2017 the Group was ranked as the 21st most disruptive company globally by DISRUPT 100 an annual index celebrating the businesses with the most potential to inuence change or create new global markets.
More recently post period end our CEO Joo Andrade was awarded the CEO Europe Award 2018 by CEO Today Magazine.
CELLPLAN
CellPlan has developed the worlds rst stem cell healthcare insurance plan and medical concierge service designed to revolutionise stem cell healthcare by making stem cell transplants affordable for families who require treatment for life threatening diseases.
During the year it made signicant advances bolstering its innovative offering to create new revenue opportunities and expand its service globally.
It secured an agreement with Biovault Technical Ltd the UKs largest private human tissue storage facility Biovault to rollout CellPlan to Biovaults client base.
Additionally it launched its ecommerce platform site which allows the Group to sell CellPlan directly to families whether existing or new clients.
Although the UK stem cell market is comparatively small our initial launch in the UK has enabled us to trial our offering.
The aim is now to roll CellPlan out internationally I am delighted to be part of this groundbreaking company and deliver my inaugural statement as its Chairman the prospects of WideCells Group truly excite me.
Through our three divisions we are focused on making stem cell treatment affordable and accessible for families around the world.
To this end 2017 was a year of building both our service offerings and our partnerships with key players to position the Group as a multirevenue generative opportunity in a fastgrowing sector.
This resulted in an inection point with rst revenues generated before the year end.
Chairmans Review Peter Presland Chairman WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 8 and include additional product offerings over time.
We are set to launch in Spain imminently and in support of this have secured an agreement with Stem Cell Banco Celulas Madre S.
A. an established provider of stem cell storage services to offer CellPlan to its clients and will also launch our ecommerce platform to ensure maximum market penetration.
A Denitive Agreement has also been secured with Hemocord Clinica Medica Ltd in Brazil a worldclass leader in cord blood storage which is set to provide CellPlan access to the largest cord blood storage market in South America a market projected to be worth US445 million by 2023.
In March this year WideCells announced a landmark deal with Cryoviva Group an established cord blood storage facility with operations in Thailand Singapore and India to sell CellPlan in Asia.
Cryoviva has c.250000 inspected samples stored todate which represents almost 9% of all samples stored worldwide with forecasts to store c.25000 new samples every year.
CellPlan will be launched to Cryoviva customers on a phased basis commencing in H2 2018 providing staged revenue increases.
Finally with our storage division WideCells having recently launched BabyCells an umbilical cord blood and tissue storage service which is available to clients in the UK and Europe additional synergistic growth opportunities are available for CellPlan as one years stem cell insurance cover will be included as part of the initial storage package.
It is our hope and expectation that this will lead to ongoing uptake and revenue generation for CellPlan whilst also giving a competitive advantage to our storage services.
WIDECELLS
WideCells offers stem cell procurement processing retrieval and storage services in the UK and Europe.
Through WideCells Brasil it also operates a stem cell laboratory in So Paulo Brazil licensed by the Brazilian regulatory authority the Agncia Nacinal de Vigilncia Sanitra ANVISA.
WideCells has established its own storage and processing facility called the Institute of Stem Cell Technology ISCT based at the University of Manchester Innovation Centre in the UK which is well positioned to capture an increasing share of the cord blood banking market in the UK and
This provides the Group with exposure to a fundamental part of the market 4 million cord blood samples are currently held in storage in 500 facilities across the world and this is increasing by 250000 a year.
Whilst the Group had been offering umbilical cord stem cells processing and storage services through a thirdparty storage facility under its BabyCells brand in Portugal between 2014 and early 2015 it was only post period end in February 2018 that WideCells was awarded a Human Application Licence by the UKs Human Tissue Authority
This licence permits the Group to procure import export process store and distribute for treatment umbilical cord blood and umbilical cord tissue from the UK and Europe at our ISCT facility in Manchester UK.
This transformational milestone licence enables the Group under the brand name BabyCells to offer affordable umbilical cord blood and tissue storage services at the highest standards to clients in the UK and Europe.
Our
In support of this we believe we have a very strong product offering as alongside offering clients stateoftheart storage services new BabyCells clients will be given a years stem cell insurance cover provided by our CellPlan division.
Going forward WideCells intends to add additional stem cell services such as dental pulp processing and storage TeethCells and Adipose tissue collection processing and storage LipoCells to increase the Groups stem cell storage product offering.
Furthermore during the year under review WideCells secured a licence to provide INDUS a novel synthetic bone graft which promotes new bone formation.
The Group commenced selling this new product in the UK in Q4 2017 initially targeting the dental industry with obvious potential for further roll out internationally.
Alongside our cryogenics facility at the ISCT we have a stateoftheart laboratory which allows us to undertake pioneering paidfor research projects to support the continued development of the stem cell industry.
Our
By supporting development we ensure we remain at the fore of the stem cell industry.
WIDEACADEMY
Spearheaded by Alan Greenberg the former Director of Apple Education Wideacademy the Groups education and training division is focused on promoting bestpractice and quality whilst driving innovation.
By helping people to understand this growing industry from multiple perspectives and angles Wideacademy will help drive the uptake of our other products and services and in turn investment across the entire sector which ultimately could save many lives.
The platform which combines freetoaccess educational areas with paidfor premium Chairmans Review Overview  9 digital tools and resources for doctors and medical professionals was launched post period end and is already receiving excellent feedback.
Going forward we intend to add additional functionality including access to educational modular courses that can support Continual Professional Development CPD for medical professionals.
The Group is currently in discussions with a number of universities and educational organisations to rene its planned courses and CPD offering.
Wideacademy also intends to launch a Diseases and Treatment section in H1 2018 to provide more detailed information on specic illnesses.
CORPORATE
During the year several corporate changes were undertaken to reect the Groups transition from product development into a revenuegenerative international provider of stem cell services.
Accordingly we have brought together individuals of outstanding quality who have proven track records in the stem cell industry and nancial sector.
Directorship appointments included Alan Greenberg previously Vice President of Wideacademy and a Group NonExecutive Director who became a Group Executive Director and Group Chief Business Development Ocer whilst remaining Vice President of Wideacademy Malcolm Glaister who has held a number of management roles across a broad spectrum of leading investment and trading businesses and joined as a NonExecutive Director and myself as NonExecutive Chairman having previously held several senior directorship positions with both large and small companies in the insurance healthcare and IT industries.
As part of these board changes Dr.
Graham
Hine my predecessor as Chairman retired from his board role I would like to thank him for all his work and support in helping advance the Group to a point of international growth and development.
Post period end David Henriques who has signicant asset management and corporate nance experience and is involved with the digitalisation of insurance products was appointed to the Board as a NonExecutive Director.
He replaced Mr.
Zakaria Aziz who stepped down from his position as NonExecutive Director.
A new Scientic Advisory Committee consisting of leading gures in the industry was also appointed.
Responsible for identifying and advising the Board on new developments within the stem cell sector the Committee will ensure that we continue to address market demand and offer the most competitive and innovative portfolio of services.
Finally postperiod end investors will be aware that trading in our shares was suspended.
This was a result of a delay in publishing our nal results for 2017 pending completion of the audit process which in turn could not be completed as we were in discussions with our nancial advisers with a view to a fundraising.
Having received commitments in respect of approximately 1.47 million via a placing and with a live market bookbuild underway to bolster this further we have been able to successfully conclude the auditing of our annual accounts.
In light of this we expect our trading suspension to be lifted in the near term and are working with the FCA to achieve this.
I would like to assure shareholders that despite this auditcorporate setback all business operations have continued to operate as usual and our growth prospects remain strong.
Our focus is rmly on achieving the commercial rollout of our stem cell services to build revenues and ultimately drive the value of our business.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW We successfully raised 1.4 million before expenses in two placings in 2017 on the Main Market of the London Stock
This has enabled us to set up our operations for WideCells and Wideacademy in Manchester and for CellPlan in Porto and we are on target to grow sales in 2018.
OUTLOOK
We are now focused on growth and the commercial rollout of products and services across all three divisions.
As well as our existing regions we are exploring opportunities in the AsiaPacic territories where the stem cell industry is gaining increasing prole.
Our preeminent team and staff are leading the world in this exciting sector and with their support I anticipate steady growth during the year.
To conclude I would like to take this opportunity to thank our shareholders who provide ongoing support and look forward to updating our progress on a regular basis.
Peter Presland NonExecutive Chairman 4 June 2018 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 Stem cell therapy is gaining increasing recognition for its lifesaving potential in a widerange of medical applications.
82 illnesses can currently be treated using stem cell procedures and developments in its use in illnesses such as cystic brosis cerebral palsy diabetes and autism have caught the headlines of late.
As the value potential of this innovative treatment advances more and more people are becoming aware of the benets of storing stem cells which in turn is driving additional development and advancement in the industry.
This is accordingly an opportune time to be building a leading position within the stem cell industry and having successfully launched our rst of its kind endtoend stem cell service that covers storage insurance research and educationtraining we are now focused on achieving global rollout to build revenues drive development and ultimately ensure that all people regardless of geography or nancial position have access to stem cell treatment.
Through rsthand experience I have identied both the value potential and the limitations of the industry in which we operate.
In terms of value potential we are focused on cord blood taken from the umbilical cord following birth as we believe it is the most useful and best quality source of stem cells and it is an area of rapid growth with more than 250000 samples being stored per annum and growing fast.
However looking at the limitations whilst over 4000000 people have stored cord blood with over 500 cord blood bank companies that exist worldwide paying c.
2000 to do so many do not realise that if treatment is needed costs could climb to as high as 300000 making it unaffordable for many.
It is because of these limitations and strong growth dynamics that we have created our endtoend stem cell service.
At the core of this offering is our highly innovative CellPlan product  the rst global stem cell insurance package.
This provides access to stem cell specialists and hospitals covering the whole family for up to 1 million worth of medical travel and accommodation expenses worldwide for an affordable 150300 per annum.
With CellPlan live in the UK and strategic agreements in place to launch in Spain Brazil Thailand India and Singapore in the coming Chief Executives Statement Joo Andrade Chief Executive Ocer Overview  11 year it is clear to see that our focus is now on achieving rollout on a commercial scale.
Of course critical to stem cell treatment is stem cell storage and so alongside CellPlan we are delighted to have recently launched our own stem cell storage services at our state of the art facilities at the Institute of Stem Cell Technology in Manchester UK.
Following landmark licencing approval from the Human Application Licence in February 2018 our BabyCells service offering umbilical cord blood and tissue storage services to clients in the UK and Europe is now live and we are accordingly focused on promoting uptake.
BabyCells will be charged at a cost of circa 2000 per sample for one years storage including collection and processing with recurring storage revenues of 5075 per annum thereafter and alternative multiyear prepaid storage plans.
Clients of BabyCells will be also offered one years stem cell insurance cover provided by CellPlan highlighting the synergistic offering of our tripartite business model.
The nal string to our offering is education and training focused services delivered through a bespoke online platform  Wideacademy  of which we launched the rst stage in February 2018.
Being spearheaded by the former Director of Apple Education Alan Greenberg Wideacademy is committed to utilising the power of education to support stem cell uptake across all levels of the industry with revenue opportunities available through educational tools and courseware targeted at medical professionals.
Looking ahead it is clear to see that 2018 is set to be incredibly active for WideCells Group.
Having successfully launched all three divisionsservices our primary focus is now on driving product update to deliver strong recurring revenues and realise meaningful value for our investors whilst providing our clients with an affordable and quality product offering that provides them with lifesaving medical cover for them and their family now and for many years to come.
In line with our commitment to being at the fore of the rapidly growing global stem cell industry we maintain an active growth strategy and will continue to target strategic opportunities that provide our company with value uplift opportunity but our rst and foremost focus is on building the prole and global reach of our innovative stem cell services.
Joo Andrade Chief Executive Ocer 4 June 2018 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 12 Strategic Report
WideCells Group PLC the Group is a company domiciled in England.
The Group was incorporated on 24 May 2016 and this is the second set of nancial statements prepared by the Group.
The WideCells Group was formed on 16 June 2016 when WideCells Group PLC acquired the entire issued share capital of WideCells International Limited which had been originally incorporated in 2012 under the name of Wide Universal Ltd and its wholly owned subsidiaries based in the United Kingdom Portugal and Spain.
On 27 July 2016 WideCells was admitted to the London Stock Exchanges Main Market raising 2.00 million 1.72 million net of costs via the placing of 18181819 new ordinary shares at a price of 0.11 and since then the Group has raised approximately 1.4 million before fees in two private placings.
A placing and live market bookbuild to raise an additional 1.80 million is underway as referred to in note 26 to the Financial
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES AND BUSINESS
WideCells Group is an international specialised provider of stem cell services.
Its business is separated into three key divisions each of which is operated under a separate brand WideCells CellPlan and Wideacademy.
OUR STRATEGY AND OUTLOOK The market and recent trends Over 4000000 people have stored cord blood with over 500 cord blood bank companies that exist worldwide.
The global stem cell market was valued at approximately US96 billion in 2017 and is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 13.8% to 2025 to reach an estimated value of US270 billion Source Transparency Market Insight report.
As one of the fastest growing segments of the stem cell market the number of cord blood banks worldwide has grown from 23 in 2004 to over 500 in 2013 Source BioInformant Report.
The Directors believe that the Groups growth will be driven by the following factors amongst others while the cord blood market in the US is reasonably mature it is an earlystage market in other areas of the world where cord blood banks were not well established until the 2000s.
This provides potential for growth and expansion cord blood stem cells are relatively uncontroversial because they are derived from otherwise discarded materials associated with living newborns.
WideCells is not involved in embryonic stem cell research the effectiveness of cord blood transplants has been widely validated with 30000 transplants performed worldwide to date cord blood is a very versatile biological material as it can be used to treat a wide range of blood diseases genetic and metabolic disorders immunodeciencies and various forms of cancer cord blood is a naturally occurring resource available during the birthing process collecting cord blood for transplant use is a safe easy and painfree process.
Thus cord blood transplant has a distinct advantage over directly competing alternatives such as bone marrow transplant the industry serves expectant parents who are generally openminded about options that could provide protection to their families public awareness is improving and perception toward cellular therapy is becoming increasingly favourable due to news coverage about stem cells being used to treat serious medical conditions as well as to heal traumatic injuries for sports icons clinical trial data support applications for haemopoietic stem cells from cord blood and mesenchymal stem cells from cord tissue there is substantial potential for consolidation and cooperation within the industry including mergers acquisitions and funding rounds and industry associations and there is a trend toward diversication within the industry with cord blood banks effectively becoming stem cell banks through the storage of cord blood cord tissue and in some cases placental tissue amniotic uid and more.
Overview  13
Current Business Strategy The strategy of the Board is to continue to develop and expand the business segments noted above.
In addition it will work to develop the existing Groups business.
The
Directors believe that the growth of the global cord blood banking industry and the trends within the industry referred to below will create opportunities to build the Groups services and products.
The Groups strategy in the cord blood banking market comprises three key elements It is intended that the CellPlan insurance product which the Group has developed with the medical advisory group will give customers access to renowned specialists and hospitals globally and will include cover for medical travel accommodation expenses including a companion arranging doctors appointments hospitalisation paperwork and bills.
The Group expects that the CellPlan insurance will be priced within the range of 150300 p. depending on the country.
The
Group will retain a percentage of the net premium of each policy sold Through its WideCells business the Group has established a laboratory called the Institute of Stem Cell Technology at the University of Manchester Innovation Centre.
The facilities at UMIC include two clean rooms used for contract research projects and stem cell processing and a Cryogenics section which are used for freezing and storing a range of human cells and tissues.
WideCells will collect process and store cells and tissue of various kinds.
The average cost to the consumer is expected to be in the region of 2000 and The Group has launched Wideacademy which is its education and training branch and continues to develop it.
It will offer a series of online stem cell training programmes for healthcare professionals.
The Directors believe that training will help to accelerate the growth of the stem cell market.
These digital stem cells courses and content are being developed in partnership with the University of Westminster and other partnerships with strong inuencers in the stem cell industry and the edtech space are currently being exploited.
CellPlan
CellPlan insurance CellPlan provides a specialist insurance product for the stem cell and cord blood banking services sector which provides cover for expenses relating to use of stored stem cells in certain medical procedures following specied diagnoses.
This product is complementary in nature to the services offered by the WideCells division of the business.
The CellPlan insurance product was launched in July 2017 and has so far been trialled with a UK cord blood bank initially and the future strategy is for this to be rolled out across the UK including through its own brand WideCells.
Launch in Spain is underway and expansion across additional territories is set for later in 2018 supported by agreements the Group has entered into in AsiaPacic and
Furthermore the Group maintains an active growth strategy and will continue to target new partner cord blood banks as policies are adapted for local insurance requirements.
WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 14 Strategic Report The Group has an active growth strategy to further build CellPlans global reach and increase sales which is in part via the ecommerce platform which facilitates lowcost global rollout.
To this end CellPlan is currently in discussions with additional stem cell storage facilities to widen its existing networks.
The CellPlan insurance product is and will continue to be available for selected potential customers via its ecommerce platform.
Through an extended provider network CellPlan insurance will be offered to families which store their childs stem cells in cord blood storage facilities which are of high quality in terms of licensing and accreditation.
The Group together with its insurance providers intend to make the premiums payable as affordable as possible.
This approach was undertaken to widen the Groups reach and make the product available to more families in line with CellPlans mission to make stem cell treatment accessible and affordable for families globally.
Families with stem cells stored in banks that do not have CellPlan Excel accreditation or form part of the extended provider network will not be eligible to purchase the CellPlan insurance product.
To implement this strategy the Group has developed a userfriendly ecommerce website allowing potential policyholders to purchase CellPlan online.
It delivers a comprehensive overview of the benets of the coverage and is planned to be supported by call centres live chat and tracking features.
The Group intends to use social media and advertising to promote its services and will distribute materials at group events and activities attended by expectant parents new parents and parents of schoolaged children who have or are looking to have their childrens stem cells stored.
The business may also approach insurance companies and brokers to encourage a larger distribution of the CellPlan product for example as an addition to existing private healthcare insurance policies.
CellPlan Excel CellPlan is in the process of developing an accreditation programme CellPlan Excel a membership programme aiming to promote best practice within the marketplace.
Accredited cord blood banks sign up to a prescriptive set of requirements and also agree to exclusively promote the marketing of CellPlan to its existing and future members.
The cord blood bank receives commission payments for policies sold.
Members of the CellPlan Excel membership programme will be the primary focus of the CellPlan product launches due to the comprehensive cover of CellPlan products.
The proposed plan includes a mix of marketing channels and tools and focuses on engaging with an Excel accredited cord blood bank customer at strategic points throughout the parents journey as well as commercial activities such as sponsorships training social media and trade fair participation.
The existing customers of an Excel accredited cord blood bank will be offered
Agreements are already in place with Hemocord Biovault Stem Cell S.
WideCells Cryoviva Group and the Directors are in discussions with a number of other cord blood banks.
Once a referral agreement is in place with a cord blood bank CellPlan and the bank will develop a detailed implementation plan covering amongst other things sales operations including sales approach the policy issuance processreporting and design and implementation sales training including the preparation of supporting materials the establishment of a detailed marketing rollout plan across the key jurisdictions in which the cord blood bank conducts operations launch the CellPlan website which will be directed at both retail customers and cord blood banks and formally launch the CellPlan product in the market.
WideCells
The Directors intention is to continue developing WideCells products to support and enhance its existing offerings.
WideCells Ltd has received the HTA Licence.
This licence is a human tissue application licence which enables WideCells Ltd to procure importexport process store and distribute cord blood stem cells and cord tissue cells.
The Group is now offering its BabyCells stem cell retrieval processing storage and distribution services in the UK through its laboratory facilities which are designed to apply industryleading techniques to optimise the quality and safety of stem cells.
WideCells Espaa has obtained a licence from SERMAS and WideCells Portugal may seek to apply to obtain licences from the relevant authorities so as to allow for the export of samples collected by WideCells Espaa and WideCells Portugal to the Groups UK cord blood bank operated from the Core Technology Facility of the UMIC.
Overview  15 The initial processing capacity of the facility is expected to be approximately 1000 cord blood and 1000 cord tissue samples per year.
This capacity can be increased in the facility albeit dependent on investment in additional equipment and staff.
The facility will also be able when licensed to do so to process limited numbers of dental pulp and adipose tissue collections.
The initial storage capacity of the facility which is based on a single large storage tank is anticipated to provide storage space for at least 2 years operation.
The storage area has capacity of at least another 4 storage tanks and additional storage space is potentially available at UMIC.
The use of an additional clean room plus an investment in additional equipment and staff could increase capacity to allow 30 cord blood and cord tissue samples to be processed per day.
It can store up to 30000 cord blood and 50000 cord tissue samples with the capacity to increase this to a total of 480000 samples.
In addition there is an option to further expand capacity on the current site if required.
The Groups Chief Scientic Ocer Professor Hollands oversees the Groups operations at the laboratory.
He is the Designated Individual under the HTA Licence.
Further applications are expected to be made in the future to the HTA to enable the processing of dental pulp stem cells and adipose tissue.
WideCells BabyCells brand was launched on 19 March 2018 and is now fully operational.
Cord blood storage including the rst years storage costs collection kit testing and CellPlan insurance for the rst year is priced at 1995.
Cord blood and tissue storage is priced at 2390.
WideCells intends to further develop its research facilities to take on additional products from its existing two referred to in paragraph above.
The University of Manchester has its Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health and Division of Cardiovascular Research located near to the UMIC Core Technology Facility building which may enable further academic and research collaboration with
In addition the University of Manchester is adjacent to Manchester Royal Inrmary which may enable collaboration with clinical teams in the future.
Additional products The Board plans to further expand the offerings of the Group by developing the following products and services TeethCells dental pulp stem cells processing and storage LipoCells adipose tissue stem cells processing and storage KEY STRENGTHS The Directors believe that the Group is wellplaced to compete against other market participants in the stem cell and cord blood banking and services sector due to the collectively strong track record understanding and experience of its Board.
The Directors believe that the CellPlan insurance product is the most attractive product suite on the market owing to the partnership with Best Doctors the key differentiating features of the insurance coverage including the high nancial limit of coverage high levels of service provision including a concierge service the territorial scope of the coverage being global and limited pre exclusions complementary services for the umbilical cord blood industry such as the establishment of CellPlan Excel a membership programme where membership is dependent upon positive assessment against rigorous technical and regulatory criteria and the cooperation with large well known banks such as Biovault.
The arrangements with Best Doctors allows the Group to benet from the experience brand reputation and back oce infrastructure of Best Doctors and its relationships with specialist medical insurance underwriters in order to help drive the takeup of the CellPlan insurance product.
Taken on a standalone basis the WideCells business has a number of competitors offering accredited storage and processing services for cord blood in the UK Europe and other jurisdictions.
However the Directors believe that the integration of the WideCells business with the CellPlan business including the association with Best Doctors and with highquality service providers through CellPlan Excel will enable the WideCells business to be competitive with other stem cell storage and processing rms particularly as the Group expands into broader stem cell banking services such as in relation to dental pulp and adipose tissue.
Additionally the Directors believe that the education and training courses being developed by the Wideacademy business will serve to complement and promote the WideCells business.
Key performance indicators 2017 2016 Change Turnover 50765 25000 103% Operating loss 2789463 1236719 126% Net cash outowinow 998919 1116005 190% Average headcount 17 8113% WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 16 Strategic Report Given WideCells stage of development KPIs are focused on the key areas of cash management and operating results.
Nonnancial KPIs including KPIs in respect of the research and development programmes will be formalised as the business moves forward.
The board currently has Dr Marilyn Orcharton as the sole female director at the end of the year.
1 of the 4 senior managers are female and 7 of the 20 total employees in the Group are female.
The average number of employees during the year was 17.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
For the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells generated consolidated revenues of 0.05 million 2016 0.03 million.
This was from the development phase of an 0.1 million RandD contract which will run through 2017 and 2018 and the start of CellPlan and INDUS sales.
The revenues from 2016 were the from the planning phase of the RandD contract.
ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS WideCells administrative costs of 2.84 million 2016 1.26 million consisted of ongoing costs to set up the facility in Manchester and obtain the research and human application licences from the Human Tissue Authority to develop and market the CellPlan stem cell health insurance platform in the UK and Europe and to develop the Wideacademy platform to provide training and education in stem cell technologies.
During the year the average number of staff employed grew to 17 2016 8 and the payroll cost increased to 1.20 million 2016 0.61 million.
Share options were granted to Marilyn Orcharton David Bridgland and Alan Greenberg and the fair value of the options at the date of the grant were charged to consolidated statement of the comprehensive income.
Research and development expenditure Research and development activities consisted solely on the development phase of the initial 0.10 million contract and were part of normal payroll cost.
Capital expenditure The total cash expenditure on xed assets in 2017 was 0.32 million 2016 0.21 million as WideCells continued to prepare its laboratory in Manchester to process and store stem cell samples and to develop the CellPlan insurance platform.
Cash ow Net cash outow from operating activities was 2.14 million in 2017 2016 0.75 million.
The Group invested 0.32 million in xed assets raised 1.33 million net of costs following the placing of shares in 2017 raised a net 0.14 million of nancial debt resulting in an overall net cash outow for the year of 1.00 million 2016 inow of 1.12 million.
This was reduced by an overdraft of 0.50 million so the cash balance at the end of the year was 0.62 million 2016 1.15 million.
Capital structure WideCells Group PLC made a number of changes to its capital structure during 2017.
On 28 April 2017 the Company issued and allotted 5405806 ordinary shares to investors at a price of 0.12 per share in a private placement.
On 18 August 2017 the Company issued and allotted 5357143 ordinary shares to investors at a price of 0.14 per share in a second private placement.
As a result of the above transactions as at 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC had in issue 64821010 Ordinary Shares of 0.0025 each.
Principal risks and uncertainties The Directors consider the principal risks facing the business to be as follows Risks relating to the Company and its business strategy Early stage company  The Group faces risks frequently encountered by early stage companies.
In particular its future growth and prospects will depend on its ability to manage growth and to continue to expand and improve operational nancial and management information and quality Overview  17 control systems on a timely basis whilst at the same time maintaining effective cost controls.
Dependence on key executives and personnel Although the Directors have entered into service agreements or letters of appointment with the Company the loss of the services of any such individual may have an adverse material effect on the business operations revenues customer relationships andor prospects of the Company.
Reliance on the stem cell and cord blood banking market.
Risks relating to compliance and licensing  The Group is reliant upon certain key licenses.
Any diculties in maintaining such licenses could signicantly damage the prospects of such group and business.
Liability and insurance  It is not possible for the Board to ensure that the business is insured against all possible or potential risks.
Failure of the Groups premises staff performance quality management system or procedures.
Reliance on the medical advisory group Agreement and UMIC Lease  A substantial part of the Groups business and growth potential depends on its CellPlan insurance product and therefore its relationship with the medical advisory group.
Should the agreement with the medical advisory group be terminated and the Group nd it dicult or impossible to replace this relationship it could have a signicantly adverse impact on the Group.
The
WideCells division of the Groups business depends substantially on the lease in relation to the laboratory premises at the University of Manchester Innovation Centre UMIC.
Should the lease be terminated or fail to be renewed at the end of its three year term in circumstances where the Group would like to renew it this could have a signicantly adverse impact on the Group.
Risks relating to the stem cell and cord blood banking and services sector Operating within a regulatory environment  The Groups business is subject to a variety of regulatory regimes and compliance with or changes in law and regulation or in its interpretation and application by regulators could impose operational restrictions on the Group increase its expenses relating to ongoing compliance andor otherwise have a material adverse effect on such business.
Licensing requirements  The Group is dependent upon holding valid licences to enable the business to carry out its work including the HTA Licence.
Maintenance of such licences may present a damaging or insurmountable barrier to its business development and growth if the necessary licences cannot be obtained or maintained in a nancially and commercially viable manner.
The threat of competition and new technology There is a risk that the science underpinning the Groups business will reveal alternative more effective solutions to the issues the Groups services and products seek to address which will decrease demand for the Groups products and services.
In addition technologies in alternative solutions may advance more rapidly than that which the Groups business relies on making those alternative solutions more attractive to end users.
Limitations to the application of medical treatments There are a number of limitations in relation to the use of stem cells and cord blood in medical treatments some of which are inherent and some of which arise from the fact that the underlying science and technology is relatively new and of a limited track record.
Such drawbacks could have a negative impact on the overall value of and opportunities within the stem cell and cord blood banking and services sector.
This would result in a decreased demand for the business products.
Financial risk management objectives and polices The Group is exposed to a variety of nancial risks which result from both its operating and investing activities.
The
Board is responsible for coordinating the Groups risk management and focuses on actively securing the Groups short to medium term cash ows.
Finance risk The Group enters into very few transactions involving signicant complexity potential material nancial exposure or atypical risk.
The Group does not actively engage in the trading of nancial assets and has no nancial derivatives.
WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 Strategic Report Funding risk The Group continues to incur substantial operating expenses.
The recent placings generated sucient cash to take the Group toward break even and becoming cash ow positive however until the Group generates positive net cash inows from the commercialisation of its products it may be required to seek additional funding through the injection of equity capital from share issues.
The Group may not be able to generate positive net cash inows in the future or be able to attract such additional funding as may be required either at all or on suitable terms.
In such circumstances the development programmes may be delayed or cancelled and business operations cut back.
The Group seeks to reduce this risk by keeping a tight control on expenditure avoiding longterm supplier contracts prioritising development spend on products closest to potential revenue generation maintaining a focused portfolio of products under development and by keeping shareholders informed of progress.
This report was approved by the Board on 4 June 2018 and signed on its behalf.
Joo Andrade Chief Executive Ocer Overview  19 Governance WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  20 Board of Directors peter presLAnd nonexecutive director and Chairman age 68 Peter is a law graduate from Kings College London a Chartered Accountant and has over 40 years experience in the City.
Peter has extensive knowledge in restructuring and renancing company operations and as CFO and then CEO has successfully defended international insurance claims during his time at C.
Heath Plc.
In 1996 Peter created Rebus Group Plc by combining the IT businesses within Heath and demerging the combined entity as a separate listed company with a turnover of 60 million and operating prots of 6.1 million.
Over a threeyear period between 1996 to 1999 Rebus Groups turnover grew to 110 million with prots of about 11 million and in that period Peter devised and was responsible for a series of transactions which led to the original Heath shareholders investment value increasing by more than double their investment in 1996.
In 2003 Peter was appointed the rst outside Chairman of Link Interchange Network Limited well known for providing cash through ATMs within the UK economy.
Peter played a key role in the restructure of the company and led a substantial change in corporate governance by adopting a more conventional governance structure based on the then Model Code.
By 2007 Peter was asked by the largest bank shareholder of the company to supervise and deliver the merger with Voca to create Vocalink and was offered the Chairmanship of the merged entity.
In addition Peter has been a NonExecutive Director often Chairman of a number of private entities in the elds of insurance IT and healthcare including a role as Chairman of the Audit and Governance Committee at East Kent Hospitals University Foundation NHS Trust.
He is currently Chairman of the Audit Risk and Disclosure Committee of Redx Pharma plc a company pioneering transformational drug discovery and development in the areas of cancer and brosis Chairman of Beautiful Information Ltd a company providing information services to the NHS and Chairman of R and B Underwriting an MGA specialising in liability insurance.
Joo AndrAde Group Chief executive ocer age 36 Joo Andrade one of the cofounders of the WideCells business has a strong background in marketing and international business development and insurance as a certied insurance broker and brings his considerable experience business experience strategic thinking and industry specic knowledge.
Joo has over eight years senior experience in the stem cell market and prior to founding WideCells served in key roles at two European cord blood banks and service providers with operations in several countries as Key Account Manager at Future Health Technologies Limited and FHT Portugal S. and the Chief Strategy Ocer at Precious Cells International Limited.
Joo has dual nationality of Portugal and Brazil.
Lopes GiL Group Chief operating ocer age 57 Lopes Gil is a cofounder of WideCells and has over 25 years experience working as an area manager in Merck KGaA and Mylan N. complex business operations.
In addition he is a certied insurance broker and also has extensive business experience in international marketing strategic planning and studies in the pharmaceutical industry.
Lopes was previously Chief Finance Strategist at Precious Cells International Limited where he was focused on developing its international cell banking services.
He holds a degree in management from Instituto Superior Miguel Torga and an MBA from Universidad San PabloCEU.
Governance  21 proFessor peter HoLLAnds Group Chief scientic ocer age 59 Peter trained at Cambridge University under the supervision of Professor Sir Robert Edwards FRS the inventor of IVF and Nobel Laureate gaining a PhD from Cambridge University in stem cell technology.
Peter held a postdoctorate position as a Senior Embryologist at the rst IVF clinic in the world Bourn Hall Clinic and has carried out research in stem cell technology has written numerous papers and book chapters on stem cell technology and has been invited to lecture on stem cell technology in the Vatican House of Lords and the Canadian Parliament.
He has also been involved in clinical transplantation as Quality Manager in the Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children.
Recently Peter was Chief Scientic Ocer of Smart Cells International Ltd. a UK cord blood bank and Cells for Life Ltd. in Canada.
Most recently in November 2017 Professor Hollands was awarded Visiting Chair in Regenerative Medicine by Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine.
Group Chief Financial ocer age 52 David studied engineering at Cambridge University and is a Chartered Accountant.
He has over 20 years of business experience in a range of companies from privately owned and venture capital backed companies to major listed companies including Smiths Group Autoliv and Honeywell.
Davids key focus is early stage businesses with innovative technologies and he has experience in raising funding organic business growth acquisitions and has achieved successful trade sale exits for investors.
ALAn GreenberG Group Chief business development ocer and senior Vice president of Wideacademy age 67 Alan brings a wealth of experience within the education technology and healthcare startup space globally and is wellplaced to lead the development of Wideacademy and contribute to the expansion of the Company.
On becoming Head of Higher Education of Apple Education EMEA in early 2005 Alan was responsible for the deployment of a number of agship projects including the evolution and project development of Education Podcasting in collaboration with HEC Business School in Paris and University of Lyon.
This in turn led to the development of iTunes University iTunes U throughout EMEA and the Beyond Campus initiative.
This lighthouse university programme and the launch of iTunes U in EMEA included collaborations with the University of Cambridge University of Oxford University College London Royal Academy of Music Trinity Colleague Dublin and the Open University representing some of the highest achieving relationships within iTunes U globally.
His success within this role led to Alans appointment as Director of Education at Apple in Asia in 2008.
Based in Beijing Alan managed the rollout of the podcasting and iTunes U strategies within the Asia Pacic region.
This included the launch of the iPhone Developer University Programme iDUP where SDK code was being taught in universities throughout Asia and the Asia Pacic region leading to the rst generation of Education Apps for the App Store.
Whilst in China Alan was also invited to lead and project manage a major corporate social responsibility project for Apple Inc Pearson and Foxconn the development and launch of professional development and educational programme for Foxconn factory workers which remain core to Apple Inc CSR program today.
WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  22 Board of Directors dr MAriLyn orCHArton nonexecutive director age 76 A serial entrepreneur Marilyn is a qualied dentist with a medal of Honour from the British Dental Association and her rst business was a dental practice.
She cofounded Denplan Limited in 1986 which is still the UKs market leader in dental insurance with a multimillion pound annual turnover.
Marilyn sold her stake in Denplan in 1992 and founded Kite Consultants Ltd which has researched and developed ISOPLAN a unique business management software package for professional outlets dentists doctors nursing homes and lawyers.
She is a founder member of the Entrepreneurial Exchange and has been an honouree of the Leading Women Entrepreneurs.
Marilyn was also a visiting surgeon at the University of Glasgow.
Marilyn was the rst woman to be a dental adviser to the Medical Defence Union and the rst woman to be President of the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce.
She has a diploma in marketing and is a member of the Chartered Institute of Marketing.
MALCoLM GLAister nonexecutive director age 49 A former Navy Commanding Ocer Malcolm has over 20 years of experience in nancial services.
As a natural entrepreneur Malcolm founded Farm Street LLP in 2012.
Farm Street LLP is an independent nancial services rm in London offering nancial advice to mainly UK entrepreneurs and businesses covering corporate nance treasury debt and asset management.
Malcolm is a founding partner of the Eight Great Technologies Investment Fund LLP a venture capital fund focusing on investing in emerging UK technology companies.
He is the NonExecutive Director at the Corporation of Trinity House one of the UKs largest maritime charities and chair of the Investment Committee and Risk and Audit committees.
Prior to founding Farm Street LLP Malcolm held leadership positions at Lloyds Banking Group AIG Investments and J.
Morgan developing key knowledge and relationships in private equity real estate and hedge funds.
NonExecutive dAVid Henriques nonexecutive director age 53 David is a cofounder and Director of Cairn Capital Ltd and a member of the Executive Management Committee.
He has overall responsibility for Cairn Capitals corporate advisory business.
He was formerly coglobal Head of Structured Credit Products with the Royal Bank of Scotland and has extensive experience in real estate and credit products.
Prior to that he held various senior positions in corporate nance and insurance companies.
He is a NonExecutive Director of Azur Group Holdings Limited an insurance managing digital agency which partners with carriers and brokers to build underwrite and distribute digital insurance products.
Governance  23 tHe reMunerAtion CoMMittee The Remuneration Committee assists the Board in determining its responsibilities in relation to remuneration including making recommendations to the Board on the Groups policy on executive remuneration setting the overarching principles parameters and governance framework of the Groups remuneration policy and determining the individual remuneration and benets package of each of the Executive Directors and the Group Secretary.
The Remuneration Committee ensures compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code in relation to remuneration wherever possible The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Malcolm Glaister and its other members are Peter Presland and David
The Remuneration Committee meets not less than twice a year.
The Remuneration Committee has met twice during 2017.
The Remuneration Policy came into effect from the date of the AGM in 2017.
The main aim of the Groups remuneration policy is to align the interests of Executive and NonExecutive Directors with the Groups business strategy and the longterm creation of shareholder value.
The policy aims to pay the Directors competitively whilst considering the remuneration practices of other international companies of similar size and scope the current economic climate the regulatory and governance framework remuneration around the Group and the need to ensure that the Directors are remunerated appropriately whilst ensuring the Group pays no more than is necessary.
The Committee has no formal method of involving employees in the setting of Directors remuneration however the members of the Committee have access to employees both in formal and informal settings and take into account the level of employee remuneration when setting Directors remuneration.
Shareholders views on Directors remuneration are taken into account when setting the Remuneration Policy.
Basic salary na Annual bonus Executive Director salaries as at 1 January 2018 are set at the following levels these may change during the period for which the Policy is in place Joo Andrade CEO  115000 Lopes Gil COO  90000 Peter Hollands CSO  80000 David Bridgland CFO Alan Greenberg CBDO 60000 to 30 June 2018 then Basic salaries are normally reviewed annually in December with any changes usually taking effect from 1 January.
The review includes a comparison with other companies of similar size and complexity whilst taking into account a number of critical factors such as individual responsibility scope and complexity of the role and the individuals experience.
Increases in salary are made in relation to Group and individual performance market benchmarking ination and other factors at the discretion of the Remuneration
To provide the basis of a market competitive overall remuneration.
Takes account of the role skills and contribution of the individual.
Individual bonus targets are set by the Remuneration Committee each year based on a combination of personal and corporate KPIs.
The maximum bonuses are based on the following percentages of base salary Joo Andrade CEO  40% Lopes Gil COO  20% Peter Hollands CSO  20% David Bridgland CFO  40% Alan Greenberg CBDO  50% Cash payments are made following recommendation by Remuneration Committee.
Incentivises executives to achieve key strategic outcomes on an annual basis.
Remuneration Report WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  24 element of purpose of Maximum performance remuneration this element operation potential benet measures Pension na Other benets na
Incentives
NonExecutive Directors receive xed fees agreed by the full Board after reference to similar roles in an appropriate comparator group of companies and reimbursement of expenses incurred in attending Board and other meetings.
It is the Boards policy for the NonExecutive Directors to be paid a level of fee that reects the time commitment and responsibilities of the role and is sucient to attract individuals with appropriate knowledge and experience.
Peter Presland 52000 Malcolm Glaister 20000 Zakaria Aziz 20000 Marilyn Orcharton 20000 On 19 February 2018 Zakaria Aziz resigned and David Henriques was appointed as a nonexecutive director on an annual fee of 20000.
There are no set maximums for these benets but they are set in line with other wider employee remuneration.
The Executive Directors receive health insurance and car allowance.
The Group would consider payment of relocation expenses on an individual basis.
To provide market typical benets to ensure that the overall remuneration package is competitive.
Vesting subject that the Director or Employee exercise.
The Company has granted the following Options to the
Peter Hollands 1600000 shares David Bridgland 1200000 shares.
Marilyn Orcharton 270290 shares Alan Greenberg 540580 shares An award of share options under the Groups Enterprise Management Incentive Scheme.
The scheme was by the formally adopted Remuneration Committee on 21 July 2016.
To create alignment between the interest of Executives and shareholders through the delivery of rewards in Company shares.
To incentivise Executives to deliver longterm shareholder value creation and the achievement of nancial targets.
The Executive Directors are entitled to an employer pension contribution of 10%.
It is the Groups policy that only basic salary is pensionable.
To provide postretirement remuneration to ensure that the overall remuneration package is competitive.
Pension contributions to a maximum of 10% of base salary.
Governance  25 reMunerAtion sCenArios The Committee believes that the remuneration arrangements in place for 2018 and beyond provide an appropriate balance between xed and variable pay linked to short and longterm strategic objectives.
The charts below illustrate the current value and composition of the Executive Directors remuneration opportunity in minimum ontarget and maximum performance scenarios.
The impact of the EMI share option scheme is not seen here as it is considered unlikely that in the normal course of events a crystallising event will take place in 2018.
Ceo Coo Base Salary Annual base salary  115k Base Salary Annual base salary  90k Pension Company pension allowance  10% Pension Company pension allowance  10% Other Benets Taxable value of benets provided Other Benets Taxable value of benets provided Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum 0% of Salary 20% of Salary 40% of Salary 0% of Salary 10% of Salary 20% of Salary Minimum Target Maximum Minimum Target Maximum Cso CFo Base Salary Annual base salary  80k Base Salary Annual base salary  96k Pension Company pension allowance  10% Pension Company pension allowance  10% Other Benets Taxable value of benets provided Other Benets Taxable value of benets provided Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum 0% of Salary 10% of Salary 20% of Salary 0% of Salary 20% of Salary 40% of Salary Minimum Target Maximum Minimum Target Maximum telMinimum OnTarget Maximum
Fixed Pay Cash Bonus 5telMinimum OnTarget Maximum
Fixed Pay Cash Bonus tel160 Minimum OnTarget Maximum
Fixed Pay Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum
Fixed Pay Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum
Fixed Pay Cash Bonus
Base Salary Annual base salary  60k Pension Company pension allowance  10% Other Benets Taxable value of benets provided Cash Bonus Minimum OnTarget Maximum 0% of Salary 25% of Salary 50% of Salary Minimum Target Maximum WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  26
Remuneration Report
The Committees approach to remuneration with regard to recruiting staff is to pay no more than is necessary to attract candidates of the appropriate calibre and experience needed for the role.
The Committee would consider payment of compensation for the forfeiture of variable awards from previous employers on an individual basis.
The table sets out the Committees approach to recruitment of new Executive Directors in regard to each element of remuneration.
Basic salary The Committee will offer salaries in a range appropriate for comparative roles while also considering the experience of the individual the wider economic climate and pay and conditions throughout the Group in line with its policy for existing Executive Directors.
Benets The Committee will offer a benets package that will be set in line with its policy for existing Executive Directors.
This includes but is not limited to a car allowance and private health insurance.
Pension Maximum contributions will be set in line with the Companys policy for existing Executive
Longterm Share options may be awarded under the Groups Enterprise Management Incentive Scheme.
Incentives
When determining any loss of oce payment for a departing individual the Committee will ensure that a consistent approach is adopted so that there is no reward for poor performance and the liabilities of the Group are minimised where appropriate.
No amount is payable if an Executive Director is dismissed for serious breach of contract serious misconduct or underperformance or acts that bring the Executive Directors or Group into serious disrepute.
The table below sets out the policy on exit payment in relation to each element of remuneration for Executive Directors.
Basic salary In the event of termination by the Company there will be no compensation for loss of oce due benets and to misconduct or normal resignation.
In other circumstances the Executive Directors may be pension entitled to receive payment in lieu of notice.
Longterm Awards of options under Groups Enterprise Management Incentive Scheme lapse when the incentives Executive Director leaves his employment though the Company can exercise discretion and allow the options to be exercised within three months of the Option Holder ceasing to hold employment within the Group.
Governance  27 serViCe ContrACts And notiCe periods The Company has entered into the following service agreements and letters of appointment with the Directors a letter of appointment with Peter Presland dated on or around 21 December 2017 pursuant to which Mr Presland was appointed as nonexecutive Director and chairman of the Company for an annual fee of 20000 plus an additional 32000 whilst chairman.
Mr Presland will be expected to devote at least two to three days a month to perform his duties for the Company.
The appointment is terminable on 6 months notice on either side.
The appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Peter Presland is in material breach of the terms of the appointment an agreement with Joo Andrade dated on or around 21 July 2016 pursuant to which Mr Andrade was appointed as CEO of the Company for an annual salary of 115000 payable monthly in arrears.
The appointment is terminable on twelve months notice on either side.
If the Company terminates the appointment other than in circumstances in which it was entitled to terminate the appointment summarily the Company shall pay Mr Andrade a termination payment equal to his basic annual salary within one month of termination.
The appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Mr Andrade is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Mr Andrade is entitled to a company car private family medical insurance and pension contributions.
Subject to the approval of the Remuneration Committee Mr Andrade is eligible to receive an annual bonus which shall not exceed 40% of his annual salary and he is eligible to participate in the Companys stock option plan from time to time. the Company for an annual salary of 90000 payable monthly in arrears.
The appointment is terminable on twelve months notice on either side.
No compensation is payable for loss of oce and the appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Mr Gil is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Mr Gil is entitled to a company car private family medical insurance and pension contributions.
Subject to the approval of the Remuneration Committee Mr Gil is eligible to receive an annual bonus which shall not exceed 20% of his annual salary and he is eligible to participate in the Companys stock option plan from time to time. an agreement with Professor Peter Hollands dated on or around 21 July 2016 pursuant to which Prof.
Hollands was appointed as CSO of the Company for an annual salary of 80000 payable monthly in arrears.
The appointment is terminable on six months notice on either side.
No compensation is payable for loss of oce and the appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Prof.
Hollands is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Prof.
Hollands is entitled to private family medical insurance and pension contributions.
Subject to the approval of the Remuneration Committee Prof.
Hollands is eligible to receive an annual bonus which shall not exceed 20% of his annual salary and he is eligible to participate in the Companys long term incentive plan from time to time. arrears.
It was agreed at a board meeting on 18 May 2017 that from 1 July 2017 he would work full time and his annual fee be increased to 96000.
The appointment is terminable on six months notice on either side.
No compensation is payable for loss of oce and the appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Mr Bridgland is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Mr Bridgland is entitled to private medical insurance and pension contributions.
Subject to the approval of the Remuneration Committee Mr Bridgland is eligible to receive an annual bonus which shall not exceed 40% of his annual salary and he is eligible to participate in the Companys long term incentive plan from time to time.
Mr Greenberg was appointed as nonexecutive Director of the Company and Vice President Wideacademy.
On or around 18 December 2017 Mr Greenberg entered into a second agreement pursuant to which he was appointed as Group Chief Business Development Ocer and Senior Vice President of Wideacademy for an annual fee of 60000 which will rise to 80000 from 1 July 2018.
Mr Greenberg is also eligible for a bonus of up to 50% of his basic salary.
The appointment can be terminated on six months notice on either side.
The appointment may be WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  28
Remuneration Report
Mr Greenberg is entitled to certain additional benets such as private medical insurance and is eligible to participate in the Companys long term incentive plan.
Mr Glaister was appointed as nonexecutive Director of the Company for an annual fee of 20000 payable monthly in arrears.
Mr Glaister will be expected to devote at least two to three days a month to perform his duties for the Company.
The appointment is terminable on 6 months notice on either side.
The appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Mr Glaister is in material breach of the terms of the appointment a letter of appointment with Dr Marilyn Orcharton dated on or around 21 July 2016 pursuant to which Dr Orcharton was appointed as nonexecutive Director of the Company for an annual fee of 20000 payable monthly in arrears.
The appointment is terminable on six months notice on either side.
The appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Dr Orcharton is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Dr Orcharton is eligible to participate in the Companys long term incentive plan.
Mr Henriques was appointed as nonexecutive Director of the Company for an annual fee of 20000 payable monthly in arrears.
Mr Henriques will be expected to devote at least two to three days a month to perform his duties for the Company.
The appointment is terminable on 6 months notice on either side.
The appointment may be terminated immediately if among other things Mr Henriques is in material breach of the terms of the appointment.
Individual bonus targets are set by the Remuneration Committee each year based on a combination of personal and corporate KPIs.
Audited salary pension bonus Fees benets 2017 NonExecutive Directors Graham Hine 104000   104000 Peter Presland   1538  1538 Marilyn Orcharton 20000   20000 Malcolm Glaister   591  591 Executive Directors Joo Andrade 115000 11500 30750  8625 165875 Lopes Gil 90000 9000 19703  6750 125453 Peter Hollands 80000 8000 13579  101579 David Bridgland 78000 7800 11542  1764 101363 Alan Greenberg  13799 27562  27562 Directors remuneration 487000 36300 77831 29691 17139 647961 NIC 67506 Total 715467 Graham Hine stepped down as Chairman on 20 December 2017 and was entitled to 52000 being payment in lieu of notice.
Governance  29 Audited salary pension bonus Fees benets 2016 NonExecutive Directors Graham Hine 26000  4333 9000  39333 Marilyn Orcharton 10000  1667 2500  14167 Executive Directors Joo Andrade 57500 5750 9583 13500 2156 88489 Lopes Gil 45000 4500 7500 12000 1688 70688 Peter Hollands 40000 4000 6667 9000  59667 David Bridgland 30000 3000 5000 9000  47000 Directors remuneration 208500 17250 34750 55000 3844 319344 NIC 28028 Total 347372 The Chief Executive Ocers salary increased by 0% from 2016 to 2017 compared with the average Group employees salary increase of 2.7%.
NonExecutive Directors Peter Presland Marilyn Orcharton 158095 0.2% Malcolm Glaister David Henriques Executive Directors Joo Andrade 8055000 12.4% Lopes Gil 8050000 12.4% Peter Hollands Alan Greenberg 35714 0.1% David Bridgland 403981 0.6% WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  30 Corporate Governance 31 december 2017 options Held over ordinary shares NonExecutive Directors Peter Presland Marilyn Orcharton 270290 Malcolm Glaister David Henriques Executive Directors Joo Andrade Lopes Gil Peter Hollands 1600000 David Bridgland 1200000 Alan Greenberg 540580 On 15 August 2017 Graham Hine subscribed for another 20000 shares Marilyn Orcharton subscribed for another 7143 shares Alan Greenberg subscribed for 35714 shares Joo Andrade subscribed for another 15000 shares Lopes Gil subscribed for another 15000 shares and David Bridgland subscribed for another 71429 shares.
The Board uses share options to align Directors interests with those of shareholders in order to provide incentives and reward them based on improvements in Group performance The main vesting condition of all share options is that the Director or employee remain employed with the Group as at the date of exercise or continues to provide consultancy services as at the date of exercise.
The share options of the Directors under the WideCells Group PLC Scheme included in totals on page 61 are set out below number exercise earliest Grant date Awarded priceshare exercise date expiry date Peter Hollands 22072016 533333 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 533333 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 533334 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 David Bridgland 22072016 200000 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 200000 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 200000 0.0025 Fully vested July 2026 David Bridgland 24012017 200000 0.11 Fully vested January 2027 200000 0.11 24012018 January 2027 200000 0.11 24012019 January 2027 Marilyn Orcharton 24012017 270290 0.11 Fully vested January 2027 Alan Greenberg 15022017 180193 0.14 15022018 February 2027 180193 0.14 15022019 February 2027 180194 0.14 15022020 February 2027 Governance  31 perForMAnCe GrApH The following graph shows the Companys performance over the last year measured by TSR compared with the performance of the FTSE Allshare Index also measured by TSR.
The graph is prepared on the basis of constituent companies in the Index at a point in time.
FinAnCiAL yeAr The salaries for 2018 are set out below From From 1 July 2017 1 July 2018 Joo Andrade 115000 p.
115000 p.
Lopes Gil 90000 p.
90000 p.
Peter Hollands 80000 p.
80000 p.
David Bridgland 96000 p.
96000 p.
Alan Greenberg   p.
80000 p.
Remuneration arrangements throughout the Group are based on the same remuneration principles i. the market without paying more than is necessary to recruit and retain individuals.
Reward packages differ taking into account location seniority and level of responsibility but they are all built around these common reward objectives and principles.
The Remuneration Committee through the Chairman continues to have a dialogue with shareholders.
The views of shareholders are considered in addition the Chairman meets with certain shareholders during the year.
Malcolm Glaister Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 15% 20% 10% 5% 0% 5% Feb 17 Apr17 Aug17 Oct17 Dec17 Jun17 WIDECELLS GRP FTSE ALLShare 10% WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  32 Corporate Governance boArd oF direCtors As at 31 December 2017 the Board comprised nine Directors ve of whom are Executive Directors and four NonExecutive Directors reecting a blend of different experience and backgrounds.
Subsequent to the yearend Zakaria Aziz resigned and one additional NonExecutive Director David Henriques was appointed.
The nonexecutive Directors are not regarded as fully independent in view of their ownership of shares in the Company.
The Directors give due regard to the principles set out in The UK Corporate Governance Code published in September 2014 by the Financial Reporting Council the Code and the Quoted Companies Alliance QCA published Corporate Governance Guidelines.
Under the listing rules compliance with the Code is voluntary.
Although the Board has not formally adopted the Code throughout the year ended 31 December 2017 it has sought to adopt procedures to institute good governance insofar as is practical and appropriate for a group of its size while retaining its primary focus on the success of the business.
The Board is responsible for inter alia approving interim and annual nancial statements formulating and monitoring Group strategy approving nancial plans and reviewing performance as well as complying with legal regulatory and corporate governance matters.
There is a schedule of matters reserved for the Board.
The Board meet regularly to consider strategy performance and the framework of internal controls.
To enable the Board to discharge its duties all Directors receive appropriate and timely information.
Brieng papers are distributed to all Directors in advance of Board meetings.
The Company has established audit and remuneration committees of the Board with formally delegated duties and responsibilities.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities with regard to nancial reporting external and internal audits and controls including reviewing and monitoring the integrity of the Groups annual and interim nancial statements advising on the appointment of external auditors reviewing and monitoring the extent of the nonaudit work undertaken by external auditors overseeing the Groups relationship with its external auditors reviewing the effectiveness of the external audit process and reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups internal control review function.
The ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the annual report and accounts and the halfyearly reports remains with the Board.
The Audit Committee is chaired by Peter Presland David Henriques took over as chair from 19 February 2018 and its other members are Marilyn Orcharton and Malcolm Glaister The Audit and Risk Committee meet not less than twice a year.
During 2017 the Audit Committee has met twice.
The Board is responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The system of internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure of the achievement of business objectives and can only provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Audit Committee continues to monitor and review the effectiveness of the system of internal control and report to the Board when appropriate with recommendations.
The annual review of internal control and nancial reporting procedures did not highlight any issues warranting the introduction of an internal audit function.
It was concluded given the current size and transparency of the operations of the Group that an internal audit function was not required however this remains a matter for ongoing review.
The main features of the internal control system are outlined below A control environment exists through the close management of the business by the Executive
The Group has a dened organisational structure with delineated approval limits.
Controls are implemented and monitored by the Executive
The Board has a schedule of matters expressly reserved for its consideration and this schedule includes acquisitions and disposals major capital projects treasury and risk management policies and approval of budgets.
The Group utilises a detailed budgeting and forecasting process.
Detailed budgets are prepared annually by the Executive Directors before submission to the Board for approval.
Forecasts are updated at least quarterly to reect changes in the business and are monitored by the Board including future cash ow projections.
Actual results are monitored against annual budgets in detail on a monthly basis with variances highlighted to the Board.
Financial risks are identied and evaluated for each major transaction for consideration by the Board and senior management.
Governance  33 Standard nancial control procedures are operated throughout the Group to ensure that the assets of the Group are safeguarded and that proper accounting records are maintained.
A risk review process is in development whereby the Chief Executive Ocer and Finance Director will present a report to the Board each year on the key business risks.
GoinG ConCern As disclosed on page 47 the Directors have prepared cashow forecasts for a period of 12 months from the date of approval of this annual report and accounts which show that the Group and parent company will have sucient funds to continue and therefore that the going concern basis of preparation is appropriate.
First and foremost this assumes the successful completion of the current funding round.
The other key assumption within these forecasts is the growth in sales of CellPlan insurance policies and of the BabyCells umbilical cord blood and tissue storage service launched this year.
Should the fundraising fail to complete or the forecast sales be below budget or delayed a further injection of working capital will be required to meet the Group and companys liabilities as they fall due.
Thus the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual nancial statements though they also acknowledge that a material uncertainty exists that may cast signicant doubt on the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern given the factors described above.
The Directors seek to build a mutual understanding of objectives between the Company and its shareholders.
The Company reports formally to shareholders in its Annual Report and Interim Statements setting out details of the Groups activities.
In addition the Company keeps shareholders informed of events and progress through the issue of regulatory news in accordance with the Listing Rules for Companies of the London Stock Exchange The Chief Executive and Finance Director meet with institutional shareholders following interim and nal results.
The
Company also maintains investor relations pages and other information regarding the business the Groups products and activities on its website at httpsite The Annual Report is made available to shareholders at least 21 days before the Annual General Meeting AGM along with notice of the AGM.
Directors are required to attend the AGM unless unable to do so for personal reasons or due to pressing commercial commitments and shareholders are given the opportunity to vote on each separate resolution proposed at the AGM.
The Company counts all proxy votes and will indicate the level of proxies lodged for each resolution after it has rst been dealt with by a show of hands.
Company Secretary WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2016  34 Directors Report The Directors present their report and the consolidated nancial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Corporate Governance Report forms part of the Directors Report.
The Directors during the period were Graham Hine resigned 20 December 2017 Peter Presland appointed 21 December 2017 Marilyn Orcharton Zakaria Aziz appointed 21 December 2017 Malcolm Glaister appointed 18 December 2017 Joo Andrade Lopes Gil Peter Hollands David Bridgland Alan Greenberg appointed 15 February 2017 Subsequent to the period end Zakaria Aziz resigned and David Henriques was appointed on 19 February 2018.
The Group is continuing to develop products within its chosen areas of scientic and commercial focus.
MAtters CoVered in tHe strAteGiC report Details of the Groups nancial risk management objectives and policies and the future developments of the Group are given in the Strategic Report.
Details of the Groups capital structure is included in note 18 to the nancial statements.
The Directors are not recommending the payment of a dividend at this time due to the level of maturity of the
The Directors intend implementing a dividend policy of progressive payments when the Group reaches the right stage of development.
The Company has as permitted by s234 and 235 of the Companies Act 2006 maintained insurance cover on behalf of the Directors and Company Secretary indemnifying them against certain liabilities which may be incurred by them in relation to the Company.
WideCells Group recognises the essential importance of employees to the success of the business and ensures that they are fully informed of events that directly affect them and their working conditions.
Information on matters of concern to employees is given in briengs that seek to provide a common awareness on the part of all employees of the nancial and economic factors affecting the Groups performance.
Applications for employment by disabled persons are given full and fair consideration for all vacancies in accordance with their particular aptitudes and abilities.
It is the policy of the Group that training and promotion opportunities should be available to all employees.
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Directors Report Strategic Report and the nancial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare nancial statements for each nancial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group nancial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and the Company nancial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the nancial statements unless they are satised that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the prot or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these nancial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the nancial statements Governance  35 prepare the nancial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group will continue in business and prepare a directors report a strategic report and directors remuneration report which comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sucient to show and explain the Groups transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the nancial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the nancial statements comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Website pubLiCAtion The Directors are responsible for ensuring the Annual Report and the nancial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the Groups website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of nancial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the Groups website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The
Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the nancial statements contained therein.
GreenHouse GAs eMissions The Company is setting up operations in Manchester and
Once these teams are in place in 2018 systems and measures will be implemented to assess the Groups performance against internally set greenhouse emission targets.
The Company has no branch oces.
Postperiod end the Company has received commitments in respect of approximately 1.47 million via a placing and with a live market bookbuild that is set to raise another 0.55 million the Company will be allowed to focus on growing its three core divisions.
The directors conrm to the best of their knowledge the Group nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standard IFRS as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS regulation and give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities nancial position and prot and loss of the Group and the annual report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the parent company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
Auditors
All of the current directors have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken to make themselves aware of any information needed by the Groups auditors for the purposes of their audit and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information.
The Directors are not aware of any relevant audit information of which the auditors are unaware.
On behalf of the Board david bridgland Chief Financial Ocer Financial Statements WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  38
We have audited the nancial statements of WideCells Group PLC the parent company and its subsidiary companies the group for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise of the consolidated income statement and statement of other comprehensive income consolidated statement of nancial position the consolidated statement of cash ows the consolidated statement of changes in equity the company balance sheet the company statement of changes in equity and the notes to the nancial statements including a summary of signicant accounting policies.
The nancial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company nancial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the nancial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups loss for the year then ended the group nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company nancial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group nancial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the nancial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fullled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sucient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
MATERIAL UNCERTAINTY IN RELATION TO GOING CONCERN We draw attention to note 1 in the nancial statements concerning the group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors have prepared cashow forecasts for a period of 12 months from the date of signing the nancial statements which show that the group requires funds from an equity placing and from an increase in the Cellplan and cell storage sales.
Should the fundraising fail to complete or the forecast sales are below budget or delayed a further injection of working capital will be required.
These conditions along with the other matters as set out in note 1 indicate that a material uncertainty exists that may cast signicant doubt on the group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Our opinion is not modied in respect of this matter.
Given the conditions and uncertainties noted above we considered going concern to be a Key Audit Matter.
We have performed the following work as part of our audit Independent Auditors Report to the Members of WideCells Group PLC Financial Statements  39 We critically challenged the directors forecasts to assess the group and parent companys ability to meet their nancial obligations as they fall due for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the nancial statements and assessed and corroborated the key underlying assumptions
Assessing the reasonableness of forecast expenditure by reference to actual expenditures in 2017 and the Directors planned activity.
Agreement of referral contracts signed with cord blood banks in Thailand India Brazil and the UK which will allow for the sale of CellPlan insurance policies to users of the blood banks.
Agreement of the potential raising of 1.80m of funding referred to in the directors report shortly after the signing of these nancial statements to placing letters.
Conrmed with Management and the Directors whether there are any other matters that may adversely impact upon their assessment of going concern.
KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most signicance in our audit of the nancial statements of the current period and include the most signicant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identied including those which had the greatest eect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the eorts of the engagement team.
This matter was addressed in the context of our audit of the nancial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on this matter.
Other than the matter described in the material uncertainty related to going concern section above we did not identify any further key audit matters during the audit.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the eect of identied misstatements on the audit in forming our audit opinion.
Materiality is dened as the magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in aggregate could reasonably be expected to inuence the economic decisions of the users of the nancial statements and provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
The materiality for the group audit as a whole was set at 90000 2016 20000 and was determined with reference to the benchmark of adjusted group loss before taxation of which it represents 4% 2016 3%.
The groups loss has been adjusted by adding back the costs incurred by the group as part of its further placing made during the year which are exceptional in nature.
This was deemed an appropriate measure due to the fact that the group has generated little revenue to date the groups transactions mainly consist of the expenditure and other setting up costs of the business.
Performance materiality is the application of materiality at the individual account or balance level to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality for the nancial statements as a whole.
Performance materiality was set at 60% 2016 60% of the above materiality levels WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  40 having considered a number of factors including the expected total value of known and likely misstatements and managements attitude toward proposed adjustments.
The materiality for the audit of the WideCells Group PLC individual nancial statements was set at 67500 2016 15000.
In both years materiality for the company was capped at 75% of group materiality.
Performance materiality was set at 60% of materiality at 40500 2016 9000.
For signicant overseas components we set materiality at 54000 2016 12000 which is 60% of group materiality.
We reported to the Audit Committee any corrected and uncorrected misstatements exceeding 3600 2016 600 in addition to other audit adjustments that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Our assessment of audit risk and group materiality determines the audit scope for each component within the group and allows us to form an opinion on the group nancial statements.
The group engagement team completed full scope audits on the following signicant components WideCells Group PLC WideCells Limited WideCells International Limited and Wideacademy Limited.
These components account for 98% of the groups revenue and 86% of the groups loss before tax.
The remainder of the group is made up of subsidiary companies based outside of the United Kingdom.
During the audit we had full access to the books and records of these companies and so the group audit team completed audit procedures on balances above performance materiality on these companies to a materiality of 54000 which is 60% of the group materiality.
OTHER INFORMATION The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the nancial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the nancial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the nancial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the nancial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the nancial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
OPINIONS ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In our opinion the part of the directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the nancial year for which the nancial statements are prepared is consistent with the nancial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identied material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company nancial statements and the part of the directors remuneration report to be Independent Auditors Report Financial Statements  41 audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specied by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement the directors are responsible for the preparation of the nancial statements and for being satised that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of nancial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the nancial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the nancial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to inuence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these nancial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the nancial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
OTHER MATTERS WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the audit committee to audit the nancial statements for the year ending 31 December 2016 and subsequent nancial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 2 years covering the years ending 31 December 2016 to 31 December 2017.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group or the parent company and we remain independent of the group and the parent company in conducting our audit.
Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the parent company and the parent companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Stuart Wood Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of BDO LLP Statutory Auditor
United Kingdom 4 June 2018 BDO LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number OC.
Financial Statements continued CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT AND STATEMENT OF OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 tel
Revenue 3 50765 25000 Administrative costs 2840228 1261719 Loss from operations 5 2789463 1236719 Finance expense 7 17264 30710 Loss before tax 2806727 1267429 Taxation 8 2126 7517 Loss for the period attributable to the owners of the parent 2808853 1274946 Other comprehensive expense  foreign exchange translation 32798 Total comprehensive loss for the year 2841651 1274946 Loss per share Basic and diluted loss per ordinary share 9 0.05 0.03 The notes on pages 47 to 66 form part of these nancial statements Financial Statements  43 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION 8 Company Number at 31 December 2017 2016
Assets
Noncurrent assets Tangible xed assets 466591 394898 Intangible xed assets 605697 394898 Current assets
27850 2887 Trade and other receivables 9551 22554 VAT recoverable 173703 59567 Cash and cash equivalents 615219 1149758 826323 1234766 Total assets 1432020 1629664
Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowing 207551 247803 207551 247803 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 935536 392331 Loans and borrowing 857709 165879 1793245 558210 Total liabilities 2000796 806013 Issued capital and reserves attributable to owners of the parent Share capital 162053 135145 Share premium 3460854 2159000 Merger reserve 185728 185728 Translation Reserve Sharebased payment reserve 331975 211513 Accumulated decit 4305132 1496279 Total equity 568776 823651 Total equity and liabilities 1432020 1629664 The nancial statements on pages 42 to 46 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 4 June 2018 and were signed on its behalf by David Bridgland
The notes on pages 47 to 66 form part of these nancial statements.
Financial Statements continued CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 tel
Cash ows from operating activities Loss for the year 2808853 1274946 Adjustments for Deprecation of tangible xed assets 113191 16143 Sharebased payment expense 120462 186626 Net Interest expense 17264 30710 Taxation expense 2126 7517 Cash ows used in operating activities before changes in working capital 2555810 1033950 Increase in stock Increase in trade and other receivables 101133 56665 Increase in trade and other payables 543205 238129 Cash used in operations 2138701 739156 Taxes paid 2126 7517 Net cash used in operating activities 2140827 746673 Investing activities Purchases of property plant and equipment 323989 205531 Sale of property plant and equipment Net cash used in investing activities 323989 180600 Financing activities Share issues 1398697 2000000 Cost of share issue 69935 239598 Interest paid 17264 11579 Issue of convertible debt 50000 274500 Issue of nance leases Proceeds from borrowings 150000 200000 Repayment of borrowings 198604 180045 Net cash generated from nancing activities 1465897 2043278 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 998919 1116005 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 1149758 33753 Eect of foreign exchange rate changes Net cash and cash equivalents at end of year 118041 1149758 The notes on pages 47 to 66 form part of these nancial statements.
Financial Statements  45 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Audited results for the year ended 31 December 2016
Share
Share
Merger
Translation payments Accumulated
At 1 January 2016 Loss for the period Foreign exchange translation Total comprehensive loss 1274946 1274946 Transactions with owners Conversion of loan capital to share capital Share exchange Share based payment charge Issue of shares on IPO 27 July 2016 Conversion of convertible loan notes Fee shares Broker warrants Costs of IPO Total contribution by and distributions to owners At 31 December 2016 The notes on pages 47 to 66 form part of these nancial statements.
Audited results for the year ended 31 December 2017
Share
Share
Merger
Translation payments Accumulated
At 1 January 2017 Loss for the period 2808853 2808853 Foreign exchange translation Total comprehensive loss Transactions with owners Share based payment charge Issue of shares on placings 28 April 2017 and 15 August 2017 Costs of Placings Total contribution by and distributions to owners At 31 December 2017 The notes on pages 47 to 66 form part of these nancial statements.
WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  46 Financial Statements continued CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY continued 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of preparation and going concern WideCells Group PLC the company is a public company the Company is a company domiciled in England.
The Company was incorporated on 24 May 2016 and this is the second set of nancial information prepared by the Company.
The principal accounting policies adopted by the Group are set out below.
The policies have been consistently applied to all the periods presented.
The Directors have prepared cashow forecasts for a period including 12 months from the date of approval of this annual report and accounts which show that the Group and the parent company will have sucient funds to continue and therefore that the going concern basis of preparation is appropriate.
First and foremost this assumes the successful completion of the current funding round of 1.80 million.
The other key assumption within these forecasts is the growth in sales of CellPlan insurance policies and of the BabyCells umbilical cord blood and tissue storage service launched this year.
Should the fundraising fail to complete or the forecast sales be below budget or delayed a further injection of working capital will be required to meet the Group and companys liabilities as they fall due.
Thus the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual nancial statements though they also acknowledge that a material uncertainty exists that may cast signicant doubt on the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern given the factors described above.
The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as endorsed by the European Union EU and those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS and are presented in  Sterling.
The consolidated nancial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis.
Changes in accounting policies New standards and interpretations not yet adopted A number of new standards amendments to standards and interpretations are not eective for 2017 and therefore have not been applied.
The eective dates shown are for periods commencing on the date quoted.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers eective 1 January 2018  EU endorsed IFRS 9 Financial Instruments eective 1 January 2018  EU endorsed IFRS 16 Leases eective 1 January 2019  EU endorsed As the Group has not yet started to generate signicant revenues the Directors are of the opinion that the introduction of IFRS15 will have no material impact on the previously reported revenue.
The Directors will continue to review the Groups revenue recognition policy of its core revenue which should commence in the coming year to ensure that this is compliant with IFRS15.
The Directors are also of the opinion that IFRS9 will have minimal impact on the Group.
IFRS16 will not aect the Group until the year ended 1 January 2019.
This will have the eect of capitalising some of the Groups leases on the Groups balance sheet and its eect has yet to be fully documented by the Directors.
Financial Statements  47 Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES continued Basis of consolidation The Group nancial statements consolidate those of the parent company and all of its subsidiaries.
The parent controls a subsidiary if it has power over the investee to signicantly direct the activities exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and the ability to use its power over the investee to aect the amount of the investors returns all subsidiaries have a reporting date of 31 December.
All transactions and balances between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation including unrealised gains and losses on transactions between Group companies.
Where unrealised losses on intraGroup asset sales are reversed on consolidation the underlying asset is also tested for impairment from a Group perspective.
Amounts reported in the nancial statements of subsidiaries have been adjusted where necessary to ensure consistency with the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
Prot or loss and other comprehensive income of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are recognised from the eective date of acquisition or up to the eective date of disposal as applicable.
The consolidated nancial statements consist of the results of the following entities Entity Summary description WideCells Group PLC Ultimate holding company WideCells International Limited Holding company of subsidiaries WideCells Limited Trading company WideCells Portugal SA Trading company WideCells Espaa SL Trading company WideAcademy Limited Trading company CellPlan Limited Holding company CellPlan International Lda Trading company
Revenue represents the fair value of the consideration received or receivable in the year net of discounts and sales taxes.
Sales income derives from the procurement and marketing of cord blood stem cell storage.
Revenue is recognised as detailed below Revenue is recognised when it is probable that the economic benets associated with a transaction will ow to the Group and the amount of revenue and associated costs can be measured reliably.
Where the work has been carried out and it is certain that the income is due appropriate adjustments are made through deferred and accrued income on a percentage of completion basis.
Deferred income comprises of income received in advance of the consideration being due and has been included within current liabilities on the basis that the revenue becomes due within 12 months from the balance sheet date.
Accrued Income Includes the value of work performed during the period and where a right to consideration has arisen which was not invoiced until after the period end.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  48 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES continued Impairment of nonnancial assets excluding inventories and deferred tax assets Other nonnancial assets are subject to impairment tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable.
Where the carrying value of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount i. higher of value in use and fair value less costs to sell the asset is written down accordingly.
Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset the impairment test is carried out on the smallest group of assets to which it belongs for which there are separately identiable cash ows its cash generating units
Goodwill is allocated on initial recognition to each of the Groups CGUs that are expected to benet from the synergies of the combination giving rise to the goodwill.
Impairment charges are included in prot or loss except to the extent they reverse gains previously recognised in other comprehensive income.
Foreign currency Transactions entered into by Group entities in a currency other than the currency of the primary economic environment in which they operate are recorded at the rates ruling when the transactions occur.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the rates ruling at the reporting date.
Exchange dierences arising on the retranslation of unsettled monetary assets and liabilities are recognised immediately in prot or loss except for foreign currency borrowings qualifying as a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation in which case exchange dierences are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the foreign exchange reserve along with the exchange dierences arising on the retranslation of the foreign operation.
On consolidation the results of overseas operations are translated into sterling at rates approximating to those ruling when the transactions took place.
All assets and liabilities of overseas operations are translated at the rate ruling at the reporting date.
Exchange dierences arising on translating the opening net assets at opening rate and the results of overseas operations at actual rate are recognised in the translation reserve.
Exchange dierences recognised in the prot or loss of Group entities on the translation of longterm monetary items forming part of the Groups net investment in the overseas operation concerned are reclassied to other comprehensive income and accumulated in the foreign exchange reserve on consolidation.
Financial assets The Group does not have any nancial assets which it would classify as fair value through prot or loss available for sale or held to maturity.
Therefore all nancial assets are classed as loans and receivables as dened below.
Loans and receivables These assets are nonderivative nancial assets with xed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers e. incorporate other types of contractual monetary asset.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as signicant nancial diculties on the part of the counterparty or default or signicant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the dierence between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash ows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables which are reported net such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
On conrmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written o against the associated provision.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the consolidated statement of nancial position.
Financial Statements  49 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES continued Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents includes cash in hand deposits held at call with banks other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and  for the purpose of the statement of cash ows  bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are shown within loans and borrowings in current liabilities on the consolidated statement of nancial position.
Equity instruments Convertible loan notes are categorised based on the substance of the contract and not their legal form.
Any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of its liabilities is treated as an equity instrument.
A nancial instrument is treated as an equity instrument only if The instrument may or will be settled in the issuers own equity instruments it is either a derivative that will be settled by the issuer exchanging a xed amount of cash or another nancial instrument for a xed number of its own equity shares or a nonderivative that includes a contractual obligation to deliver a variable number of the entitys own equity shares.
The instrument includes no contractual obligation to deliver cash or another nancial asset to another entity Financial liabilities The Group does not have any nancial liabilities that would be classied as fair value through the prot or loss.
Therefore these nancial liabilities are classied as nancial liabilities at amortised cost as dened below.
Other nancial liabilities include the following Items Borrowings are initially recognised at fair value net of any transaction costs directly attributable to the issue of the instrument.
Such interest bearing liabilities are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the eective interest rate method which ensures that any interest expense over the period to repayment is at a constant rate on the balance of the liability carried in the consolidated statement of nancial position.
Interest expense in this context includes initial transaction costs and premium payable on redemption as well as any interest or coupon payable while the liability is outstanding.
Trade payables and other shortterm monetary liabilities which are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the eective interest method.
Share capital The Groups ordinary shares are classied as equity instruments.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends to equity shareholders this is when declared by the Directors.
In the case of nal dividends this is when approved by the shareholders at the AGM.
No dividends were declared during the years to 31 December 2017.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  50 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES continued Tangible xed assets Items of plant and equipment are initially recognised at cost.
As well as the purchase price cost includes directly attributable costs.
Depreciation is provided on all other items of property plant and equipment so as to write o their carrying value over their expected useful economic lives.
It is provided at the following rates Plant and machinery  33% straight line basis Leasehold improvements  33% straight line basis Computer hardware 33% straight line basis Motor vehicles  33% straight line basis Intangible xed assets Intangible assets comprise capitalised computer software and are initially recognised at cost.
Amortisation is provided so as to write o their carrying value over their expected useful economic lives.
It is provided at the following rates Computer software  33% straight line basis Leased assets Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership of a leased asset have been transferred to the Group a nance lease the asset is treated as if it had been purchased outright.
The amount initially recognised as an asset is the lower of the fair value of the leased property and the present value of the minimum lease payments payable over the term of the lease.
The corresponding lease commitment is shown as a liability.
Lease payments are analysed between capital and interest.
The interest element is charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income over the period of the lease and is calculated so that it represents a constant proportion of the lease liability.
The capital element reduces the balance owed to the lessor.
Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership are not transferred to the Group an operating lease the total rentals payable under the lease are charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Inventories
Inventories are initially recognised at cost and subsequently at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises all costs of purchase costs of conversion and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Sharebased payments Where equity settled share options are awarded to employees the fair value of the options at the date of grant is charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income over the vesting period.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity instruments expected to vest at each reporting date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
Nonvesting conditions and market vesting conditions are factored into the fair value of the options granted.
As long as all other vesting conditions are satised a charge is made irrespective of whether the market vesting conditions are satised.
The cumulative expense is not adjusted for failure to achieve a market vesting condition or where a nonvesting condition is not satised.
Where the terms and conditions of options are modied before they vest the increase in the fair value of the options measured immediately before and after the modication is also charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income over the remaining vesting period.
Financial Statements  51 2.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND JUDGEMENTS The Group makes certain estimates and assumptions regarding the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
In the future actual experience may dier from these estimates and assumptions.
There are no estimates and assumptions that have a signicant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next nancial year.
REVENUE
Revenue in all periods principally arises from the provision of services.
In 2016 this was from the planning phase of an RandD contract with Qiginex which will run through 2017 and 2018 in the UK.
The revenues in 2017 also included the start of sales of CellPlan and INDUS product.
SEGMENT INFORMATION Operating segments are components of the entity that Engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses Of which discrete nancial information is available Whose operating results are reviewed regularly by the chief operating decision maker Until sales begin in the new operating divisions of CellPlan and Wideacademy the Group has three main operating segments all of which have the same intended sources of revenue from the WideCells division
Portugal
Spain
The Groups reportable segments are geographical business units that oer WideCells products and services into dierent market.
They are managed separately as each business is operated from a dierent location.
Measurement of operating segment prot or loss assets and liabilities The accounting policies of the operating segments are the same as those described in the summary of signicant accounting policies.
The Group evaluates performance on the basis of prot or loss from operations but excluding nonrecurring losses and the eects of sharebased payments.
Intersegment sales are priced along the same lines as sales to external customers with an appropriate discount being applied to encourage use of Group resources at a rate acceptable to local tax authorities.
This policy was applied consistently throughout the current and prior period.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  52 4.
SEGMENT INFORMATION continued UK Portugal Spain Total Sales and services provided 49501 1264  50765 Total revenue from external customers 49501 1264  50765 Total gross prot 49501 1264  50765 Segment EBITDA 2311794 352110 12368 2676272 Depreciation and amortisation 107555 5636  113191 Loss from operations 2419349 357746 12368 2789463 Finance expense 17185 80 1 17264 Tax  2126  2126 Group loss after tax 2436534 359952 12367 2808853 Total assets 1341263 82690 8067 1432020 Total liabilities 1913128 80691 6977 2000796 UK Portugal Spain Total Sales and services provided 25000  25000 Total revenue from external customers 25000  25000 Total gross prot 25000  25000 Segment EBITDA 1083290 112668 24618 1220576 Depreciation and amortisation 10389 2436 3318 16143 Loss from operations 1093679 115104 27936 1236719 Finance expense 19139 10297 1274 30710 Tax  7517  7517 Group loss after tax 1112818 132918 29210 1274946 Total assets 1546017 71608 12039 1629664 Total liabilities 726031 66979 13003 806013 Financial Statements  53 5.
LOSS FROM OPERATIONS 2017 2016 The loss for the period is stated after chargingcrediting Depreciation 113191 16143 Auditors Remuneration  Group 30000 24500 Auditors Remuneration  Company 10000 10000 Operating lease  Property 87069 33320 Sharebased payments 120462 186626 Foreign exchange gains 54881 1191 Expenses by nature Supplies and external services 1568974 616594 Other expenses 46938 23891 Sta cost see note 6 1205001 605091 Total operating expenses 2727037 1245576 Amortisation and depreciation of assets 113191 16143 2840228 1261719 STAFF COSTS 2017 2016 Sta costs including directors comprise Wages and salaries 900811 346092 Dened contribution pension cost 44427 18330 Benets 25149 4049 Social security contributions and similar taxes 114152 49994 Sharebased payment expense see note 21 120462 186626 1205001 605tel Employee numbers The average number of sta employed by the Group during the nancial year amounted to General and administration Key management personnel compensation Key management personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities and are the directors of the company listed on pages 2022.
Remuneration of the directors and highest paid Director is shown on the Remuneration Report on page 23.
In addition to the amounts disclosed in the Remuneration Report the full sharebased payment expense of 120462 2016 186626 relates to key management personnel.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  54 7.
FINANCE INCOME AND EXPENSE 2017 2016 Finance expense Bank loans and overdrafts 17264 11579 Convertible loan notes  19131 Total nance expense 17264 30710
2017 2016 Current tax Overseas taxation payable on prots for the year 2126 7517 Total current tax and tax credit 2126 7517 The reason for the dierence between the actual tax charge for the year and the standard rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom applied to losses for the year are as follows 2017 2016 Loss before tax 2806727 1267429 Tax using the Companys domestic tax rate of 19.25% 2016 20% 540295 253486 Unrelieved tax losses and other deductions arising in the period 463295 253486 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 77000 Local overseas taxes 2126 7517 Total tax charged in the income statement 2126 7517 The deferred taxation of 534212 2016 270719 attributable to losses arising in the year and for losses carried forward has not been recognised in these accounts due to the uncertainty over whether this will be recovered.
LOSS PER SHARE 2017 2016
Loss used in EPS 2808853 1274946
Weighted average number of ordinary shares used in basic EPS 59993454 39769715 Eects of Employee share options 3485518 2200000 Conversion share warrants see note 22 205479 2721757 Broker share warrants see note 22 727272 727272 Weighted average number of shares used in diluted EPS 64411723 45418744 Basic and diluted loss per share 0.05 0.03 Financial Statements  55 10.
TANGIBLE AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS Plant and
Computer
Motor
Tangible
Computer
Intangible
Machinery Improvements
Vehicles
Asset Total
Asset Total
At 1 January 2016
Disposals
Eect of FX At 31 December 2016 At 1 January 2017
Disposals
Eect of FX At 31 December 2017 Accumulated depreciation At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year
Eect of FX At 31 December 2016 At 1 January 2017 Charge for the year
Eect of FX At 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 At 31 December 2016 At 1 January 2016 The net book value of assets held under nance leases is 242434 2016 187008 and had 64308 depreciation charged as at 31 December 2017.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  56 11.
SUBSIDIARIES
The principal subsidiaries of WideCells Group PLC all of which are 100% owned and have been included in these nancial statements in accordance with the details set out in the basis of preparation and basis of consolidation note 1 are as follows Name Country of Nature of Business Notes Registered Oce
Widecells International Ltd United Kingdom Holding Company 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT WideCells Ltd United Kingdom Trading Company a 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT WideCells Portugal SA Portugal Trading Company a Rua Da Casa Branca 97 Coimbra 3030109
WideCells Espaa SL Spain Trading Company a Calle Castillo de Fuensaldaa 4 28232 Las Rozas Madrid WideAcademy Ltd United Kingdom Trading Company a 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT CellPlan Ltd United Kingdom Holding Company a 4250 Hersham Road WaltonOnThames KT12 1RZ CellPlan International Lda Portugal Trading Company b Edcio Tower Plaza Rotunda Eng Edgar Cardoso n 23 11 F 4400676 Vila Nova de Gaia Portugal Notes a 100% owned by WideCells International Ltd b 100% owned by CellPlan Ltd
2017 2016 Raw materials and consumables 27850 2887 TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLE 2017 2016 Trade receivables 2029 126 Other receivables 7522 22428 VAT recoverable 173703 59567 Total trade and other receivables 183254 82121 Trade and other receivables do not contain any impaired assets.
The Group does not hold any collateral as security and the maximum exposure to credit risk at the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position date is the fair value of each class of receivable.
Book values approximate to fair value at 31 December 2017 and 2016.
No Trade receivables are overdue but not impaired.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS 2017 2016 Cash at bank available on demand 615219 1149758 Bank overdraft 497178 Total cash and cash equivalents 118041 1149758 Financial Statements  57 15.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2017 2016
Trade payables 634310 172060 Other payables 234713 144678 Total nancial liabilities excluding loans and borrowings classied as nancial liabilities measured at amortised cost 869023 316738 Tax and social security 66434 75195 Deferred revenue 79 398 Total trade and other payables 935536 392331 Book values approximate to fair values at 31 December 2017.
LOANS AND BORROWING 2017 2016
Bank loans 66667 133333 Finance leases 140884 114470 Total 207551 247803
Bank overdraft 497178 Bank loans 72210 66667 Other loans 25000 Finance leases 113321 72538 Directors loans 100000 26674 Convertible loans 50000 Total 857709 165879 Book values approximate to fair value at 31 December 2017 and 2016.
The bank loans are repayable over 3 years at a xed interest rate of 3.98% and secured over the assets held by the group.
The convertible loans will converted to equity at the share placing in June 2018.
Finance leases are secured over the relevant assets.
Directors loans are unsecured and interest free.
The highest balance on the directors loans in the year was 100000 2016 26674.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  58 17.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  RISK MANAGEMENT
The Group is exposed through its operations to the following nancial risks Credit risk.
Market risk.
Liquidity risk.
In common with all other businesses the Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of nancial instruments.
This note describes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Principal nancial instruments The principal nancial instruments used by the Group from which nancial instrument risk arises are as follows Trade receivables.
Cash and cash equivalents.
Trade and other payables.
Loans and borrowings.
A summary of the nancial instruments held by category is provided below Financial assets  loans and receivables Financial liabilities  amortised cost 2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 615219 1149758 Trade receivables 2029 126 Total nancial assets 617248 1149tel Trade and other payables 869023 316738 Loans and borrowings 1065260 413682 Total liabilities  amortised cost 1934283 730420 Financial Statements  59 17.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  RISK MANAGEMENT continued General objectives policies and processes The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Groups risk management objectives and policies and whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them it has delegated the authority for designing and operating processes that ensure the eective implementation of the objectives and policies to the Groups Management Committee.
The Board receives quarterly reports from the Management Committee.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly aecting the Groups competitiveness and exibility.
Further details regarding these policies are set out below Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of nancial loss to the Group if a development partner or a counterparty to a nancial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Group is mainly exposed to credit risk from credit sales.
It is group policy implemented locally to assess the credit risk of new customers before entering into contracts.
Credit risk also arises from cash and cash equivalents and deposits with banks and nancial institutions.
For banks and nancial institutions only independently rated parties with high credit status are accepted.
The Group does not enter into derivatives to manage credit risk.
Quantitative disclosures of the credit risk exposure in relation to nancial assets are set out below.
Further disclosures regarding trade and other receivables which are neither past due nor impaired are provided in note 13.
The total exposure to credit risk of the Group is equal to the total value of the nancial assets held at each year end as noted above.
Cash in bank 2017 2016 Cash held at HSBC  SandP Rating AA 610707 1131301 Cash held at Santander  SandP Rating A 4512 18457 Total nancial assets 615219 1149758 The Group is continually reviewing the credit risk associated with holding money on deposit in banks and seeks to mitigate this risk by holding deposits with banks with high credit status.
Market risk Cash ow interest rate risk The Group is exposed to cash ow interest rate risk from short term borrowings at variable rate.
It is group policy that all borrowings are approved by the Directors to ensure that it is not taking on signicant risk related to possible movements in interest rates.
Although the Board accepts that this policy neither protects the Group entirely from the risk of paying rates in excess of current market rates nor eliminates fully cash ow risk associated with variability in interest payments it considers that it achieves appropriate balance of exposure to these risks.
During the period the Groups borrowings at variable rate were denominated in sterling.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  60 17.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  RISK MANAGEMENT continued Foreign exchange risk Foreign exchange risk arises because the Group has operations in Portugal and Spain whose functional currency is not the same as the functional currency of the Group.
The Groups net assets arising from such overseas operations are exposed to currency risk resulting in gains or losses on retranslation into sterling.
Given the levels of materiality the Group does not hedge its net investments in overseas operations as the cost of doing so is disproportionate to the exposure.
Foreign exchange risk also arises when individual Group entities enter into transactions denominated in a currency other than their functional currency the Group has several customers and a regular supplier who are invoiced in currency other than sterling.
These transactions are not hedged because the cost of doing so is disproportionate to the risk.
As of 31 December 2017 and 2016 the Groups exposure to foreign exchange risk was not material.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter diculty in meeting its nancial obligations as they fall due.
It is the Groups aim to settle balances as they become due however following the anticipated placing in June 2018 it is agreeing with creditors an extended payment plan to manage short term liquidity risk.
The Groups nancial position following the placing in June 2018 will be such that the Board does not consider there to be a short term liquidity risk however the Board will continue to monitor long term cash projections in light of the development plan and will consider raising funds as required to fund long term development projects.
Development expenditure can be curtailed as necessary to preserve liquidity.
The following table sets out the contractual maturities representing undiscounted contractual cashows of nancial liabilities Between 3 Between Between Up to and 12 1 and 2 2 and 5 Over 5 3 months months years years years Trade and other payables 869023 Bank loans and overdrafts 514890 53137 70749 Finance leases 35237 88167 115359 37223 Directors and other loans 114037 10963 Convertible loans  54000 Total 1533187 206267 186108 37223 Between 3 Between Between Up to and 12 1 and 2 2 and 5 Over 5 3 months months years years years Trade and other payables 316738 Bank loans 17712 53137 70749 70749 Finance leases 31360 48169 64226 64226 Directors loans 26674 Total 392484 101306 134975 134975 Financial Statements  61 17.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS  RISK MANAGEMENT continued More details in regard to the line items are included in the respective notes Trade and other payables  note 15 Loans and borrowing note 16 Capital risk management The Group monitors capital which comprises all components of equity i. decit.
The Groups objectives when maintaining capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern and continue to provide returns for shareholders benets for other stakeholders to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurably with the level of risk.
At present the Directors do not intend to pay dividends but will reconsider the position in future periods as the Group becomes protable.
SHARE CAPITAL 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 Number  Number Authorised allotted and fully paid  classied as equity Ordinary shares of 0.0025 each 64821010 162053 54058061 135145 Total 64821010 162053 54058061 135145 In accordance with CA 2006 the Company has no limit on its authorised share capital.
On 28 April 2017 the Company issued 5405806 ordinary shares at a price of 0.12 per ordinary share.
On 18 August 2017 the Company issued 5357143 ordinary shares at a price of 0.14 per ordinary share.
Pursuant to a resolution passed on 16 June 2016 the Company resolved that The Directors be generally authorised in accordance with the Articles to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot Ordinary Shares or grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into Ordinary Shares up to a maximum aggregate nominal value of 500000 provided always that such authority conferred on the directors shall unless previously renewed varied or revoked prior to that time expire at the conclusion of the Companys next annual general meeting or on the date falling 18 months after the date of the passing of the resolution whichever is the sooner.
The Company may make an oer or agreement which would or might require Ordinary Shares to be allotted pursuant to the resolution referred to in paragraph 3.6.1 of the listing prospectus before the expiry of their authority to do so but allot the Ordinary Shares pursuant to any such oer or agreement after that expiry date Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  62 18.
SHARE CAPITAL continued all preemption rights in the Articles be waived i for the purposes of or in connection with the Placing the issue of the Conversion Shares and the issue of the Warrant Shares ii generally for such purposes as the directors may think t including the allotment of equity securities for cash up to a maximum aggregate amount of 40543.54 and iii for the purposes of the issue of securities oered by way of a rights issue open oer or otherwise to existing holders of Ordinary Shares but subject to the directors having a right to make such exclusions or other arrangements in connection with the oering as they deem necessary or expedient A to deal with equity securities representing fractional entitlements and B to deal with legal or practical problems in the laws of any territory or the requirements of any regulatory body on the basis that the authorities conferred under the resolution referred to in paragraph 3.6.2 of the listing prospectus shall unless previously renewed varied or revoked prior to that time expire at the conclusion of the Companys next annual general meeting or on the date falling 18 months after the date of the passing of the resolution whichever is the sooner.
The Company may make an oer or agreement which would or might require equity securities to be issued before the expiry of its power to do so but allot the equity securities pursuant to any such oer or agreement after that expiry date.
The provisions of section  CA 2006 to the extent not disapplied pursuant to sections 570571 CA 2006 confer on shareholders certain rights of preemption in respect of the allotment of equity securities as dened in section 560 CA 2006 which are or are to be Rights attaching to the shares Shares classied as equity The holders of ordinary shares have full voting dividend and capital distribution rights.
They do not confer any rights of redemption.
On or following the occurrence of a change of control the receipts from the acquirer shall be applied to the holders of the ordinary shares pro rata to their respective holdings.
Ordinary shares were recorded as equity.
RESERVES
The following describes the nature and purpose of each reserve within equity Reserve Description and purpose Share premium Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value.
Merger reserve Amount arising on acquisition of noncontrolling interest and share for share exchange Translation reserve Reserve related to translation of foreign currency assets and liabilities Sharebased payment reserve Reserve related to share options Accumulated decit All other net gains and losses and transactions with owners e. dividends not recognised elsewhere.
RETIREMENT BENEFITS The Group operates a dened contribution pension scheme for the benet of its employees.
The assets of the scheme are to be administered by trustees in funds independent from those of the Group.
The pension costs charged for each year are 10% for directors and 5% for sta and included in the sta costs note 6.
Financial Statements  63 21.
SHAREBASED PAYMENT Share Options The Group has issued options over ordinary shares under the WideCells Group Limited 2015 approved Enterprise Incentive scheme.
Exercise of an option is subject to continued employment.
Under the terms of his option grant Peter Hollands has been granted options to subscribe for a total of 1600000 Ordinary Shares at an exercise price of 0.0025 per Ordinary Share.
His options vest in three tranches over 533333 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2015 533333 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2016 and 533334 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2017.
David
Bridgland has been granted options to acquire a total of 600000 Ordinary Shares at an exercise price of 0.0025 per Ordinary Share.
His options vest in three tranches over 200000 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2015 200000 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2016 and 200000 Ordinary Shares on 6 October 2017.
David Bridgland has been further awarded 600000 Ordinary Shares at an exercise price of 0.11 per Ordinary Share these options vest in three tranches 200000 Ordinary Shares on 24 January 2017 200000 Ordinary Shares on 24 January 2018 and 200000 Ordinary Shares on 24 January 2019.
Marilyn Orcharton has been granted options to subscribe for 270290 Ordinary Shares at an exercise price of 0.11 per Ordinary Share these options are fully vested.
Alan Greenberg has been granted options to subscribe for a total of 540580 Ordinary Shares at an exercise price of 0.14 per Ordinary Share these options vest in three tranches 180193 on 15 February 2018 180193 Ordinary Shares on 15 February 2019 and 180194 Ordinary Shares on 15 February 2020.
Weighted Number Weighted Number average average exercise exercise price price Outstanding at 1 January 0.0025 2200000 0.01 55000 Options in WideCells International  0.01 55000 Options in granted in WideCells Group PLC 0.1215 1410870 0.0025 2200000 Outstanding at 31 December 0.0490 3610870 0.0025 2200000 The BlackScholes valuation model was used setting an implied volatility of 50% interest rate of 5% and dividend yield of 1%.
Each tranche of share options was valued separately using the actual exercise price.
The Group recognised total expenses of 120462 and 186626 related to sharebased payment transactions in 2017 and 2016 respectively.
Warrants
In 2016 the company issued 727272 Broker warrants that allowed for the conversion of these warrants into ordinary shares in the company at any time within two years of the date of the placing at the placing price of 0.11.
Given the early stage of the companys development and the limited active market in its shares the Directors considered that the IPO placing price at 0.11 represented the most recent reliable benchmark of sharewarrant valuation.
Using the BlackScholes valuation model and setting an implied volatility of 50% interest rate of 5% and dividend yield of 1% the warrants were valued at 24887.
As this was considered to be a cost related to the IPO the 24887 was charged to the share premium account rather than the prot and loss account in 2016.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  64 22.
LEASES
Finance Lease The Group is leasing the more expensive pieces of laboratory equipment for the stem cell processing and storage facility in
These nance leases are over 3 years and the future payments are as follows
Not later than one year 123404 10083 113321 Between one year and ve years 152582 11698 140884 Later than ve years 275986 21781 254205 Current liabilities  113321 Noncurrent liabilities  140884
Not later than one year 79529 6991 72538 Between one year and ve years 128452 13982 114470 Later than ve years 207981 20973 187008 Current liabilities  72538 Noncurrent liabilities  114470 Operating leases The Group had commitments under noncancellable operating leases as set out below.
Property Equipment Property Equipment Not later than one year 82882 587 73119 519 Later than one year and not later than ve years 41261 587 139432 1038 Later than ve years 124143 1174 212551 1557 Financial Statements  65 23.
CAPITAL COMMITMENTS The Group had no capital commitments at 31 December 2017 and 31 December 2016.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Details of Directors remuneration are given on page 28 and in note 6.
Details of Directors loans are in note 16.
Vivian Andrade Joo Andrades wife received 2655 of professional fees during 2017 for providing the services of Quality Manager to WideCells Portugal SA.
No amounts were due to Vivian Andrade at the year end.
Luis Andrade Joo Andrades brother received 6049 of professional fees during 2017 for providing the services of Group IT Manager to WideCells Group PLC.
No amounts were due to Luis Andrade at the year end.
There are no other related party transactions.
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES The Group had no contingent liabilities at 31 December 2017 or 31 December 2016.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS Postperiod end the Company has received commitments in respect of approximately 1.47 million via a placing and with a live market bookbuild that is set to raise another 0.55 million the Company will be allowed to focus on growing its three core divisions.
ULTIMATE CONTROLLING PARTY The Directors do not consider that there is an ultimate controlling party.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  66
2017 2016 Noncurrent assets Fixed assets 42477 16186
76000 76000 118477 92186 Current assets Trade and other receivables 1696772 1807265 1696772 1807265 Total assets 1815249 1899451
Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowing 113321 114470 113321 114470 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 833805 248922 Bank debt and commercial loans Directors loans Loans and borrowing 140884 72538 1099689 321460 Total liabilities 1213010 435930 Net assets 602239 1463521 Issued capital and reserves attributable to owners of the parent company Share capital 162053 135145 Share premium account 3460854 2159000 Sharebased payment reserve 331975 211513 Prot and loss account 3352643 1042137 Total equity attributable to owners of the parent company 602239 1463521 The loss attributable to the company in the year was 2310506 2016 1042137.
The nancial statements on pages 67 to 68 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 4 June 2018 and were signed on its behalf by David Bridgland
The notes on pages 69 to 75 form part of these nancial statements.
Financial Statements  67 Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 WIDECELLS GROUP PLC  COMPANY BALANCE SHEET 8 Company Number  Sharebased Share Share payments Accumulated Total capital premium reserve decit equity At 24 May 2016 Loss for the year   1042137 1042137 Total comprehensive loss   1042137 1042137 Acquisition of WideCells International Limited 76000   76000 Share based payment charge  186626  186626 Issue of shares on IPO  27 July 2016 45454 1954546  2000000 Conversion of convertible loan notes 13609 465421  479030 Fee shares 82 3518  3600 Broker warrants  24887 24887 Costs of IPO  239598  239598 Total contribution by and distributions to owners 135145 2159000 211513 1042137 1463521 At 31 December 2016 135145 2159000 211513 1042137 1463521
Share Share payments Accumulated Total capital premium reserve decit equity At 1 January 2017 135145 2159000 211513 1042137 1463521 Loss for the period   2310506 2310506 Total comprehensive loss   2310506 2310506 Transactions with owners Share based payment charge  120462  120462 Issue of shares on placings 28 April 2017 and 15 August 2017 26908 1371789  1398697 Costs of placings  69935  69935 Total contribution by and distributions to owners 26908 1301854 120462  1449224 At 31 December 2017 162053 3460854 331975 3352643 602239 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  68 WIDECELLS GROUP PLC  STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY ACCOUNTING POLICIES Basis of preparation WideCells Group PLC is a public company the Company domiciled in England.
The nature of the Companys operation is a holding company.
The separate nancial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
They have been prepared under the historical cost convention and in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 102 FRS102 issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
In preparing the separate nancial statements of the parent company advantage has been taken of the following disclosure exemptions available in FRS 102 No cash ow statement has been presented for the parent company Disclosures in respect of the parent companys nancial instruments and sharebased payment arrangements have not been presented as equivalent disclosures have been provided in respect of the group as a whole and No disclosure has been given for the aggregate remuneration of the key management personnel of the parent company as their remuneration is included in the totals for the Group as a whole.
The principal accounting policies are summarised below.
Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are carried at cost less any provision for losses arising on impairment In relation to acquisitions where advantage can be taken of the merger relief rules shares issued as consideration for acquisitions are accounted for at nominal value.
Taxation
Current tax including UK corporation tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
A deferred tax asset in respect of unutilised tax losses has not been recognised on the basis that the future economic benet was not certain.
Going concern Accounting standards require the Directors to consider the appropriateness of the going concern basis when preparing the nancial statements.
The Directors have prepared cashow forecasts for a period including 12 months from the date of approval of this annual report and accounts which show that the Company will have sucient funds to continue and therefore that the going concern basis of preparation is appropriate.
First and foremost this assumes the successful completion of the current funding of 1.80 million.
The other key assumption within these forecasts is the growth in sales of CellPlan insurance policies and of the BabyCells umbilical cord blood and tissue storage service launched this year.
Should the fundraising fail to complete or the forecast sales be below budget or delayed a further injection of working capital will be required to meet the Companys liabilities as they fall due.
Thus the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual nancial statements though they also acknowledge that a material uncertainty exists that may cast signicant doubt on the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern given the factors described above.
Financial Statements  69 Notes to the Financial Statements for the year ended 31 December 2017 1.
ACCOUNTING POLICIES continued Property plant and equipment Items of plant and equipment are initially recognised at cost.
As well as the purchase price cost includes directly attributable costs.
Depreciation is provided on all other items of property plant and equipment so as to write o their carrying value over their expected useful economic lives.
It is provided at the following rates Computer hardware and software  33% straight line basis Foreign currency Assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rates of exchange ruling at the Balance Sheet date.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of transaction.
Exchange dierences are taken into account in arriving at the operating result.
Leasing
Leases are classied as nance leases wherever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classied as operating leases.
Assets held under nance leases are recognised as assets of the Company at their fair value or if lower at the present value of the minimum lease payments each determined at the inception of the lease.
The corresponding liability to the lessor is included in the balance sheet as a nance lease obligation.
Lease payments are apportioned between nance charges and reduction of the lease obligation so as to achieve a constant rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Retirement benet costs Payments to dened contribution retirement benet plans are charged as an expense as they fall due.
Sharebased payments Where equity settled share options are awarded to employees the fair value of the options at the date of grant is charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income over the vesting period.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are taken into account by adjusting the number of equity instruments expected to vest at each reporting date so that ultimately the cumulative amount recognised over the vesting period is based on the number of options that eventually vest.
Nonvesting conditions and market vesting conditions are factored into the fair value of the options granted.
As long as all other vesting conditions are satised a charge is made irrespective of whether the market vesting conditions are satised.
The cumulative expense is not adjusted for failure to achieve a market vesting condition or where a non vesting condition is not satised.
Where the terms and conditions of options are modied before they vest the increase in the fair value of the options measured immediately before and after the modication is also charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income over the remaining vesting period.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  70 2.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND JUDGEMENTS The Company makes certain estimates and assumptions regarding the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
In the future actual experience may dier from these estimates and assumptions.
There are no estimates and assumptions that have a signicant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next nancial year.
The valuation of share options and warrants are directors estimates and details are disclosed in note 21 of the consolidated accounts.
LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS Under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present its own prot and loss account.
The loss attributable to the company in the year was 2310506 2016 1042137.
The auditors remuneration for audit services to the Company was 10000 2016 10000.
STAFF COSTS 2017 2016 Sta costs including directors comprise Wages and salaries 690733 320346 Dened contribution pension cost 42458 18330 Benets 16367 3844 Social security contributions and similar taxes 79285 42113 Sharebased payment expense 120462 186626 949305 571tel Employee numbers The average number of sta employed by the company during the nancial period amounted to General and administration .
TAXATION
2017 2016 Current tax Taxation payable on prots for the period Total current tax and tax credit The deferred taxation of 451525 2016 177146 attributable to losses arising in the year and for losses carried forward have not been recognised in these accounts due to the uncertainty over whether this will be recovered.
Financial Statements  71 5.
TAXATION continued The reason for the dierence between the actual tax charge for the period and the standard rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom applied to losses for the period are as follows 2017 2016 Loss before tax 2310506 1042037 Tax using the Companys domestic tax rate of 19.25% 444772 208407 Unrelieved tax losses and other deductions arising in the period 367772 208407 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 77000
The deferred taxation of 451525 2016 177146 attributable to losses arising in the year and for losses carried forward have not been recognised in these accounts due to the uncertainty over whether this will be recovered.
FIXED ASSETS
Equipment Total
At 1 January 2016 Additions 16659 16659
At 31 December 2016 16659 16659 At 1 January 2017 16659 16659 Additions 46031 46031
At 31 December 2017 62690 62690 Accumulated depreciation At 1 January 2016 Charge for the year 473 473
At 31 December telAt 1 January telCharge for the year 19741 19741
At 31 December 2017 20214 20214 Net book value At 31 December 2017 42477 42477 At 31 December 2016 16186 16186 At 1 January 2016 There are no assets held under nance lease.
Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  72 7.
INVESTMENTS
2017 2016 Total investments at 1 January 76000 Additions  76000 Total investments at 31 December 76000 76000 At 31 December 2017 the Company held share capital in the following subsidiaries Name Country of Nature of Business Proportion held Notes
WideCells International Limited United Kingdom Holding company 100% WideCells Limited United Kingdom Trading company 100% a WideCells Portugal SA Portugal Trading company 100% a WideCells Espaa SL Spain Trading company 100% a WideAcademy Limited United Kingdom Trading company 100% a CellPlan Limited United Kingdom Holding company 100% a CellPlan International Lda Portugal Trading company 100% b Notes a 100% owned by WideCells International Limited b 100% owned by CellPlan Limited See note 11 in to the consolidated nancial statements for the registered oce addresses.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES 2017 2016 Amounts due from group companies 1580016 1770546 Other Receivables 116756 36719 1696772 1807265 The amounts due from group companies are deemed to be recoverable.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2017 2016
Trade payables 601276 132446 Other payables 188313 57257 Total nancial liabilities excluding loans and borrowings classied as nancial liabilities measured at amortised cost 789589 189703 Tax and social security 44216 59219 Total trade and other payables 833805 248922 Book values approximate to fair values at 31 December 2017and 31 December 2016.
Financial Statements  73 10.
LOANS AND BORROWING 2017 2016
Finance leases 113321 114470 Total 113321 114470
Bank debt and commercial loans 25000 Directors loans 100000 Finance leases 140884 72538 Total 265884 72538 Book values approximate to fair values at 31 December 2017and 31 December 2016.
Directors loans are unsecured and interest free.
Finance leases are secured on the relevant assets.
SHARE CAPITALtel 2016 Number  Number Authorised allotted and fully paid Ordinary shares of 0.0025 each 64821010 162053 54058061 135145 Total 64821010 162053 54058061 135145 Details of shares issued by the Company in the year are given in note 18 to the consolidated nancial statements.
LEASES
Finance Lease The Group is leasing the more expensive pieces of laboratory equipment for the stem cell processing and storage facility in
These nance leases are over 3 years and the future payments are as follows
Not later than one year 123404 10083 113321 Between one year and ve years 152582 11698 140884 Later than ve years 275986 21781 254205 Current liabilities  113321 Noncurrent liabilities  140884 Notes to the Financial Statements continued for the year ended 31 December 2017 WideCells Group PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017  74 12.
LEASES continued Not later than one year 79529 6991 72538 Between one year and ve years 128452 13982 114470 Later than ve years 207981 20973 187008 Current liabilities  72538 Noncurrent liabilities  114470 CAPITAL COMMITMENTS The Company had no capital commitments at 31 December 2017.
CONTINGENT LIABILITIES The Company had no contingent liabilities at 31 December 2017.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS The Company has taken advantage of the exemption in s33 FRS 102 not to disclose transactions with 100% owned members of the Group headed WideCells Group PLC on the grounds that 100% of the voting rights of the Company are controlled within that Group and the Company is included in the consolidated nancial statements.
All related party transactions are disclosed under note 24 to the consolidated nancial statements.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS Postperiod end the Company has received commitments in respect of approximately 1.47 million via a placing and with a live market bookbuild that is set to raise another 0.55 million the Company will be allowed to focus on growing its three core divisions.
ULTIMATE CONTROLLING PARTY The Directors do not consider that there is an ultimate controlling party.
Financial Statements  75 Other
4 DIRECTORS Peter Presland Marilyn Orcharton Malcolm Glaister David Henriques Joo Andrade Lopes Gil Peter Hollands David Bridgland Alan Greenberg
David Bridgland REGISTERED OFFICE Core Technology Facility 46 Grafton Street
England
M13 9NT REGISTERED NUMBER
BDO LLP 3 Hardman Street
