Report for the 12 month period ending 31 December 2017 site 01 Group highlights 07 Chairmans statement
Chief Executive Officers review
Chief Financial Officers review
15 Strategic report 17 Directors report 19 Directors remuneration report 22 Corporate governance report 23 Statement of Directors responsibilities Independent auditors report to the members of Xeros Technology Group plc Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated statement of financial position Consolidated statement of cash flows Notes to the consolidated financial statements 60 Company statement of changes in equity Company statement of financial position Company statement of cash flows 63 Notes to the Company information Xeros Technology Group plc Xeros develops and commercialises polymer based technologies which radically improve the sustainability performance and economics of water intensive industries.
Group highlights Significant progress towards commercialising technology across all targeted applications under IPrich capitallight models Meaningful engagement with major industry players around the world Group income increased to 2.3m 17month 31 December 2016 2.5m.
Adjusted
EBITDA loss 28.7m 17month 31 December 2016 loss 20.7m Year end cash 25.1m 17month 31 December 2016 28.9m following 25m capital raise in December 2017 to accelerate commercialisation against specific milestones Adjusted EBITDA is defined as loss on ordinary activities before interest tax sharebased payment expense nonoperating exceptional costs depreciation and amortisation.
Cleaning Technologies High Performance Workwear Acquired Marken PPE Restoration in July 2017 and Gloves Inc. expected in 2019.
Domestic Laundry Structured discussions with number of major OEMs after launch of domestic washing machine incorporating Xeros technologies at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas in January 2018.
Hotel and Lodging Ongoing discussions with two major OEMs on testing and validation after launch of Symphony Project in April 2017  enables integration of Xeros technology in OEMbranded machines.
Expansion of Forward Channel Partner network reducing direct sales and service force.
Pipeline of opportunities in high water shortageprice countries and regions of the US.
Total commissioned and revenue generating estate of 381 machines up 80% in the year.
Tanning Technologies Successful scale trials with leading European tanneries focus on completing engineering solutions to facilitate technology incorporation in existing tannery processes.
Commercial negotiations ongoing with multiple tanneries.
Targeting first revenues in 2018.
Textile Technologies Successful lab trials in Denim finishing and Garment dyeing.
IP filing protection now permits scale trials and development with major garment manufacturers.
01 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Group highlights Were taking giant steps to change industry for the better.
Our gamechanging technology transforms many industrial and domestic processes by radically reducing their dependence on water chemicals and energy while improving performance.
02 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc OUR
03 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 XEROS
04 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc We saw the future of laundry at CES  and its amazing.
05 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 The nearwaterless washing system from Xeros is exciting and can potentially revolutionise the local tourism sector.
Saving up to 80% water and nearly 50% electricity are metrics that really resonate with South Africans who are facing rising water costs.
Charl De Beer
06 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc This has been another year of considerable progress at Xeros.
We also commenced implementation of our plan to move our Hotel and Lodging business to a lowcost model with the launch of the Symphony Project in April 2017.
Symphony Project enables OEMs to integrate Xeros technology into their own branded products and to use their existing channels for its commercialisation.
Subject to successful validation and testing we are targeting OEMs to begin this commercialisation in 2019.
At the end of the year we had a total of 381 commissioned machines earning revenue a growth of 80% during the year.
Our learning and US market presence has been instrumental in creating demand for Xeros benefits in multiple new geographies and has provided credibility for all the applications we are now looking to commercialise.
Following the contract signature with Wollsdorf Leder our Tanning Technologies team have successfully delivered many scale trials with leading European tanneries.
With the technology itself now proven focus has been on completing the engineering solutions which customers need to incorporate the technology into their process.
Our
The development of Textile Technologies which we started in mid2016 is now delivering comparable water and chemistry savings to those achieved by our other applications.
Following further scale trials we are planning to engage with major garment manufacturers and targeting to sign development agreements by the end of the year.
We have a clear commercialisation strategy predicated on generating returns on our intellectual property.
We only physically enter markets where it is imperative for us to prove out and derisk our applications ahead of licensing or selling our technology to others who are best placed to maximise their commercial potential.
Our strategy is dependent upon a robust intellectual property portfolio which at the end of March 2018 totalled 48 pending and granted patent families which represents an increase of 7 since the beginning of 2017.
In December we raised 25m before fees to accelerate the commercialisation of our application portfolio and to achieve specific commercial milestones in each of our businesses thereby giving a clear line of sight to monetisation of our intellectual property portfolio.
The Board and I view the Group as now being close to a number of major inflection points each of which has the capacity to generate significant value for our investors many of whom have been supportive since the inception of the Group in 2006.
Their loyalty combined with the continued commitment and dedication of our employees has taken us to this point.
I look forward to 2018 being a pivotal year in the development of the Group.
John Samuel
18 April 2018 John Samuel
Having now materially completed the development for the majority of our chosen applications the Group is focused on their commercialisation under IPrich capitallight business models.
After many years of groundbreaking innovation we are now in the position of being able to engage meaningfully with major industry players around the world who are best placed to market and sell our technologies into the global markets they serve.
Our applications are targeted at global scale industries the longterm viability of which are being threatened by increasing water constraints and pollution challenges.
Xeros technologies materially improve sustainability whilst simultaneously delivering performance and economic benefits.
In this respect Xeros represents a unique solution to a world already suffering from high water stress which will only increase with population growth and continued urbanisation.
During the year we continued to demonstrate and prove the benefits of Xeros technology in our Cleaning and Tanning Technology businesses.
We also established that we have the potential to create significant value with our Textile applications.
In Cleaning Technologies we established a new business unit High Performance Workwear which made a number of acquisitions in the fifteen months to April 2018 to build a platform from which to serve firefighters across the US.
The application of Xeros technology significantly reduces harmful contamination in firefighters expensive Personal Protective Equipment PPE whilst simultaneously extending its life.
The learning and knowledge from owning these businesses will create a platform that we believe will create a valuable proprietary asset that can be leveraged to bring our technology to PPE markets on a global basis.
In the domestic market we launched our new low cost domestic washing machine design the XDrum
January 2018.
We also unveiled our proprietary microparticle filtration solution the XFiltra garments.
Our objective in doing so was to start meaningful discussions with major OEMs which are now underway.
07 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Chairmans statement The Xeros machines water and power savings will provide our department with longterm savings.
I am most impressed with the customer service at Xeros they truly value their customers.
Xeros will continue to revolutionize the way we clean firefighter gear.
They are committed to the health and safety of firefighters.
Battalion Chief Frank Orefice Prince William County Department of Fire and Rescue VA 08 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc We have established that our technologies can deliver these benefits in three worldscale industries cleaning tanning and textiles.
We are now progressively commercialising applications in these sectors to generate profitable returns leveraging our intellectual property and knowhow with low capital requirements.
Mark Nichols
Chief Executive Officer
Strategic review Xeros develops polymer based technologies which radically improve the sustainability performance and economics of water intensive processes dramatically reducing water chemistry energy and effluent whilst either meeting or exceeding the conventional quality standards for the materials being processed.
We have established that our technologies can deliver these benefits in three worldscale industries cleaning tanning and textiles.
We are now progressively commercialising applications in these sectors to generate profitable returns leveraging our intellectual property and knowhow with low capital requirements.
Given the scale of the markets in which we operate our strategy is to commercialise our technology with partners who already have strong international market positions and who also demonstrate a strategic intent to deliver increased levels of sustainability.
The disruptive nature of our technology enables the creation of new high valueadded business models and revenue streams.
Where necessary we enter markets ourselves to prove out our propositions so that our prospective partners benefit from materially lower risk profiles when they join us in the commercialisation process.
In order to accelerate the adoption of our technology we have increased and aligned our resources to each of the application areas that we are pursuing with the vast majority being applied to those with nearer term profitability.
Commercialisation is in progress in our Cleaning Technologies business with Hotel and Lodging and High Performance Workwear business units generating revenue of 2.0m and 0.2m respectively.
We are targeting Tanning Technologies to deliver its first revenues in 2018 with Textile Technologies revenues in 2019 once scale trials have been completed.
Having proven the scale and the quantum of the economic improvements of many of our applications we are now organised to generate revenues where the time horizons for generating significant income from our investments are increasingly in the near term.
In December we raised 25m before fees in an oversubscribed placing to accelerate the commercialisation of our application portfolio and to achieve specific commercial milestones in each of our businesses thereby giving a clear line of sight to monetisation of our intellectual property portfolio.
The Group expects to raise further funds in 2018 for the execution of specific commercialisation strategies.
Chief Executive Officers review
09 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Operating review Cleaning Technologies High Performance Workwear Having extensively trialled our technology in the high added value Personal Protective Equipment PPE market during 2017 we entered this market with the acquisition of Marken PPE Restorations operations in Nevada in July 2017.
Turnover for the five months ended December 2017 totalled 0.2m.
This was an initial step in our aim to create a nationwide network which will enable us to serve the US firefighter market.
We have since acquired our second and third sites in Atlanta and Miami through the acquisition of the trade and assets of Gloves Inc. of the current year.
Our target is to have a total of five sites by the end of 2018 with full national coverage of the US achieved by the end of 2019.
The US firefighter PPE market is a specialist market for the cleaning inspection and repair of uniforms and is valued at approximately 330m p.
With 1.1m firefighters in the US there are 350000 professional firefighters based in approximately 8000 fire crews.
Nearly 40% of these professional firefighters are based within 100 miles of one of the top 10 major US metropolitan areas.
Each professional firefighter has on average two sets of bespoke turnout gear.
Once our network in the US is completed we believe we will create a valuable proprietary asset which can be leveraged to bring our technology to PPE markets on a global basis.
The PPE market spans many additional subsegments including petrochemicals mining military and transportation many of which are becoming increasingly aware of the adverse and potentially dangerous effects of incorrectly or insufficiently cleaned workwear.
In the transportation sector we increased the footprint of machines in France cleaning the PPE of SNCFs workers to six by the end of December 2017.
The ability of Xeros technology to significantly outperform conventional cleaning technologies coupled with major cost savings from extending the life of expensive PPE garments puts Xeros in a unique position to create high added value for our customers and our shareholders.
Domestic Laundry During 2017 we developed a new solution called the XDrum technology inside a domestic washing machine.
Similar to High Performance Workwear we have demonstrated that Xeros technology can improve cleaning results whilst simultaneously making garments look better for longer.
In so doing we have the capacity to provide consumers with washing outcomes which are better cheaper and more environmentally friendly than conventional washing machine technology.
We unveiled the XDrum
Electronics Show CES in January 2018 following which we have entered into structured discussions with a number of major OEMs with the objective of licensing our technology.
In response to the increasing amounts of microplastic pollution from synthetic fibres in fabrics and garments that are released when they are washed Xeros also unveiled its proprietary XFiltra technology at CES.
The Company expects regulatory authorities across the world to increasingly demand that OEMs place such filters in their washing machines to reduce the microplastic pollution.
Xeros XFiltra this need.
A licensing process similar to that of XDrum is being developed as a potential revenue stream.
The estimated global market size for domestic washing machines in 2015 was 119m units including 57m units sold in China.
Hotel and Lodging We entered the US market in 2013 with our own brand machines and an all requirements multiyear contract package which was sold and delivered by our own staff in combination with Forward Channel Partners.
In 2017 we initiated a plan to transition to a business model whereby major market incumbents incorporate and sell our proprietary technology in exchange for royalties.
To this end we announced Symphony Project in April 2017 and demonstrated a leading conventional branded commercial size washing machine with Xeros technology inside at the Clean Show in Las Vegas in June.
Following this demonstration we are currently working with two major OEMs on the testing and validation of Xeros technology inside their own branded machines.
The objective being to have these companies marketing selling and servicing machines incorporating Xeros technology through their own wellestablished channels.
Chief Executive Officers review continued
Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Simultaneously we have signed agreements with Forward Channel Partners in Australia UAE and South Africa who will market sell and provide the full set of services for Xeros enabled machines.
A number of additional opportunities in high water shortageprice countries are in the pipeline.
We have adopted a similar approach in the US with a high focus on metropolitan areas with acute water shortages.
This targeted approach to the US market will be with a reduced direct sales and service force and with focused Forward Channel Partners.
Having validated the value and benefits of our technology in the years since our market entry the new model to which we are migrating will enable broader market penetration of our technology but with lower capital intensity for Xeros both in operational and financial terms the savings being redeployed to commercialise our other applications.
The Information Technology solutions required to implement the new commercialisation model met major milestones during the year with the release of the XConnect portal.
The portal provides complete operational financial and sustainability information with which to manage and optimise onpremise laundries.
As part of our strategy to commercialise our technologies in China the Company joined the UK Department of International Trades mission to exhibit the countrys best advanced manufacturing and innovation companies at the International Industrial Fair in Shanghai in November 2017.
Xeros was selected to participate alongside major UK brands and technologies including Jaguar Land Rover Dyson McLaren and The Graphene Institute.
Xeros is now actively developing opportunities for the licensing of its Cleaning Technologies in China.
In October 2017 we started to implement the relocation of all our US operations excluding High Performance Workwear into a new facility in Providence Rhode Island.
It was commissioned in March 2018.
The facility which benefits from favourable tax incentives will consolidate four office and warehouse locations and result in cost savings.
Additional measures taken to increase penetration of the market included commercialising at scale our 16kg commercial washing machine to supplement our 25kg version.
The first trial units were delivered to US customers in late 2016 with 88 commissioned by the end of 2017.
Including both our 25kg and 16kg machine options the total number of machines commissioned and generating revenue grew by 169 during the year commencing 1 January 2017 to a total of 381 at the end of December 2017.
Our plan in this application is for Xeros to make a financial return on its intellectual property and knowhow with relatively low capital intensity.
Our target is that by the end of 2020 a machine incorporating Xeros technology will be commissioned every working hour with each providing a royalty to Xeros.
Tanning Technologies As of the end of March 2018 our tanning team have processed over 2300 hides in trials in the Retanning and Dyeing phases of the tanning process with multiple tanneries.
Production scale trials have proven that our technology works for all hide applications including auto and shoe leather and in the different drum types used in their production irrespective of their construction material.
As of the end of March 2018 we have designed the engineering solutions required to introduce our polymers into the tanning process manage them during the cycle and then remove them from hides before their reuse.
These developments are a significant step forward for transitioning tanneries from trials to contract and implementation.
Under proposed contracts the cost of the equipment that Xeros would supply would be reimbursed so making the business one of low capital intensity for the Group.
Our business model for this industry is one of sharing gains with customers under longterm contracts.
This has been validated by the contract signed with Wollsdorf Leder in July 2017 and in other ongoing commercial negotiations.
We await a start date for implementing our engineering solutions in Wollsdorf.
Following customer acceptance of our engineering solutions revenue will be generated.
We are currently focused on commercialising our technology in the Retanning and Dyeing stages which use large volumes of water to apply specialty chemicals.
In due course we will also move upstream to the Tanning stages of the process which typically uses proportionately more water to apply bulk chemicals.
We estimate that 300 million bovine hides are tanned per annum and we target to be applying our technology to up to 20% of this market by the end of 2022.
Textile Technologies During 2017 we ratified our mid2016 decision to include textiles applications within our commercialisation plans due to the scale of the global textiles industry and the very significant water and chemistry usage within the industry.
We have now successfully demonstrated that Xeros technology has the capacity to deliver water chemistry energy and effluent reductions which at least match performance outcomes in our other selected applications.
We are achieving these results in Denim Finishing and Garment Dyeing with reductions in chemical and water consumption of up to 70% initially in lab scale trials but now also increasingly at larger scale.
In the case of Denim Finishing we have also achieved significant reductions in cycle time.
We have the capacity to dramatically reduce water chemistry energy and effluent whilst either meeting or exceeding the conventional quality standards.
11 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Our scale trials have been conducted in our Technology Centre using adapted commercial size washing machines which are equivalent to the engineered solutions used in the industry.
We have concurrently been working on filing IP on our inventions on these applications with four applications made across both areas.
With this protection in place we anticipate moving to scale trials and development agreements with major manufacturers in the near term.
Xeros solutions in these applications offer manufacturers the resource and pollution reductions that consumers and governments are demanding.
One example being the plan for Zero Discharge of Hazardous Chemicals by 2020 which has 23 global clothing brands as signatories.
This is a sizable opportunity for Xeros with 22.7 million tonnes of natural fibres processed annually for the clothing and textiles industries a third of those in China.
Polymer Technologies During 2017 we completed the polymer developments necessary to begin commercialisation of all our present applications in Cleaning Tanning and Textiles.
In Cleaning Technologies we use the cleaning properties of nylon polymers which are supplied by our global partner BASF under a multiyear agreement through to 2021.
Polypropylene which is broadly available on a global basis is used for all our Tanning and Textiles applications.
Our polymer science team continues to work on developing Generation Three polymers which use novel surface effects with the objective of delivering further major reductions in process inputs or improvements in our Cleaning Technologies.
We are currently scaling these developments up at lab scale and in the event they are successful we anticipate these improvements being introduced within a two year timeframe.
All our novel polymer and engineering developments are underpinned by Intellectual Property and in the 15 months to the end of March 2018 we increased our pending or granted patent families by seven to a total of 48.
A number of these filings have the benefit of significantly extending the time horizon of the protection of our applications.
Outlook
With the development of our Cleaning and Tanning Technologies materially completed during 2017 Xeros is now focused on their commercialisation.
The proven sustainability performance and economic benefits of our technologies have become increasingly understood and accepted by both consumers and those who serve them.
They are attracting a number of major industry players to the table.
We look forward to reaching formal agreements in the current year.
The results from our Textiles programme are as material as those in Cleaning and Tanning.
They indicate that we have the capacity to substantially improve the longterm viability of another global industry which is currently under extreme pressure to reduce its environmental impact.
We anticipate demonstrating these technologies at scale with manufacturers in the current year.
All of the commercialisation models for our applications are IPrich and capitallight with our physical participation in the supply chain only undertaken at an early stage when there is a need to prove out and derisk our technologies for current market incumbents.
In December 2017 we raised 25m before fees from both existing and new investors to fund the business through to the realisation of significant commercial milestones by the end of 2018.
In each of our businesses we have a clear strategy to achieve commercial inflection points in 2018 which will allow future monetisation of these businesses.
With development work materially completed in 2017 and the foundations for commercialisation put in place Xeros costs will remain fixed whilst revenues increase from licensing and other low capital intensity models.
Overall the Group is trading in line with the Boards expectations.
Mark Nichols
Chief Executive Officer
18 April 2018
Chief Executive Officers review continued
Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Financial review Group earned income was generated as follows
31 December 17month period ended 31 December Machine sales 726 1540 Service income 1451 837 Consumables 13 16 Lease interest income 80 73 Total earned income 2270 2466 Group earned income was 2270000 in the year ended 31 December 2017 17month 31 December 2016 2466000.
On a normalised basis average monthly earned income is 30% higher than the previous period year ended 31 December 2017 189000 compared to 17months to 31 December 2016 145000.
Service income includes 249000 from Marken PPE since its acquisition in July 2017.
This income reflects the unit based pricing model in this business.
In the Hotel and Lodging business the point at which revenue and costs from machine sales can be recognised is dependent on the completion of a number of stages.
These include the installation of the machine commissioning of the machine acceptance of the machine by the customer completion of utility incentive formalities where applicable and then in the case of lease sales finalisation of the lease agreement.
The
Group does not recognise revenue and costs from a machine sale until all of these aspects are complete.
The number of machines installed in the period are as follows
31 December
17month period ended 31 December
Machines sold  revenue and costs taken to PandL statement 26 76 Machines commissioned and generating service revenue but machine sale revenues and costs not yet recognised 143 64 Total revenue generating machines 169 140 Machines installed but not yet commissioned 104 70 Machines installed in the period 65 210 Paul Denney Chief Financial Officer
Chief Financial Officers review
13 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 During the period the Group has focused on increasing its commissioning capacity in the Hotel and Lodging business through the use of Forward Channel Partners and this has resulted in an increase of 143 machines commissioned in 2017 17month 31 December 2016 64.
At the start of the period the Group had 104 machines installed but not yet commissioned and due to the focus on increasing commissioning capacity these machines were either commissioned or sold during the year.
Therefore the number of machines installed but not yet commissioned at the end of the year was zero and the balance reduced by 104 during the year.
As at 31 December 2017 the total revenue generating estate increased by 169 machines 17month 31 December 140 to 381 machines.
As there were 212 revenue generating machines at the start of the year this represents growth of 80% during the year.
As at 31 December 2017 contracted future revenues amount to 4.2m 31 December 2016 3.8m and average contract length is 24 months 31 December 2016 59 months.
As the Groups commercial activities have expanded this average contract period reflects normal trading terms.
Gross loss was 448000 17month 31 December 2016 gross profit 290000.
Adjusted gross loss defined as gross loss plus lease interest income was 368000 17month 31 December 2016 gross profit of 363000.
The gross loss figure includes a loss of 74000 from the Marken business since its acquisition in July 2017.
The move to a gross loss in the period was a result of an increase in consumables costs principally chemistry and machine spare parts used to support a larger customer base.
Adjusted gross profitloss and adjusted EBITDA are considered the key financial performance measures of the Group as they reflect the true nature of our continuing trading activities.
The Group has continued to invest in its RandD programme but as the Group has now completed all fundamental development the total RandD spend in the period has fallen in comparison with the prior period.
The Group spent 5.1m on RandD including staff and patent costs 17month 31 December 2016 7.6m.
This includes direct RandD expense of 1.8m 17month 31 December 2016 3.1m patent and intellectual property expense of 1.2m 17month 31 December 2016 1.7m and 2.0m of salary costs 17month 31 December 2016 This RandD spend was all expensed during the period as it represents Group expenditure on Textiles Domestic laundry development and Tanning engineering development none of which yet meet the full criteria for capitalisation of these costs in accordance with IAS 38.
When these business areas are deemed to have met the IAS 38 capitalisation criteria ongoing development costs will be capitalised.
Total administrative expenses which include the RandD expenses increased to 30.9m 17month 31 December 2016 During the period the Group began the reallocation of expenses away from the US Hotel and Lodging business and towards the new areas of High Performance Workwear and Domestic Laundry.
This was achieved through a reduction in direct headcount in the US and an increase in the use of Forward Channel Partners.
This reallocation of expenses will continue in 2018.
Administrative expenses include a foreign exchange loss of 2.2m resulting from movements in the US Dollar rate 17month 31 December 2016 gain of 3.8m and 0.4m of administrative expenses from Marken since its acquisition in July 2017.
After adjusting for Marken and the impact of foreign exchange underlying administrative expenses increased from 26.4m 17 months ending 31 December 2016 to 28.3m.
This has resulted in an adjusted EBITDA loss of 28.7m 17month 31 December 2016 loss 20.7m.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as the loss on ordinary activities before interest tax sharebased payment expense nonoperating exceptional costs depreciation and amortisation.
Nonoperating exceptional costs are the professional advisory costs related to the December 2017 fundraising.
Whilst Sterling is still weaker against the US compared to the previous reporting period which increases the reported losses in 2017 it has gradually strengthened against the US during 2017.
As we continue to fund the working capital and operating costs of the US Hotel and Lodging and Marken businesses this stronger Sterling benefits the Group.
The Group reported an operating loss of 31.3m 17month 31 December 2016 loss 22.4m.
The loss per share was 34.92p 17month 31 December 2016 loss 25.04p.
The Group expects cash utilisation to remain at current levels over the coming years as we continue to fund the current portfolio of businesses.
The increase in net cash outflow from operations to 27.1m 17month period ended 31 December 2016 26.4m reflects these activities and was in line with the Boards expectations.
The Group had existing cash resources as at 31 December 2017 of 25.1m 31 December 2016 28.9m and remains debt free.
The Group expects to raise further funds from investors in 2018.
The Group has tax losses of approximately 72.5m to offset against future taxable profits 31 December 2016 42.4m.
Paul Denney Chief Financial Officer 18 April 2018 14 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Chief Financial Officers review continued Principal activity Xeros Technology Group plc LN XSG is a platform technology company that is reinventing water intensive industrial and commercial processes by reducing water and chemistry usage with its polymer technologies.
Its patented technologies have the capacity to provide material economic operational and sustainability improvements that are unattainable with traditional processes.
The Group is currently exploiting its intellectual property in three areas Cleaning Technologies Tanning Technologies and Textile Technologies.
The Company is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
Business model A description of the Groups activities and how it seeks to add value are included in the Chairmans statement Chief
Executive Officers review and Chief Financial Officers review
Business review and results A review of the Groups performance and future prospects is included in the Chairmans statement Chief Executive Officers review and Chief Financial Officers review on pages 7 to 14.
The loss for the year attributable to equity holders was 30611000 17month period ended 31 December 2016 20239000.
The directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend 2016 nil.
Key performance indicators As the Group is in the process of development and commercialisation the directors consider the key quantitative performance indicator to be the level of cash and deposits held in the business of 25149000 31 December 2016 28934000.
The Board performs regular reviews of actual results against budget and monitors cash balances on a regular basis to ensure that the business has sufficient resources to enact its current strategy.
Certain qualitative measures such as the performance of product development initiatives are also monitored on a regular basis.
The Board will continue to review the KPIs used to assess the business as it grows.
Key risks The Board carefully considers the risks facing the Group and endeavours to minimise the impact of those risks.
The key risks are as follows Intellectual property The Groups success will depend in part on its ability to maintain adequate protection of its intellectual property covering its processes and applications.
The intellectual property on which the Groups business is based is a combination of patent applications and proprietary know how.
No assurance can be given that any pending patent applications or any future patent applications will result in granted patents that any patents will be granted on a timely basis that the scope of any patent protection will exclude competitors or provide competitive advantages to the Group that any of the Groups patents will be held valid if challenged or that third parties will not claim rights in or ownership of the patents and other proprietary rights held by the Group.
There can be no assurance that others have not developed or will not develop similar products duplicate any of the Groups products or design around any patent applications held by the Group.
Others may hold or receive patents which contain claims having a scope that covers products developed by the Group whether or not patents are issued to the Group.
In addition no assurance can be given that others will not independently develop or otherwise acquire substantially equivalent techniques or otherwise gain access to the Groups unpatented proprietary technology or disclose such technology or that the Group can ultimately protect meaningful rights to such unpatented technology.
Any claims made against the Groups intellectual property rights even without merit could be time consuming and expensive to defend and could have a materially detrimental effect on the Groups resources.
Third party intellectual property Although the Board believes that the Groups current products products in development and processes do not infringe the intellectual property rights of any third parties it is impossible to be aware of all third party intellectual property.
No assurance can be given that third parties will not in the future claim rights in or ownership of the patents and other proprietary rights from time to time held by the Group.
Research and development risk The Group is involved in complex scientific areas and new product development.
There is no guarantee that the Group will be successful in its research and product development.
Some of the Groups technology and intellectual property portfolio is at an early stage of commercial development.
The
Group may not be able to develop and exploit its technology sufficiently to enable it to develop commercial and marketable products.
Furthermore the Group may not be able to develop new applications or identify additional specific market needs that can be addressed by the Groups technology.
Risk of competing technology There is a risk that technological advances in competing technology andor the lower cost of such technology may impede the commercial exploitation of the Groups technology.
Acceptance of the Groups products The success of the Group will depend on the markets acceptance of and attribution of value to its core technology and the benefits of incorporating the same into various applications.
There can be no guarantee that this acceptance will be forthcoming that an acceptable value will be placed upon such technology or that the Groups core technology will succeed as an alternative to other applications.
15 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Strategic report Commercialisation risk The Group has and will continue to enter into arrangements with third parties in respect of the development production and commercialisation of products based on its technology.
The Groups negotiating position in agreeing terms of either joint development distribution service or supply arrangements may be affected by its size and limited cash resources relative to potential development partners with substantial cash resources and established levels of commercial success.
An inability to enter into or renew such arrangements on favourable terms if at all or disagreements between the Group and any of its potential partners could lead to delays in the Groups commercialisation strategy.
Early stage of operations Whilst the Group has made initial limited product sales it is still at an early stage of development.
There are a number of operational strategic and financial risks associated with such early stage companies.
In particular the Groups future growth and prospects will depend on its ability to develop products and services for applications which have sufficient commercial appeal to manage growth and to continue to develop operational financial and quality control systems on a timely basis whilst at the same time maintaining effective cost controls.
Any failure to develop operational financial and management information and quality control systems in line with the Groups growth could have a material adverse effect on its business financial condition and results of operations.
The Group is currently loss making and there can be no certainty that the Group will achieve increased or sustained revenues profitability or positive cash flow from its operating activities within the timeframe expected by the Board or at all.
The development of the Groups revenues is difficult to predict and there is no guarantee that it will generate any material revenues in the foreseeable future.
The Group has a limited operating history upon which its performance and prospects can be evaluated.
Competition risk Given the potentially disruptive nature of the Groups technology in relation to established markets the Group may face significant competition and negative commentary from organisations which have greater capital resources than it and or which have a product offering competitive to that of the Group to the detriment of the Group.
Supply chain risk The Group is dependent on a limited number of key suppliers in relation to the production of its polymer bead cleaning system which includes the production of the machines used in the system.
Should any such key supplier cease to deal with the Group for any reason andor materially and adversely change the terms upon which it deals with the Group difficulties may be experienced by the Group in sourcing alternative suppliers on acceptable terms.
Dependence on key executives and personnel and the ability to attract and retain appropriately qualified personnel The Groups future success is substantially dependent on the continued services and performance of its executive Directors and senior management and its ability to attract and retain suitably skilled and experienced personnel.
The Group cannot give assurances that members of the senior management team and the executive Directors will continue to remain within the Group.
Finding and hiring any such replacements could be costly and might require the Group to grant significant equity awards or other incentive compensation which could adversely impact its financial results.
Reduction in government support for environmentalfocused technologies Most states in the US offer energy incentive programs to help offset energy costs with the Federal Energy Management Programs Energy Incentive Program providing information to federal agencies about the availability of energyefficiency and renewableenergy project funding for public purpose programs on a statebystate basis.
These public purpose programs are administered by utilities state agencies or other third parties and paid for by utility ratepayers.
The Groups existing and prospective customers in the US are potentially able to benefit from attractive incentives to install Xeros washing machines as a result of these incentive programs.
In the event that the federal government reviews reduces or withdraws its energy efficiency and renewableenergy project funding the Groups ability to sign up new customers who would be able to benefit from incentives to install Xeros washing machines could be adversely affected.
Brexit
The Board expects future revenues from the commercialisation of its technology in the EU to effectively be in the form of royalties on its intellectual property.
The international patent laws that apply to the protection of intellectual property are not affected by the status of the UKs membership of the EU and therefore the Board does not view Brexit as posing a material risk to the Groups future revenues.
Foreign exchange risk Given the international nature of its business the Group is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from the normal conduct of its activities.
The Board regularly reviews this foreign exchange risk and all forward currency purchases of foreign currency are reviewed and approved within the framework of an agreed risk policy.
Future developments Future developments are described in the Chairmans
statement Chief Executive Officers review and Chief Financial
Officers review on pages 7 to 14.
On behalf of the Board Mark Nichols
Chief Executive Officer
18 April 2018 Strategic report continued Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc The Directors hereby present their annual report and audited consolidated and parent Company financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
Share capital and funding Full details of the Group and Companys share capital movements during the year are given in note 20 of the financial statements.
Directors and their interests The following directors held office during the period and up to the date of signing this report John Samuel Mark Nichols Paul Denney Julian Viggars Dr Richard Ellis Stephen Taylor appointed 13 February 2017 Directors interests in the shares of the Company including family interests are included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 19 to 21.
Directors indemnity insurance The Group has maintained insurance throughout the year for its directors and officers against the consequences of actions brought against them in relation to their duties for the Group.
Profile of the current Directors John Samuel Chairman John joined Xeros as Chairman in September 2011.
John has previously held a number of senior finance positions and was formerly the CEO of the Molnlycke Health Care Group as well as a former partner with Apax Partners LLP.
John is also the NonExecutive Chairman at Tissue Regenix Group plc and Vernacare Group Limited.
Mark Nichols Chief Executive Officer
Mark joined Xeros as Chief Executive Officer in September 2015.
Marks background is in business development finance and operations with global enterprises including Total Laing ORourke and BOC.
During his career he has lived and worked in the US Asia and Europe.
Prior to joining Xeros Mark led a number of technology startups in the cleantech arena.
Paul Denney Chief Financial Officer and Company Secretary Paul joined Xeros as Chief Financial Officer in October 2016.
He established his career in financial management with USbased IT outsourcing business Electronic Data Systems Inc.
Latin America.
His two most significant recent roles were within high growth environments at Experian plc and at Callcredit Information Group.
Paul is a qualified accountant and has an MBA from the London Business School.
Julian Viggars NonExecutive Director Julian was appointed to the Xeros Board in June 2009.
Julian is Head of Technology Investment at Enterprise Ventures which is an investor in Xeros.
He was previously a Director of BioProjects International plc an AIMtraded early stage technology fund and an Associate Partner with accountancy firm NCL Smith and Williamson in London.
Richard Ellis NonExecutive Director Richard joined the Board in October 2014.
Richard was the global head of Research and Development for Reckitt Benckiser and prior to that held positions with Unilever.
He has experience of both the consumer and industrial cleaning markets and has worked in the UK Netherlands USA and
He has a BSc and PhD in Chemistry from the University of Manchester.
Stephen Taylor NonExecutive Director Stephen joined the Board in February 2017.
He is currently the Chief Marketing Officer for PayPal Europe and has over 20 years of experience working in brand development and marketing in the FMCG sector.
He was previously the Chief Marketing Officer Europe for Samsung Electronic Appliances.
Prior to this he held a number of commercial and business development roles within Procter and Gamble and Findus.
17 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Directors report Substantial shareholders As at 29 March 2018 shareholders holding more than 3% of the share capital of Xeros Technology Group plc were Name of shareholder Number of shares % of voting rights Woodford Investment Management LLP 25085961 25.3 Invesco Asset Management Limited 23583013 23.8 IP Group plc 16864042 17.0 Entrepreneurs Fund LP 7255774 7.3 Baillie Gifford and Co 4680870 4.7 Held through IP2IPO Limited IP Assist Services Limited formerly Techtran Group Limited IP Venture Fund and Parkwalk Advisors Funds.
Employment policies The Group supports employment of disabled people where possible through recruitment by retention of those who become disabled and generally through training career development and promotion.
The Group is committed to keeping employees as fully informed as possible with regard to the Groups performance and prospects and seeks their views wherever possible on matters which affect them as employees.
Statement as to disclosure of information to the auditor The Directors who were in office on the date of approval of these financial statements have confirmed that as far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the auditor is unaware.
Each of the Directors have confirmed that they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that it has been communicated to the auditor.
Auditor
The Board will put KPMG LLP forward to be reappointed as auditor by the shareholders and a resolution concerning their appointment will be put to the forthcoming AGM of the Company.
On behalf of the Board Mark Nichols
Chief Executive Officer
18 April 2018 Unit 2 Evolution Advanced Manufacturing Park Whittle Way Catcliffe
S60 5BL 18 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Directors report continued It is the Companys policy that Executive Directors should have contracts with an indefinite term providing for a maximum of six months notice.
In the event of early termination the Directors contracts provide for compensation up to a maximum of basic salary for the notice period.
Nonexecutive Directors are employed on letters of appointment which may be terminated on not less than one months notice.
Companies with securities listed on AIM do not need to comply with the UKLA Listing Rules.
The Remuneration Committee is however committed to maintaining high standards of corporate governance and disclosure and has applied the guidelines as far as practical given the current size and development of the Company.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee consists of John Samuel as Chairman Julian Viggars Richard Ellis and Stephen Taylor.
The Remuneration Committee will review and make recommendations in respect of the Directors remuneration and benefits packages including share options and the terms of their appointment.
The Remuneration Committee will also make recommendations to the Board concerning the allocation of share options to employees under the share incentive schemes.
The Remuneration Committee will meet at least once a year.
The main elements of the remuneration packages for Executive Directors and senior management are Basic annual salary including Directors fees The base salary is reviewed annually from the beginning of each calendar year.
The review process is undertaken by the Remuneration Committee and takes into account several factors including the current position and development of the Group individual contribution and market salaries for comparable organisations.
Discretionary annual bonus and Deferred Annual Bonus Plan All Executive Directors and senior managers are eligible for a discretionary annual bonus which is paid in accordance with a bonus scheme developed by the Remuneration Committee.
This takes into account individual contribution business performance and commercial progress along with financial results.
The Group has a Deferred Annual Bonus plan the DAB
Under the terms of the DAB Plan directors and senior managers will be given the opportunity to defer up to 50% of any gross cash annual bonus in exchange for a nominal cost share option over ordinary shares in the Company the Deferred Award which can be exercised after 3 years or earlier if the participant ceases employment.
The number of ordinary shares comprising the Deferred Award i. day immediately prior to the date of grant of the award.
By participating in the DAB Plan directors and senior managers will be entitled to receive a matching award at no additional cost the Matching Award.
The Matching Award will also be a nominal cost option over ordinary shares in the Company.
The number of ordinary shares comprising the Matching Award will be equivalent to two times the number of ordinary shares received in the Deferred Award.
Participants will not be entitled to receive the Matching Award until the vesting date is reached which is three years from the date of grant of the award.
The vesting of a Matching Award will be subject to performance conditions which will be determined by the Remuneration Committee.
The first awards under the DAB Plan took place early in 2015 following confirmation of bonuses for the calendar year 2014 and further awards were made in early 2016 following confirmation of bonuses for the calendar year 2015 and in early 2017 following confirmation of bonuses for the calendar year 2016.
Share incentive schemes The Group operates share option plans under which certain directors and senior management have been granted options to subscribe for ordinary shares.
All options are equity settled.
The options are subject to service and performance conditions have an exercise price of between 0.15 pence and 305.00 pence and the vesting period is generally 13 years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of 10 years from the date of grant the options expire.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to repurchase or settle the options in cash.
Remuneration policy for NonExecutive Directors Remuneration for NonExecutive Directors is set by the Chairman and the Executive Members of the Board.
NonExecutives do not participate in bonus schemes.
19 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration The remuneration of the main Board Directors of Xeros Technology Group plc who served from 1 January 2017 or date of appointment if later to 31 December 2017 or date of resignation if earlier was
Bonus payments
Total
Year ended 31 December
17 months ended 31 December John Samuel 62   62 87 Mark Nichols notes 1 and 8 Paul Denney notes 2 and 8 Dr Steve Jenkins notes 3 and 8     100 Julian Viggars 30   30 28 Dr Maciek Drozdz note 4     4 Dr Richard Ellis 30   30 35 Chris Hanson notes 5 and 8     307 Bill Westwater note 6     135 Stephen Taylor note 7 26   26 Total 209 Note 1 Mark Nichols was appointed as a director on 14 September 2015.
Note 2 Paul Denney was appointed as a director on 3 October 2016.
Note 3 Dr Steve Jenkins resigned as a director on 26 January 2016.
His remuneration was paid through the Companys subsidiary Xeros Limited.
Note 4 Dr Maciek Drozdz resigned as a director on 11 January 2016.
Note 5 Chris Hanson resigned as a director on 3 October 2016.
Note 6 Bill Westwater resigned as a director on 15 September 2015.
His remuneration was paid through the Companys subsidiary Xeros Limited.
Note 7 Stephen Taylor was appointed as a director on 13 February 2017.
Note 8 In addition to the remuneration above certain directors hold employee share scheme interests in the Company.
Fair value sharebased payment charges recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income attributable to these directors are Mark Nichols 397286 2016 715519 Paul Denney 214426 2016 nil Chris Hanson nil 2016 55163 Dr Steve Jenkins nil 2016 1499.
Directors shareholdings The interests of the Directors holding office at 31 December 2017 in the shares of the Company including family interests were Ordinary shares of 0.15p each
John Samuel 1477188 1.5 Mark Nichols Paul Denney Julian Viggars Stephen Taylor Dr Richard Ellis Directors remuneration report continued Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Directors interests in share options Directors interests in share options for directors who held office at any point during the period granted under either the Xeros Technology Group plc Enterprise Management Incentive Share Option Scheme or the Xeros Technology Group plc Unapproved Share Option Scheme to acquire ordinary shares of 0.15 pence each in the Company at 31 December 2017 were
1 January
Exercised during the period
At
31 December
John Samuel note 1 81300    81300 0.15p Mark Nichols note 2 1250000    1250000 225.0p Mark Nichols note 3 34188 14283   48471 0.15p Mark Nichols note 4  250000   250000 210.0p Paul Denney note 4  500000   500000 210.0p Note 1 There were employment period and performance conditions in relation to the 81300 options granted on 25 March 2014 which allowed for vesting in three equal proportions on or after the Companys share price reaching 184.5 pence per share 246 pence per share and 307.5 pence per share.
As at the 31 July 2015 the performance conditions had been met.
Note 2 There were employment conditions in relation to 1000000 options granted on 12 November 2015 which allowed for vesting in three annual instalments between 14 September 2016 and 14 September 2018 and a further 250000 options granted on 16 December 2015 which allowed for vesting in three annual instalments between 16 December 2016 and 16 December 2018.
Note 3 There were employment conditions in relation to 34188 options granted on 20 January 2016 which allowed for vesting on 20 January 2019 and a further 14283 options granted on 27 January 2017 which allowed for vesting on 27 January 2020.
Note 4 There were employment conditions in relation to 750000 options granted on 25 January 2017 which allowed for vesting in three annual instalments between 25 January 2018 and 25 January 2020.
On behalf of the Board John Samuel Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 18 April 2018 21 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Directors remuneration report continued Corporate governance The Company is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and does not voluntarily apply the full requirements of the Code.
However our governance arrangements do meet many of the requirements of the Code which the directors deem most relevant to an AIM listed company having consideration to the size nature and scope of the Company and Groups activities.
The Board The Board currently comprises two Executive Directors and four NonExecutive Directors.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee consists of Julian Viggars as Chairman and John Samuel.
The Audit Committee will inter alia determine and examine matters relating to the financial affairs of the Company including the terms of engagement of the Companys auditor and in consultation with the auditor the scope of the audit.
It will receive and review reports from management and the Companys auditor relating to the annual accounts and the accounting and the internal control systems in use throughout the Group.
The Audit Committee will meet at least twice a year.
Nominations Committee The Nominations Committee consists of John Samuel as Chairman Julian Viggars and Richard Ellis.
The Nominations Committee will monitor the size and composition of the Board and the other Board Committees be responsible for identifying suitable candidates for Board membership and monitor the performance and suitability of the current Board on an ongoing basis.
The Nominations Committee will meet at least once a year.
Internal control The Board is responsible for maintaining a sound system of internal control.
The Boards measures are designed to manage not eliminate risk and such a system provides reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Whilst as a small AIM listed company the Company is not required to comply with the full provisions of the Internal Control Guidance for Directors on the Combined Code The Turnbull Report the Board considers that the internal controls do meet many of those requirements and are adequate given the size of the Company.
Some key features of the internal control system are i Management accounts information budgets forecasts and business risk issues are regularly reviewed by the Board which meets at least seven times per year ii The Company has operational accounting and employment policies in place iii The Board actively identifies and evaluates the risks inherent in the business and ensures that appropriate controls and procedures are in place to manage these risks iv There is a clearly defined organisational structure and v There are wellestablished financial reporting and control systems.
Going concern At 31 December 2017 the Group had 25.1m of cash and cash equivalents.
At this stage in its development the Group is reliant on equity share funding.
When making their going concern assessment the directors assess available and committed funds against all nondiscretionary expenditure and related cash flows as forecast for the period ended 30 April 2019.
These forecasts indicate that the Group is able to settle its liabilities as they fall due in the forecast period.
In these forecasts the directors have considered appropriate sensitivities such as the level of discretionary expenditure included and the ability to raise additional funds during 2018.
Accordingly the directors consider that this should enable the Group to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and the Directors believe that it remains appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis.
Note 17 to this financial information includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposure to credit liquidity and market risk.
The Directors have considered their obligation in relation to the assessment of the going concern of the Group and each statutory entity within it and have reviewed the current budget cash forecasts and assumptions as well as the main risk factors facing the Group.
Corporate governance report 22 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and the financial statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent Company financial statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent Company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and the parent Company financial statements the Directors are required to a. b. c. d. e. to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent Company and to enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have a general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
23 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Statement of Directors responsibilities 1.
Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Xeros Technology Group plc the Company for the year ended 31 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income consolidated statement of changes in equity consolidated statement of financial position consolidated statement of cash flows company statement of changes in equity company statement of financial position company statement of cash flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 2.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows unchanged from 2016 Completeness of capitalised development costs Group capitalised development costs at 31 December 2017 nil 2016 nil Risk vs 2016 tu Refer to pages 32 and 36.
The risk Accounting treatment  The Group is developing its own technologies and products across various markets and sectors with each project being at various stages of development.
The technologies in these developments are inherently disruptive therefore technical feasibility can take significant investment and the commercial success of each project can be subjective.
Commercial subjectivity is largely driven by the fact the Groups products have no proven market or track record of commercial success.
Assessing whether the capitalisation criteria are met is inherently judgmental and there is a risk that the appropriate point in time for capitalisation is not identified appropriately and therefore costs continue to be expensed when they should be capitalised.
Our response Our procedures included Assessing application  Specific focus was given to the status of the significant development projects currently ongoing and to which the majority of research and development spend relates.
We critically assessed the Groups evaluation of the technical and commercial status of each of these projects and the conclusion against the criteria for capitalisation including inspecting project status announcements.
This included in particular for Tanning Technologies consideration of the contract now in place with a key partner and how this impacted achievement of the criteria.
Personnel interviews  We corroborated the status of the projects by interviewing technical staff outside of the finance function.
Recoverability of carrying value of investment in subsidiary Parent Company only investment carrying value at 31 December 2017 9.1m 2016 7.9m intercompany receivable carrying value at 31 December 2017 63.6m 2016 60.5m Risk vs 2016 tu Refer to pages 63 and 64.
The risk Forecastbased valuation  The parent Company balance sheet includes an investment in a trading subsidiary of 9.1m 2016 7.9m and a receivable from that subsidiary of 63.6m 2016 60.5m.
The subsidiary is currently loss making given the nature of its development stage activities and therefore the Companys assessment of potential impairment is inherently subjective.
Given the nature of the business the Group assesses recoverability with reference to their expectations of the projects and external valuations.
Independent auditors report to the members of Xeros Technology Group plc 24 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc  Our response Our procedures included Our sector experience  We considered the current stage of the various projects currently in development in the subsidiary and in particular how these have enabled the Group to raise further equity linked to announcements of development progress.
Comparing valuations  We considered the carrying value of investment and intercompany receivable with reference to the net assets of the subsidiary.
We also considered the carrying values of each underlying business segment in the subsidiaries with reference to analyst reports.
Assessing analyst credentials  We evaluated the third party analysts credentials and independence.
Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit The materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 1111000 2016 750000 determined with reference to a benchmark of Group loss before taxation of which it represents 3.5% 2016 3.5%.
Materiality for the parent Company financial statements as a whole was set at 889000 2016 740000 determined with reference to a benchmark of gross assets of which it represents 0.8% 2016 1%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected and uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 56000 2016 37500 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 4 2016 3 reporting components we subjected 4 2016 3 to full scope audits for Group reporting purposes.
These components accounted for 100% of total Group revenue Group loss before taxation and total Group assets.
All component audits 2016 all including that of the parent Company were performed by the Group team.
Component materiality levels were set individually for each component having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components and ranged from 889000 to 659000 2016 740000 to 355000.
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
25 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of Xeros Technology Group plc continued 7.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 23 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Claire Needham Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 1 Sovereign Square Sovereign Street
LS1 4DA 18 April 2018 26 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Independent auditors report to the members of Xeros Technology Group plc continued Notes
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Earned income 2270 2466 Less lease interest income 7 80 73 Revenue 3 2190 2393 Cost of sales 2638 2103 Gross lossprofit 448 290 Lease interest income 7 80 73 Adjusted gross margin 368 363 Administrative expenses 6 30894 22640 Adjusted EBITDA 28669 20659 Share based payment expense 23 1865 1232 Non operating exceptional costs 6 195 87 Amortisation of intangible fixed assets 10 39 Depreciation of tangible fixed assets 11 574 372 Operating loss 31342 22350 Net finance expenseincome 7 574 1225 Loss before taxation 31916 21125 Taxation 8 1305 886 Loss after tax 30611 20239 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss Foreign currency translation differences  foreign operations 1727 1720 Total comprehensive expense for the period 28884 21959 Loss per share Basic and diluted on loss from continuing operations 9 34.92p 25.04p Adjusted gross margin comprises gross profit plus lease interest income.
Adjusted EBITDA comprises loss on ordinary activities before interest tax sharebased payment expense nonoperating exceptional costs depreciation and amortisation.
27 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income For the year ended 31 December 2017
Share premium
Foreign currency translation reserve
Total
At 31 July 2015 98 28178 15443 22 22426 21271 Loss for the period     20239 20239 Other comprehensive expense    1720  1720 Loss and total comprehensive expense for the period    1720 20239 21959 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Issue of shares 27 39973    40000 Exercise of share options 4 281    285 Costs of share issues  2152    2152 Share based payment expense     1232 1232 Total contributions by and distributions to owners 31 38102   1232 39365 At 31 December 2016 129 66280 15443 1742 41433 38677 Loss for the year     30611 30611 Other comprehensive expense    1727  1727 Loss and total comprehensive expense for the year    1727 30611 28884 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Issue of shares following placing 17 24983    25000 Exercise of share options 3 493    496 Costs of share issues  1374    1374 Share based payment expense     1865 1865 Total contributions by and distributions to owners 20 24102   1865 25987 At 31 December 2017 149 90382 15443 15 70179 35780 Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc
At
31 December
31 December
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 10 654 Property plant and equipment 11 3516 1588 Trade and other receivables 14 1104 1656 Total noncurrent assets 5274 3244 Current assets Inventories 12 6392 7005 Other financial assets 13  705 Trade and other receivables 14 2235 1830 Current tax asset 8 1306 Investments  bank deposits 15  9959 Cash and cash equivalents 16 25149 18975 Total current assets 35082 38474 Total assets 40356 41718
Noncurrent liabilities Deferred consideration 18 185 Deferred tax 19 38 39 Total noncurrent liabilities 223 39 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 4353 3002 Total current liabilities 4353 3002 Total liabilities 4576 3041 Net assets 35780 38677
Share capital 20 149 129 Share premium 20 90382 66280 Merger reserve 20 15443 15443 Foreign currency translation reserve 21 15 1742 Accumulated losses 21 70179 41433 Total equity 35780 38677 Approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 18 April 2018.
John Samuel
Company number Paul Denney Chief Financial Officer 29 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Consolidated statement of financial position For the year ended 31 December 2017
Year ended 31 December 17 months ended 31 December Operating activities Loss before tax 31916 21125 Adjustment for noncash items Amortisation of intangible assets 10 39 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 574 372 Share based payment 23 1865 1232 Increase in inventories 2218 3957 Increase in trade and other receivables 26 2424 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 3983 663 Finance income 131 1225 Finance expense 705 Cash used in operations 27125 27790 Tax receiptspayments 2 1380 Net cash outflow from operations 27127 26410 Investing activities Finance income 131 520 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking 25 577 Cash withdrawn fromplaced on deposits with more than 3 months maturity 9959 8420 Purchases of property plant and equipment 271 811 Net cash inflowoutflow from investing activities 9242 8711 Financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital net of costs 20 24122 38133 Net cash inflow from financing activities 24122 38133 Increase in cash and cash equivalents 6237 3012 Cash and cash equivalents at start of yearperiod 18975 15913 Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash held 63 50 Cash and cash equivalents at end of yearperiod 16 25149 18975 Consolidated statement of cash flows For the year ended 31 December 2017 30 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 1 Basis of preparation Xeros Technology Group plc is a public limited company domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The financial statements of Xeros Technology Group plc are audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2017.
These include comparatives for the 17month period to 31 December 2016.
The level of rounding for financial information is the nearest thousand Pounds.
The Companys registered office is Unit 2 Evolution Advanced Manufacturing Park Whittle Way Catcliffe Rotherham S60 5BL.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union EU IFRS.
Business combinations and basis of consolidation Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Company.
Control exists when the Company has the power directly or indirectly to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
In assessing control potential voting rights that presently are exercisable or convertible are taken into account.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Where the acquisition is treated as a business combination the purchase method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed at the date of exchange.
Acquisition costs are expensed as incurred.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the cost of the acquisition is less than the fair value of net assets of the subsidiary acquired the difference is recognised directly in the income statement.
All intraGroup balances and transactions including unrealised profits arising from intraGroup transactions are eliminated fully on consolidation.
Going concern At 31 December 2017 the Group had 25.1m of cash and cash equivalents.
At this stage in its development the Group is loss making and incurs operating cash outflows.
It is therefore reliant on equity share funding to continue its development operations and will require a further capital injection to meet forecast spend both discretionary and non discretionary over the next 12 months to April 2019.
As with all such businesses the Group is reliant on cyclical equity funding while developing technologies with a longterm view to commercialising those technologies to enable them to provide a return to the shareholders.
Whilst there is no guarantee that further equity funding will be made available the directors believe that given past history of successful share placings and the consistent development progress across the project portfolio the required cash can be raised in line with the above.
When making their going concern assessment the directors assess available and committed funds against all nondiscretionary expenditure and related cash flows as forecast for the period ended 30 April 2019.
These forecasts indicate that the Group is able to settle its liabilities as they fall due in the forecast period.
In these forecasts the directors have considered appropriate sensitivities such as the level of discretionary expenditure included and the ability to raise additional funds as described above.
Accordingly the directors consider that this should enable the Group to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and the Directors believe that it remains appropriate to prepare the financial statements on a going concern basis.
Note 17 to this financial information includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and its exposure to credit liquidity and market risk.
The Directors have considered their obligation in relation to the assessment of the going concern of the Group and each statutory entity within it and have reviewed the current budget cash forecasts and assumptions as well as the main risk factors facing the Group.
31 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements For the year ended 31 December 2017 2 Significant accounting policies The principal accounting policies applied are set out below.
Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the sale of goods and services in the ordinary course of business and is shown net of Value Added Tax.
The Group primarily earns revenues from the saleprovision of polymer bead cleaning equipment consumables and services.
Within the Hotel and Lodging segment where products are sold outright product sales revenues are recognised once substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred.
Where sales are made through the Xeros Sbeadycare service the contract is separated into the element relating to the initial sale of equipment where relevant and the ongoing service element.
Consideration is allocated to the different components based on their relative fair values.
Service income is recognised prorata over the life of the contract.
Where equipment is sold under a finance lease agreement revenue is recognised in accordance with the stated lessor accounting policy.
Amounts received in respect of operating leases are recognised in the income statement with reference to the period of rental.
Within the High Performance Workwear segment revenues are recognised once the service contracted with the customer is completed.
The difference between the amount of income recognised and the amount invoiced on a particular contract is included in the statement of financial position as deferred income.
Amounts included in deferred income due within one year are expected to be recognised within one year and are included within current liabilities.
Foreign currencies The individual financial statements of each Group entity are presented in the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates its functional currency.
For the purposes of the consolidated financial statements the results and the financial position of each Group entity are expressed in Pounds Sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentational currency for the consolidated financial statements.
In preparing the financial statements of the individual entities transactions in currencies other than the entitys functional currency foreign currencies are recorded at the rates of exchange prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
At each balance sheet date monetary items denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing at the balance sheet date.
Nonmonetary items carried at fair value that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing at the date when the fair value was determined.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in foreign currency are not retranslated.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations are translated using exchange rates at the balance sheet date.
The components of shareholders equity are stated at historical value.
An average exchange rate for the period is used to translate the results and cash flows of foreign operations.
Exchange differences arising on translating the results and net assets of foreign operations are taken to the translation reserve in equity until the disposal of the investment.
The gain or loss in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income on the disposal of foreign operations includes the release of the translation reserve relating to the operation that is being sold.
Government grants Government grants are recognised where there is reasonable assurance that the grant will be received and all attached conditions will be complied with.
When the grant relates to an expense item it is recognised as income on a systematic basis over the periods that the costs which it is intended to compensate are expensed.
Where the grant relates to an asset it is recognised as income in equal amounts over the expected useful life of the related asset.
Income from grants is allocated to cost of sales and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income to match it against the underlying expenditure incurred.
32 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Research and development Expenditure on research activities is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
Development costs are only capitalised when the related products meet the recognition criteria of an internally generated intangible asset the key criteria being as follows it is probable that the future economic benefits that are attributable to the asset will flow to the Group the project is technically and commercially feasible the Group intends to and has sufficient resources to complete the project the Group has the ability to use or sell the asset and the cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
Such intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis from the point at which the assets are ready for use over the period of the expected benefit and are reviewed for an indication of impairment at each reporting date.
Other development costs are charged against profit or loss as incurred since the criteria for their recognition as an asset are not met.
The costs of an internally generated intangible asset comprise all directly attributable costs necessary to create produce and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management.
Directly attributable costs include employee costs incurred on technical development testing and certification materials consumed and any relevant thirdparty cost.
The costs of internally generated developments are recognised as intangible assets and are subsequently measured in the same way as externally acquired intangible assets.
However until completion of the development project the assets are subject to impairment testing only.
No development costs to date have been capitalised as intangible assets as it is deemed that the probability of future economic benefit is currently uncertain.
Leases
As a lessee At the current time the Group only partakes of lease arrangements where all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership are not transferred to the Group an operating lease.
The total rentals payable under the lease are charged to the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The aggregate benefit of lease incentives is recognised as a reduction in the rental expense over the lease term.
As a lessor As the Group transfers substantially all the risks and benefits of ownership of the asset the arrangement is classified as a finance lease and a receivable is recognised for the initial direct costs of the lease and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
As payments fall due finance income is recognised in the income statement so as to achieve a constant rate of return on the remaining net investment in the lease.
Assets held for rentals to customers under operating leases are recorded as fixed assets and are depreciated on a straightline basis to their estimated residual values over their estimated useful lives.
Operating lease income is recognised within revenue on a straightline basis over the term of the rental period.
Intangible assets and goodwill Recognition and measurement Goodwill  Goodwill arising on the acquisition of subsidiaries is measured at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Other intangible assets  Other intangible assets including customer relationships and brands that are acquired by the Group and have finite useful lives are measured at cost less accumulated amortisation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Amortisation
Amortisation is calculated to write off the cost of intangible assets less their estimated residual values using the straightline method over their estimated useful lives and is generally recognised in profit or loss.
Goodwill is not amortised.
The estimated useful lives for current and comparative periods are as follows Customer lists 5 years
5 years Amortisation methods useful lives and residual values are reviewed at each reporting date and adjusted if appropriate.
Assets considered to have indefinite useful economic lives are tested annually for impairment.
33 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment losses.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the costs of assets over their estimated useful lives on the following basis Leasehold improvements  over the term of the lease on a straightline basis Plant and machinery  20% on cost on a straightline basis Fixtures and fittings  20% on cost on a straightline basis Computer equipment  33% on cost on a straightline basis The gain or loss arising on the disposal of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
Impairment of noncurrent assets For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows cashgenerating units.
As a result some assets are tested individually for impairment and some are tested at cash generating unit level.
Goodwill is allocated to those cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from synergies of the related business combination and represent the lowest level at which management monitors goodwill.
Cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment at least annually.
All other individual assets or cashgenerating units are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets or cashgenerating units carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value reflecting market conditions less costs to sell and value in use based on an internal discounted cash flow evaluation.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition is accounted for as follows Raw materials work in progress and finished goods  Purchase cost on a firstin firstout basis.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business.
Share based payments Certain employees and consultants including Directors and senior executives of the Group receive remuneration in the form of sharebased payment transactions whereby employees render services as consideration for equity instruments equitysettled transactions.
The cost of equitysettled transactions with employees is measured by reference to the fair value at the date on which they are granted.
The fair value is determined by using an appropriate pricing model.
The cost of equitysettled transactions is recognised together with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance andor service conditions are fulfilled ending on the date on which the relevant employees become fully entitled to the award the vesting date.
The cumulative expense recognised for equitysettled transactions at each reporting date until the vesting date reflects the extent to which the vesting period has expired and the Groups best estimate of the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
The profit or loss charge or credit for a period represents the movement in cumulative expense recognised as at the beginning and end of that period.
No expense is recognised for awards that do not ultimately vest except for awards where vesting is conditional upon a market condition which are treated as vesting irrespective of whether or not the market condition is satisfied provided that all other performance andor service conditions are satisfied.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified the minimum expense recognised is the expense as if the terms had not been modified.
An additional expense is recognised for any modification which increases the total fair value of the sharebased payment arrangement or is otherwise beneficial to the employee as measured at the date of modification.
Where an equitysettled award is cancelled it is treated as if it had vested on the date of cancellation and any expense not yet recognised for the award is recognised immediately.
However if a new award is substituted for the cancelled award and designated as a replacement award on the date that it is granted the cancelled and new awards are treated as if they were a modification of the original award as described in the previous paragraph.
The dilutive effect of outstanding options is reflected as additional share dilution in the computation of earnings per share.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Financial assets and liabilities Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the consolidated statement of financial position when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets are derecognised when the contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire or when the contractual rights to those assets are transferred.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the obligation specified in the contract is discharged cancelled or expired.
Trade receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost less provision for impairment.
Appropriate provisions for estimated irrecoverable amounts are recognised in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income when there is objective evidence that the assets are impaired.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Investments  bank deposits Comprise bank deposits maturing more than three months after the balance sheet date.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Group are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Trade and other payables Trade payables are initially measured at their fair value and are subsequently measured at their amortised cost using the effective interest rate method this method allocates interest expense over the relevant period by applying the effective interest rate to the carrying amount of the liability.
Taxation
The tax expensecredit represents the sum of the tax currently payable or recoverable and the movement in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
Current tax is based upon taxable profitloss for the year.
Taxable profitloss differs from net profitloss as reported in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated by using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Credit is taken in the accounting period for research and development tax credits which have been claimed from HM Revenue and Customs in respect of qualifying research and development costs incurred.
Research and development tax credits are recognised on an accruals basis with reference to the level of certainty regarding acceptance of the claims by HMRC.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply to the period when the asset is realised or the liability is settled based upon tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income except when it relates to items credited or charged directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the profit nor the accounting period.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
35 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued Critical accounting estimates and areas of judgement Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and assumptions that have the most significant effects on the carrying amounts of the assets and liabilities in the financial information are discussed below Revenue recognition The Group offers an integrated service and care package marketed under Xeros Sbeadycare.
This package includes the transfer of equipment and an ongoing commitment to service and support.
As part of determining the appropriate revenue recognition policy for such packages the Group is required to determine the relative fair values of the various elements of revenue.
The Group is also required to make judgements as to the market rate of interest used in the calculations.
Due to the unique nature of the product and the stage of development of the Group such assessment is based on limited historical information and requires a level of judgement.
These judgements may be revised in future years.
Research and development costs Careful judgement by the Directors is applied when deciding whether the recognition requirements for capitalising development costs have been met.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain and may be subject to future technical problems.
Judgements are based on the information available at each reporting date which includes the progress with testing and certification and progress on for example establishment of commercial arrangements with third parties.
Specifically the Directors consider production scale evidence of commercial operation of the Groups technology.
In addition all internal activities related to research and development of new products are continuously monitored by the Directors.
To date no development costs have been capitalised.
Accounting standards and interpretations not applied At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following IFRSs IASs and Interpretations were in issue but not yet effective.
Their adoption is not expected to have a material effect on the financial statements unless otherwise indicated IFRS 2 amended June 2016 Sharebased payment 1 January 2018 IFRS 4 amended September 2016 Insurance Contracts 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases 1 January 2019 IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts 1 January 2021 IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration 1 January 2018 IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments 1 January 2019 IAS 28 amended October 2017 Investment in Associates and Joint Ventures 1 January 2019 IAS 40 amended December 2016 Investment Property 1 January 2018 IAS 41 amended June 2014 Agriculture 1 January 2018 Amendments resulting from September 2014 Annual Improvements to IFRSs 1 January 2018 The Group is implementing IFRS 15 for the period ending 31 December 2018.
Transition is ongoing and will be performed under the cumulative effect method as permitted under the standard.
Had IFRS 15 been in effect for the period ended 31 December 2017 the Directors do not consider that there would have been a material impact on the results reported.
The Directors are currently evaluating the impact of IFRS 16 on the accounting policies of the Group.
The Directors do not consider that IFRS 9 will have a material impact on the results of the Group.
It is not anticipated that any of the other new standards or interpretations will have a material impact.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 3 Segmental reporting The financial information by segment detailed below is frequently reviewed by the Chief Executive Officer who has been identified as the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM.
The segments are distinct due to the markets they serve.
The all other activities segment contains supporting functions and activities in respect of applications that have not yet been fully commercialised.
The way in which the CODM reviews information has changed in the period as the internal reporting structure of the Group has developed and as a result of the acquisition made in the period.
The comparative information for the period ended 31 December 2017 is not restated.
For the year ended 31 December 2017
High
Performance
Workwear
All Other
Total
Revenue 1941 249  2190 Gross loss 374 74  448 Adjusted EBITDA 10854 453 17362 28669 Operating loss 11260 499 19583 31342 Net finance incomeexpense 80  654 574 Loss before tax 11180 499 20237 31916 Segmental net assets 9928 87 25765 35780 Other segmental information Capital expenditure   271 271 Depreciation Amortisation  39  39 For the 17month period ended 31 December 2016
Operating
Segment
Revenue 2466 Gross profit 290 Adjusted EBITDA 20659 Operating loss 22350 Net finance incomeexpense 1225 Loss before tax 21125 Segmental net assets 38677 Other segmental information Capital expenditure 811 Depreciation 372
37 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 3 Segmental reporting continued An analysis of revenues by type is set out below
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Sale of goods 738 1556 Rendering of services 1452 837 2190 2393 During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Group had no customers who individually generated more than 10% of revenue.
During the 17month period ended 31 December 2016 the Group had two customers who individually generated more than 10% of revenue.
Those customers accounted for 19% and 13% of revenue respectively.
An analysis of revenues by geographic location of customers is set out below
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Europe 361 259 North America 1829 2134 2190 2393 An analysis of noncurrent assets by location is set out below
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Europe 1529 722 North America 3745 2522 5274 3244 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 4 Loss from operations
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Loss from operations is stated after crediting Grant income  410 Foreign exchange gains  3848 Loss from operations is stated after charging to administrative expenses Foreign exchange losses 2178 Depreciation of plant and equipment note 11 574 372 Amortisation of intangible assets note 10 39 Operating lease rentals  land and buildings 271 270 Staff costs excluding sharebased payment charge 11740 10525 Research and development 1859 3067 Auditors remuneration Audit of these financial statements 19 12 Audit of financial statements of subsidiaries of the Company 21 12 All other services 6 29 Total auditors remuneration 46 53 Other services in the current period related to interim review work tax advice and advice in respect of the Groups overseas subsidiary.
5 Staff numbers and costs
31 December
17 months ended 31 December
The average monthly number of persons including Directors employed by the Group during the year was Directors 6 6 Operational staff 000 000 The aggregate remuneration including Directors comprised Wages and salaries 10637 9512 Social security costs 987 992 Pension contributions 116 21 Share based expense note 23 1865 1232 13605 11757 Directors remuneration comprised Emoluments for qualifying services 743 1209 Directors emoluments disclosed above include 334000 paid to the highest paid director 17month period ended 31 December 2016 457000.
There are no pension benefits for directors.
Please see Directors Remuneration Report on pages 19 to 21 for further information on directors emoluments.
39 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 6 Expenses by nature The administrative expenses charge by nature is as follows
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Staff costs recruitment and other HR 12617 11288 Sharebased payment expense 1865 1232 Premises and establishment costs 586 504 Research and development costs 1859 3067 Patent and IP costs 1176 1661 Engineering and operational costs 1978 1314 Legal professional and consultancy fees 2978 2720 IT telecoms and office costs 725 645 Depreciation charge 377 361 Amortisation charge 39 Travelling subsistence and entertaining 2221 2102 Advertising conferences and exhibitions 1234 1548 Bad debt expense 412 88 Other expenses 434 237 Foreign exchange lossesgains 2198 3848 Less grants receivable  366 Total operating administrative expenses 30699 22553 Nonoperating administrative exceptional items Costs of placing of ordinary shares 195 87 Total administrative expenses 30894 22640 7 Net finance expenseincome
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Bank interest receivable 51 447 Lossgain from forward foreign currency 705 705 Finance income from lease receivables 80 73 Net finance expenseincome 574 1225 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 8 Taxation Tax on loss on ordinary activities
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Current tax UK tax credits received in respect of prior periods 1306 923 Foreign taxes paid 2 20 1304 903 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary timing differences 1 17 Tax credit on loss on ordinary activities 1305 886 The credit for the yearperiod can be reconciled to the loss before tax per the statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income as follows Factors affecting the current tax charges The tax assessed for the year varies from the main company rate of corporation tax as explained below
31 December 17 months ended 31 December The tax assessed for the period varies from the main company rate of corporation tax as explained below Loss on ordinary activities before tax 31916 21125 Tax at the standard rate of corporation tax 19.25% 2016 20% 6144 4225 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 418 291 Research and development tax credits receivable 1306 923 Unutilised tax losses for which no deferred tax asset is recognised 6649 5130 Employee share acquisition adjustment 924 1172 Foreign taxes paid 2 20 Change in tax rates  7 Tax credit for the periodyear 1305 886 The Group accounts for Research and Development tax credits where there is certainty regarding HMRC approval.
The Group has recognised a debtor in respect of the claim which has been approved for payment by HMRC and subsequently received by the Group.
41 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 9 Loss per share basic and diluted Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing the loss attributable to equity holders of the parent by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
Diluted loss per share is calculated by adjusting the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
Year ended 31 December 17 months ended 31 December Total loss attributable to the equity holders of the parent 30611 20239
No.
Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year 87671769 80839504 Loss per share Basic and diluted on loss for the year 34.92p 25.04p Adjusted earnings per share has been calculated so as to exclude the effect of nonoperating exceptional costs including related tax charges and credits.
Adjusted earnings used in the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share reconciles to basic earnings as follows Basic earnings 30611 20239 Nonoperating exceptional costs 195 87 Adjusted earnings 30416 20152 Adjusted loss per share Basic and diluted on loss for the year 34.69p 24.93p The weighted average number of shares in issue throughout the period is as follows
31 December 17 months ended 31 December Issued ordinary shares at 1 January 20171 August 2015 86021911 65504879 Effect of shares issued for cash 1649858 15334625 Weighted average number of shares at 31 December 87671769 80839504 The Company has issued employee options over 7658146 31 December 2016 6687763 ordinary shares which are potentially dilutive.
There is however no dilutive effect of these issued options as there is a loss for each of the periods concerned.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 10 Intangible assets and goodwill
Customer relationships
Total
Cost
At 31 July 2015 and 31 December 2016 Acquisitions through business combinations 13telForeign currency differences 2 4 6 12 At 31 December tel320 693 Accumulated amortisation and impairment losses At 31 July 2015 and 31 December 2016 Amortisation charge for the year  39  39 Foreign currency differences At 31 December 2017  39  39 Net book value At 31 December tel320 654 At 31 December 2016 At 31 July 2015
The amortisation of customer relationships is included within administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
The brand acquired is considered to have a fiveyear economic life and will be amortised in future periods.
Impairment testing for CGUs containing goodwill For the purposes of impairment testing goodwill has been allocated to the Groups CGUs operating divisions as follows Commercial Laundry High Performance Workwear 131 43 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 10 Intangible assets and goodwill continued High Performance Workwear The recoverable amount of this CGU is based on fair value less costs of disposal estimated using discounted cash flows.
The key assumptions used in the estimation of the recoverable amount are set out below.
The values assigned to the key assumptions represent managements assessment of future trends in the relevant industry and have been based on historical data from both external and internal sources.
Discount rate 15% Terminal value growth rate 1% Budget EBITDA growth rate average of next five years 5% All goodwill relates to the purchase of Marken PPE.
Goodwill arising on acquisition represents excess of the fair value of the consideration given over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired.
The goodwill arising from the acquisition consists largely of the synergies expected from combining the Marken PPE business with the proprietary Xeros technology and the workforce acquired.
The Group tests annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The forecast used in impairment testing is approved by management and the Board of Directors and is based on a bottom up assessment of costs and uses the known and estimated sales pipeline.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 11 Property plant and equipment
Leasehold improvements
Computer equipment
Motor vehicles
Cost
At 31 July tel151 85 91  817 Additions 11tel53  1381 Transfers 476 476 Foreign currency differences   32 At 31 December 2016  84tel 2230 Arising on acquisitions Additions   255 Transfers from inventory   2270    2270 Foreign currency differences  20 64 12 5  101 At 31 December 2017  893 3691
At 31 July 2015   240 Charge for the period   372 Foreign currency differences   30 At 31 December 2016   642 Charge for the year   574 Transfers from inventory  5    5 Foreign currency differences  15 14 6 1  36 At 31 December 2017   1175 Net book value At 31 December 2017  396 2516 At 31 December 2016   1588 At 31 July  577 Assets under construction comprised leasehold improvements at the Companys Technology Centre at the Advanced Manufacturing Park.
These premises were completed in August 2015 and these costs were transferred to leasehold improvements.
Included within plant and machinery are assets with a net book value of 2582000 31 December 2016 506000 which the Group leases as lessor to customers under a number of operating lease agreements.
When an operating lease is agreed with a customer the assets to which the operating lease relates are if necessary transferred from inventory into property plant and equipment for the duration of the lease.
Depreciation is charged on these assets in line with their useful economic lives.
45 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 12 Inventories 31 December 31 December Finished goods 6392 7005 In the year ended 31 December 2017 changes in finished goods recognised as cost of sales amounted to 742000 period ended 31 December 2016 920000.
13 Other financial assets 31 December 31 December
Foreign currency forward contracts designated as fair value through profit and loss  705 14 Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December Due within 12 months Trade debtors 345 272 Other receivables 856 1078 Prepayments and accrued income 1034 480 2235 1830 Due after more than 12 months Other receivables 1104 1656 There is no material difference between the lease receivables amounts included in other receivables noted above the minimum lease payments or gross investment in the lease as defined by IAS 17.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 14 Trade and other receivables continued The minimum lease payment is receivable as follows 31 December 31 December Not later than one year 252 284 Later than one year not later than five years 917 1185 Later than five years 187 471 1356 1940 Contractual payment terms with the Groups customers are typically 30 to 60 days.
The Directors considered the carrying value of trade receivables at 31 December 2017 and made a provision of 270000 31 December 2016 77000 for potential impairment losses arising from balances which were considered to be past due.
The
Directors believe that the carrying value of trade and other receivables represents their fair value.
In determining the recoverability of trade receivables the Directors consider any change in the credit quality of the receivable from the date credit was granted up to the reporting date.
For details on credit risk management policies refer to note 17.
Other receivables of 1104000 31 December 2016 1656000 due after more than one year comprise the longterm portion of finance leases where the Group acts as lessor.
In July 2017 a small number of lease agreements were sold to Hitachi Capital.
The value of the agreements sold is not material to the financial statements.
15 Investments  bank deposits 31 December 31 December Bank deposits maturing between 3 and 12 months  9959 At 31 December 2017 the Group held nil 31 December 2016 9959000 in 95day deposit accounts.
This balance was denominated in UK Pound Sterling .
The Directors consider that the carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates to their fair value.
For details of credit risk management policies refer to note 17.
47 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 16 Cash and cash equivalents 31 December 31 December A  5206 BBB 25138 13769 Cash and cash equivalents 25149 18975 The above has been split by the Fitch rating system and gives an analysis of the longterm credit rating of the financial institutions where cash balances are held.
All of the Groups cash and cash equivalents at 31 December 2017 are at floating interest rates.
Balances are denominated in UK Pound Sterling  US Dollars  and Euros  as follows 31 December 31 December Denominated in Pound Sterling 24095 16999 Denominated in US Dollars 752 1755 Denominated in Euros 302 221 Cash and cash equivalents 25149 18975 The Directors consider that the carrying value of cash and cash equivalents approximates to their fair value.
For details of credit risk management policies refer to note 17.
17 Financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise shortterm receivables and payables and cash and cash equivalents.
The
Group does not trade in financial instruments but uses derivative financial instruments in the form of forward foreign currency contracts to help manage its foreign currency exposure and to enable the Group to manage its working capital requirements.
Derivative financial instruments  fair value hierarchy The following hierarchy classifies each class of financial asset or liability depending on the valuation technique applied in determining its fair value Level 1 The fair value is calculated based on quoted prices traded in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 The fair value is based on inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly.
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
Level 3 The fair value is based on inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
In these financial statements all of the forward foreign exchange contracts are considered to be Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
There have been no transfers between categories in the current or preceding year.
The fair value of financial instruments held at fair value have been determined based on available market information at the balance sheet date.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 17 Financial instruments continued b Credit risk Financial risk management Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
The Group is exposed to credit risk in respect of trade and lease receivable balances such that if one or more customers or a counterparty to a financial instrument encounters financial difficulties this could materially and adversely affect the Groups financial results.
The Group attempts to mitigate credit risk by assessing the credit rating of new customers and financial counterparties prior to entering into contracts and by entering into contracts with customers on agreed credit terms.
The Group is potentially exposed to credit risk in respect of its bank deposits in the event of failure of the respective banks.
The Group attempts to mitigate this risk by spreading its cash deposits across different banks and through ongoing monitoring of the credit ratings of those banks.
Further details are set out in note 16.
At 31 December 2017 the Directors were not aware of any factors affecting the recoverability of the Groups bank balances.
Exposure to credit risk At 31 December 2017 the Group had net trade receivables outstanding of 345000 2016 272000.
The Directors have considered the recoverability of outstanding balances at 31 December 2017 and have made provisions for bad and doubtful debts amounting to 270000 2016 77000.
The Group had lease receivable balances outstanding of 1356000 2016 1940000 after the deduction of provisions amounting to 108000 2016 nil.
The concentration of credit risk for trade and other receivables and lease receivables at the balance sheet date by geographic region was 31 December 31 December United Kingdom 1029 1153 United States of America 2310 2333 3339 3486 c Liquidity risk Financial risk management Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its future obligations as they fall due.
The Groups policy is to ensure that it will always have sufficient cash to allow it to meet its liabilities when they become due.
To achieve this aim it seeks to maintain cash balances to meet its expected cash requirements.
The following are the contractual maturities of financial liabilities Nonderivative financial liabilities 31 December 31 December Due within one year Trade and other payables 1661 1062 49 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 17 Financial instruments continued d Market risk Financial risk management Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as interest rates or foreign exchange rates will affect the Groups income.
The objective of market risk management is to manage and control market risk exposures within acceptable parameters.
Market interest rate risk arises from the Groups holding of cash and cash equivalent balances and from cash held on term deposit accounts see notes 15 and 16.
The Board makes ad hoc decisions at its regular Board meetings as to whether to hold funds in instant access accounts or longerterm deposits.
All accounts are held with reputable banks.
These policies are considered to be appropriate to the current stage of development of the Group and will be kept under review in future years.
Foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to currency risk on sales and purchases and cash held in bank accounts that are denominated in a currency other than the respective functional currencies of Group entities primarily Pound Sterling  the US Dollar  and the Euro .
The Groups policy is to reduce currency exposure on sales and purchasing through forward foreign currency contracts.
The following are the fair values of assets held in respect of forward foreign currency contracts Derivative financial assets 31 December 31 December Due within one year Forward foreign exchange contracts used for hedging  705 The Groups overall exposure to foreign currency risk is as follows.
This is based on the carrying amount for monetary financial instruments.
At 31 December 2017 Sterling US Dollar
Total
Cash and cash equivalents 24095 752 302 25149 Income tax receivable 1306   1306 Trade and other receivables 1029 2309  3338 Trade and other payables 774 873 14 1661 Balance sheet exposure 25656 2188 288 28132 Net exposure  2188 288 2476 At 31 December 2016 Sterling US Dollar
Total
Cash and cash equivalents 16999 1755 221 18975 Investments Cash deposits 9959   9959 Trade and other receivables 1153 2333  3486 Forward exchange contracts 705   705 Trade and other payables 489 559 14 1062 Balance sheet exposure 28327 3529 207 32063 Net exposure  3529 207 3736 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 17 Financial instruments continued Sensitivity analysis A 10% weakening of the following currencies against the Pound Sterling  at 31 December 2017 would have increased equity and profit or loss by the amounts shown below.
The calculation assumes that the change occurred at the balance sheet date and had been applied to the risk exposure existing at that date.
This analysis assumes that all other variables in particular other exchange rates and interest rates remain constant.
The analysis is performed on the same basis for the period ended 31 December 2016.
Equity Profit or Loss 31 December 31 December 31 December 31 December US Dollars 219 353 219 353 A 10% strengthening of the above currencies against the Pound Sterling at 31 December 2017 would have had the equal but opposite effect on the above currencies to the amounts shown above on the basis that all other variables remain constant.
Interest rate risk At the balance sheet date the interest rate profile of the Groups interestbearing financial instruments was 31 December 31 December Fixed rate instruments Financial assets  9959 Financial liabilities Variable rate instruments Financial assets 25149 18975 Financial liabilities 25149 18975 Based on the Groups above balances at 31 December 2017 if interest rates had been 5% higher then the impact on the results for the year would be a reduction in the loss for the period of approximately 831000 with a corresponding increase in the Groups net assets.
If the interest rate had reduced to zero % then the impact on the results for the period would be an increase in the loss for the year of 51000 with a corresponding decrease in the Groups net assets.
51 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 17 Financial instruments continued e Foreign exchange forward contracts The following table indicates the periods in which the cash flows associated with cash flow hedging instruments are expected to occur Due within one year 31 December 31 December Forward exchange contracts Assets  705
The Groups capital is made up of share capital share premium and retained losses totalling 20352000 at 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 24976000.
The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
The capital structure of the Group consists of shareholders equity as set out in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
All working capital requirements are financed from existing cash resources.
There are no externally imposed capital requirements.
Financing decisions are made by the Board of Directors based on forecasts of the expected timing and level of capital and operating expenditure required to meet the Groups commitments and development plans.
18 Trade and other payables 31 December 31 December Trade payables 1223 696 Taxes and social security 126 116 Other creditors 438 366 Accruals and deferred income 2566 1824 Contingent consideration note 25 185 4538 3002 Current 4353 Noncurrent 185 3002 4538 3002 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 18 Trade and other payables continued Trade payables split by the currency they will be settled in are shown below 31 December 31 December Sterling 639 400 US Dollars 570 282 Euros 14 14 Trade payables 1223 696 Trade and other payables principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
They are noninterest bearing and are normally settled on 30 to 45 day terms.
The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other payables approximate their fair value.
The Group has financial risk management policies in place to ensure that all payables are paid within the credit timeframe and no interest has been charged by any suppliers as a result of late payment of invoices during the period.
19 Deferred tax 31 December 31 December Accelerated depreciation for tax purposes 38 39 Deferred tax creditexpense for the period 1 17
31 December 17 months ended 31 December At beginning of year 39 22 Tax expense 1 17 At end of year 38 39 As at 31 December 2017 the Group had unrecognised deferred tax assets totalling approximately 12968000 31 December 2016 7208000 which primarily relate to losses and the IFRS 2 sharebased payment charge.
The Group has not recognised this as an asset in the statement of financial position due to the uncertainty in the timing of its crystallisation.
53 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 20 Share capital
Share capital
Merger reserve
Total Ordinary shares of 0.15p each as at 31 July 2015 65504879 98 28178 15443 43719 Issue of ordinary shares on exercise of share options 17777778 27 39973  40000 Issue of ordinary shares on exercise of share options 2739254 4 281  285 Costs of share issues   2152  2152 Total Ordinary shares of 0.15p each as at 31 December 2016 86021911 129 66280 15443 81852 Issue of ordinary shares following placing 11111112 17 24983  25000 Issue of ordinary shares on exercise of share options 2036933 3 493  496 Costs of share issues   1374  1374 Total Ordinary shares of 0.15p each as at 31 December 2017 99169956 149 90382 15443 105974 As permitted by the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Company does not have an upper limit to its authorised share capital.
The following is a summary of the changes in the issued share capital of the Company during the period ended 31 December 2017 a 421888 Ordinary Shares were allotted at a price of 0.15 pence per share for total cash consideration of 633 upon the exercise of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. exercise of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. exercise of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. exercise of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. exercise of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. of share options granted in the Companys share option schemes. costs following a placing of shares.
At 31 December 2017 the Company had only one class of share being Ordinary Shares of 0.15p each.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc 21 Movement in accumulated losses and foreign currency translation reserve
Foreign currency translation reserve At 31 July 2015 22426 22 Loss for the period 20239 Other comprehensive expense  Foreign currency translation differences  foreign operation  1720 Shared based payment charge 1232 At 31 December 2016 41433 1742 Loss for the period 30611 Other comprehensive income  Foreign currency translation differences  foreign operation  1727 Shared based payment charge 1865 At 31 December 2017 70179 15 22 Commitments Operating lease commitments The Group leases premises under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The future aggregate minimum lease and service charge payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 31 December 31 December Land and buildings Amounts due within one year 377 179 Amounts due between one and five years 686 97 1063 276 On 19 October 2014 the Group entered into a fiveyear lease arrangement in respect of a property.
The Group has an annual rent commitment of 17185 on this lease.
This lease expires on 18 October 2019.
On the same date the Group entered into a fiveyear lease arrangement in respect of another property.
The Group has an annual rent commitment of 25487 on this lease.
This lease also expires on 18 October 2019.
On 13 February 2015 the Group entered into an arrangement assigning to it a 10year lease in respect of a property.
The lease commenced on 2 April 2012 and expires on 1 April 2022.
The Group has an annual rent commitment of 75250 on this lease.
On 30 November 2017 the Group entered into a threeyear lease arrangement in respect of a property.
The Group has an annual rent commitment of 246668 on the lease.
The lease expires on 31 December 2020.
The lease contains an option which allows the Group to extend the lease term by five years.
In addition the Group has operating lease commitments in respect of its premises in the USA for its subsidiary Xeros Inc.
These are short term rentals with an annual rent charge of approximately 150000.
55 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 23 Share based payments Share options The Company has share option plans The Xeros Technology Group plc Unapproved Share Option Scheme and The Xeros Technology Group plc Enterprise Management Incentive Share Option Scheme under which it grants options over ordinary shares to certain Directors employees and consultants of the Group.
Options under these plans are exercisable at a range of exercise prices ranging from the nominal value of the Companys shares to the market price of the Companys shares on the date of the grant.
The vesting period for shares is usually over a period of three years.
The options are settled in equity once exercised.
If the options remain unexercised for a period after 10 years from the date of grant the options expire.
Options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The number and weighted average exercise prices of share options are as follows Number of share interests
Unapproved options
Annual
Bonus plan Total
At 31 July 2015 4115863 3191061 61977 7368901 0.411 Granted in the period 109890 2544548 115845 2770283 1.924 Exercised in the year 2008165 609756  2617921 0.101 Forfeitedlapsed in the year 131231 702269  833500 1.434 At 31 December 2016 2086357 4423584 177822 6687763 1.032 Granted in the period  3167832 74907 3242739 2.223 Exercised in the period 1105716 950139 15384 2071239 0.273 Forfeitedlapsed in the period 4220 196897  201117 1.956 At 31 December 2017 976421 6444380 237345 7658146 1.719 There were 3677041 share options outstanding at 31 December 2017 which were eligible to be exercised.
The remaining options were not eligible to be exercised as these are subject to employment period and marketbased vesting conditions some of which had not been met at 31 December 2017.
Options have a range of exercise prices from 0.15 pence per share to 310.0 pence per share and have a weighted average contractual life of 7.91 years 31 December 2016 5.00 years.
Options granted in the period Options granted in
Options
August
Options
September
Dividend yield 0% 0% 0% Expected volatility 40.00% 40.00% 40.00% Risk free interest rate % 1.50% 1.50% 1.50% Expected vesting life of options years 10 10 10 Weighted average share price pence 210.0 305.0 305.0 Fair value of an option pence per share 107.5 156.2 156.2 Expected volatility is based upon the Companys historical share price.
56 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 23 Share based payments continued Any share options which are not exercised within 10 years from the date of grant will expire.
A charge has been recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for each period as follows 31 December 31 December Share options 1865 1232 24 Related party transactions During the year the Group entered into transactions in the ordinary course of business with other related parties.
Those transactions with directors are disclosed below.
Transactions entered into along with trading balances outstanding at each period end with other related parties are as follows Related party Relationship
31 December
31 December
31 December
31 December Enterprise Ventures Limited Fund manager for certain shareholders note 1 30  28 Entrepreneurs Fund Management LLP Fund manager for a shareholder note 2   4 Top Technology Ventures Limited Corporate finance advisor for certain shareholders Note 1 Enterprise Ventures Limited provides the services of Julian Viggars as a director for the Company and invoiced the Group for associated directors fees.
Note 2 Entrepreneurs Fund Management LLP provided the services of Dr Maciek Drozdz who was a director of the Company until 11 January 2016 and invoiced the Group for associated directors fees.
Note 3 Top Technology Ventures Limited provided corporate finance services on behalf of the IP Group shareholders for the new equity issue in December 2017.
Terms and conditions of transactions with related parties Purchases between related parties are made on an arms length basis.
Outstanding balances are unsecured interest free and cash settlement is expected within 60 days of invoice.
57 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 24 Related party transactions continued Transactions with key management personnel The Companys key management personnel comprise only the Directors of the Company.
During the period the Company entered into the following transactions in which the Directors had an interest Directors remuneration Remuneration received by the Directors from the Company is set out below.
Further detail is provided within the Directors
Remuneration Report
Year ended 31 December 17 months ended 31 December Shortterm employment benefits 743 1209 In addition certain Directors hold share options in the Company for which a fair value share based charge of 321639 has been recognised in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income 31 December 2016 823466.
During the year ended 31 December 2017 the Company entered into numerous transactions with its subsidiary company which net off on consolidation  these have not been shown above.
25 Acquisition of subsidiary During the year the Group incorporated a new whollyowned subsidiary in the USA Xeros High Performance Workwear Inc.
On 1 July 2017 Xeros High Performance Workwear Inc. a division of Marken Enterprises Inc. a company incorporated in the USA.
For the six months ended 31 December 2017 Xeros High Performance Workwear contributed revenue of 249000 and a loss of 499000.
If the acquisition had taken place on 1 January 2017 management estimates that consolidated revenue would have been 2455000 and consolidated loss before taxation would have been 31944000.
In determining those amounts management has assumed that the fair value adjustments that arose on the date of acquisition would have been the same as if the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017.
Consideration transferred The following table summarises the acquisition date fair value of each major class of consideration transferred.
Cash 577 Contingent consideration 192 Total consideration transferred 769 Contingent consideration The Group has agreed to pay the sellers additional consideration up to a maximum of 250000 192000 at the date of acquisition over a twoyear period following acquisition.
This is based on an earnout calculation which requires the Company to achieve sales revenue targets in each of the two years.
The Group has included 185000 in creditors at 31 December 2017 being 250000 translated at the yearend exchange rate.
Acquisitionrelated costs The Group incurred acquisitionrelated costs of 44000 on legal fees and due diligence expenses.
These costs have been included in administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income.
58 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 25 Acquisition of subsidiary continued Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed The following table summarises the recognised amounts of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the date of acquisition.
Property plant and equipment 38 Intangible assets 572 Trade and other receivables 26 Trade and other payables Total identifiable net assets acquired 636 Measurement of fair values All assets and liabilities acquired are recognised at fair value.
For trade and other receivables and trade and other payables fair value was deemed to be equivalent to book value.
Estimates were made in respect of property plant and equipment and intangible assets based upon managements assessment of the value in use of the assets to the Xeros Group.
The intangible assets acquired with the trade and assets comprise 246000 in relation to noncontractual customer relationships and 326000 in relation to the Marken PPE brand acquired.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising from the acquisition has been recognised as follows Consideration transferred 769 Fair value of identifiable net assets 636 Goodwill 133 The goodwill arising from the acquisition consists largely of the synergies expected from combining the Marken PPE business with the proprietary Xeros technology and the workforce acquired.
26 Events after the reporting period The Group entered into a key transaction after the reporting date of 31 December 2017.
On 22 March 2018 Xeros Technology Group plc purchased the trade and assets of Gloves Inc. and repair services for firefighter personal protection equipment with facilities in Atlanta and Miami USA.
The maximum total consideration for the acquisition is 1.1m comprising an initial cash consideration of 800000 and a conditional deferred payment of up to 0.3m.
The conditional deferred payment is dependent on the future revenue performance of the trade and assets acquired from Gloves Inc.
For the year ended 31 December 2017 the relevant trade and assets of Gloves Inc. of 0.36m.
Due to the proximity of the above business combination to the reporting date the initial accounting for these transactions is still to be completed and consequently details of the amounts of assets and liabilities acquired and fair value of contingent consideration are not disclosed within these financial statements.
59 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Attributable to the equity holders of the Company
Share premium
Retained earnings reserve
At 31 July 2015 98 28178 6625 557 35458 Total expense and other comprehensive loss for the period    1523 1523 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Issue of placing shares 27 39973   40000 Exercise of share options 4 281   285 Costs of share issues  2152   2152 Share based payment expense    768 768 Share based payment expense in respect of services provided to subsidiary undertaking    464 464 Total contributions by and distributions to owners 31 38102  1232 39365 At 31 December 2016 129 66280 6625 266 73300 Total expense and other comprehensive loss for the period    1842 1842 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Issue of placing shares 17 24983   25000 Exercise of share options 3 493   496 Costs of share issues  1374   1374 Share based payment expense    643 643 Share based payment expense in respect of services provided to subsidiary undertaking    1222 1222 Total contributions by and distributions to owners 20 24102  1865 25987 At 31 December 2017 149 90382 6625 289 97445 Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 31 December 2017 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Notes
31 December
31 December
Noncurrent assets Investments C3 9137 7915 Total noncurrent assets 9137 7915 Current assets Trade and other receivables C4 79 61 Intercompany loan balance C5 65021 60541 Cash and cash equivalents 23849 5061 Total current assets 88949 65663 Total assets 98086 73578
Current liabilities Trade and other payables C6 641 278 Total liabilities 641 278 Net assets 97445 73300
Share capital 20 149 129 Share premium 20 90382 66280 Merger reserve 6625 6625 Retained earnings 289 266 Total equity 97445 73300 Approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 18 April 2018.
John Samuel
Company number Paul Denney Chief Financial Officer Company statement of financial position As at 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 62 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Company statement of cash flows As at 31 December 2017
Year ended 31 December 17 months ended 31 December Operating activities Loss before tax 1842 1523 Adjustment for noncash items Share based payment 643 768 Increase in trade and other receivables C4 18 17 Increase in trade and other payables C6 363 141 Net cash outflow from operations 854 631 Investing activities Increase in intercompany loans C5 4480 40587 Net cash outflow from investing activities 4480 40587 Financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital net of costs 24122 38133 Net cash inflow from financing activities 24122 38133 Increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 18788 3085 Cash and cash equivalents at start of yearperiod 5061 8146 Cash and cash equivalents at end of yearperiod 23849 5061 C1 Principal accounting policies The financial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006 and in accordance with IFRS.
The principal accounting policies adopted are the same as for those set out in the Groups financial statements.
Critical accounting estimates and areas of judgement Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experiences and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The estimates and assumptions that have the most significant effects on the carrying amounts of the assets and liabilities in the financial information are discussed below Carrying value of investments and intercompany loan balances Xeros Technology Group has significant balances held as investments in subsidiaries and intercompany loan balances.
The
Directors consider the valuation and recoverability of these balances based on the potential future cashflows from utilisation of the Xeros technology.
The Directors consider all available evidence in making their judgements on the recoverability of these balances including internal forecasts and valuations performed by third parties.
The Directors consider that there is no impairment of these amounts.
C2 Company results The Company has elected to take the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present the parent Companys statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income.
The parent Companys result for the year ended 31 December 2017 was a loss of 1842000 period ended 31 December 2016 1523000.
The audit fee for the Company is set out in note 4 of the Groups financial statements.
C3 Investment in subsidiary companies At 31 December 2016 the Company held the following investments in subsidiaries Undertaking Sector Share of issued capital and voting rights Xeros Limited Research development and commercialisation of polymer technology alternatives to traditional aqueous based technologies 100% Xeros Inc.
Commercialisation of polymer technology alternatives to traditional aqueous based technologies 100% Xeros High Performance Workwear Inc.
Commercialisation of polymer technology alternatives to traditional aqueous based technologies in cleaning specialist personal protective equipment 100% Held through Xeros Limited.
63 Xeros Technology Group plc Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Notes to the Company information For the year ended 31 December 2017 C3 Investment in subsidiary companies continued Xeros Limited is incorporated in England and Wales as a private limited company under registered number .
Its
Xeros Inc. incorporated in Delaware USA.
Xeros Inc. s registered office is 250 Commercial Street Suite 4002A Manchester New Hampshire 03103 USA.
Xeros High Performance Workwear Inc.
19801 USA.
Cost and net book value 000 At 31 July 2015 7451 Additions 464 At 31 December 2016 7915 Additions 1222 At 31 December 2017 9137 Additions comprise amounts in respect of the IFRS 2 sharebased payment contribution relating to options granted to employees of the Companys subsidiaries.
C4 Trade and other receivables 31 December 31 December Prepayments and accrued income 42 41 Other debtors C5 Intercompany loans 31 December 31 December Intercompany loan 65021 60541 Loans comprise a loan of 63648000 31 December 2016 59422000 to Xeros Limited and a loan of 1373000 31 December 2016 1119000 to Xeros Inc.
No interest was payable on these loans.
All intercompany loans are repayable on demand.
C6 Trade and other payables 31 December 31 December Trade payables  44 Social security and other taxes 18 24 Accruals 62tel64 Report for the period ending 31 December 2017 Xeros Technology Group plc Notes to the Company information continued For the year ended 31 December 2017 Designed and produced by Instinctif Partners www. reative.
The paper in this report comprises 100% FSC recycled fibres sourced entirely from post consumer waste.
XEROS
TECHNOLOGIES
Without limits.
For a world with them.
Unit 2 Evolution Advanced Manufacturing Park Whittle Way
Rotherham
S60 5BL
