The unconventional opportunity in Argentina Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Phoenix Global Resources plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Phoenix Global Resources plc is an oil and gas exploration and production compan y with the scale and resources to help unlock Argentina s oil and gas potential Chief executive officers statement Technology is the key to unlocking the potential of the Vaca Muerta p2 Why Phoenix Pure play exposure to Vaca Muerta and Argentina unconventionals p8
Chairmans statement
A new board and a renewed focus on corporate governance WE ARE INVESTING IN THE LONGTERM DEVELOPMENT OF ARGENTINA AND THE FUTURE OF ENERGY S i r M i c h a e l R a k e Nonexecutive chairman
Operating review
Conventional production supports our exciting unconventional appraisal activity CO NTE NTS Strategic report 1 Highlights 2 At a glance 8 Chairmans statement 10 Chief executive officers statement 14 Our market drivers 18 Our business model 20 Our strategy and KPIs 22 Operating review at a glance 24 Operating review 32 Chief financial officers review 36 Risk review risk management 38 Risk review principal risks and uncertainties 44 Sustainability review
50 Chairmans statement on corporate governance 52 Board of directors 56 Corporate governance report 60 Nomination committee report 62 Audit and risk committee report 65 Letter from the remuneration committee chairman 67 Remuneration policy report 76 Annual report on remuneration 81 Directors report 85 Statement of directors responsibilities Financial statements 88 Independent auditors report 93 Consolidated income statement 94 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 95 Consolidated statement of financial position 96 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 97 Consolidated statement of cash flows 98 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 130 Company statement of financial position 131 Company statement of changes in equity 132 Company statement of cash flows 133 Notes to the company financial statements Other information 142 Glossary 143 Registered offices 144 Officers and advisers Completed strategic combination Phoenix Global Resources plc created on 10 August 2017 Revenues of US141.8 million Integration of offices and reorganisation of operational and business support teams completed 560000 net Vaca Muerta shale acres Secured operatorship and significant acreage at Rio Atuel Mata Mora and Corralera Adjusted EBITDAX US40.6 million 1 Excludes nonrecurring expenses US32.9 million Operating loss of US275.0 million 2 After impairment of goodwill US224.2 million noncash and nonrecurring expenses US32.9 million 2018 accelerated business plan in place and execution under way Recapitalisation completed providing funding for growth STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 HIGHLIGHTS We have the technology capital and resources to actively participate in the Argentina shale revolution.
We are an owner and operator so have control of the process from licensing through exploration and appraisal and into production.
Why
Phoenix
SCALE AND UPSIDE IN ARGENTINA 7.5% of Vaca Muerta net acreage net Vaca Muerta acres 1% of total Argentine production
A R G E N TIN A
AIRES
MENDOZA
CITY
Cuyana basin
Neuquina basin San Jorge basin
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 2 AT A GLANCE Read more on pages 24 to 31
Argentina
LONDON
INCOUNTRY OPERATOR Operational centre in Mendoza Proven operator of both conventional and unconventional Strong relationships with government and partners FINANCIAL STRENGTH AND ACCESS TO CAPITAL Strong financial backing and commitment to highest standards of governance Access to global equity from UK US Europe Asia and Latin America Ability to source local and international finance US UNCONVENTIONAL TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER Technical centre in Houston Management and technical staff have decades of unconventional experience of shale development in the US Applying the latest shale and unconventional technology and expertise to crack the Vaca Muerta code quicker LISTED PURE PLAY IN LONDON AND BUENOS AIRES Focus on onshore Argentina unconventional development opportunities Positioned for unconventional upside with significant acreage under licence Listed on London Stock Exchange AIM PGR and Buenos Aires Stock Exchange BCBA PGR MULTIPLE UNCONVENTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES IN ARGENTINA The evaluation of the Vaca Muerta shale formation is well under way in the Puesto Rojas area in Mendoza province with five wells targeting the formation in 2017.
A number of wells have also been drilled in the Agrio and Chachao formations at the nearby Cerro Pencal area also demonstrating the potential for unconventional development.
A full 3D seismic survey in southern Puesto Rojas is being processed and interpreted to plan for future drilling.
In Neuqun province a significant Vaca Muerta opportunity exists at the Mata Mora and Corralera concessions that are proximate to and on trend with the most prolific Vaca Muerta producing licences.
BUENOS AIRES
CITY
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 3 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The 2015 elections returned a progressive and probusiness government that is focused on economic growth and stability.
This progressive administration provides the foundation for real change in the fortunes of Argentina.
Why
Argentina
POLITICAL CHANGE CONTINUES TO DRIVE REFORMS Cambiemos won the 2015 elections and strengthened its position in midterm elections in October 2017 Balancing need for change with gradualism through 2019 Appointment of Argentina as chair of G20 endorses the countrys foreign policy achievements PROBUSINESS AGENDA Threeway labour deal between government unions and private business Corporate tax reforms corporate tax reduced to 30% in 2018 with a further 5% decrease in 2020 including reducing tax on retained earnings reinvested Zerotolerance policy on corruption
Fast track to OECD membership Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 4 AT A GLANCE CONTINUED NORMALISING ECONOMIC
Antiinflation monetary policies including high interest rate bills Lebacs to encourage banks to invest and reduce money supply Focus on reducing primary fiscal deficit 4.2% in 2017 vs 5.4% in 2015 Argentine authorities have requested an exceptional access Standby Arrangement from the IMF to underpin the countrys economic programme DEREGULATION OF CAPITAL MARKETS Reform of capital markets law to develop capital markets leveraging and accompanying country growth Foreign exchange regulations lifted in December 2015 First 100 year sovereign bond issued in 2017 was oversubscribed 25% Corporate tax reduced to 30% in 2018 and to 25% in 2020 EQUITY MARKETS GROWING Best performing global market index in 2017  up 77% in the year IPO market returned in 2017 and continues in 2018 Potential reclassification of Argentina as emerging market by MSCI in June 2018 Standard and Poors raised Argentinas sovereign credit rating to B and maintained outlook at stable in October 2017 FDI AND PORTFOLIO FLOWS INCREASING Significant increase in foreign direct investments and portfolio flows in past two years Substantial investment in oil and gas industry by international oil companies and overseas national oil companies Bilateral investment agreements in place with more than 55 countries STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 5 China
Algeria
USA
Canada
80tel1115
USA
China
Argentina
Libya
Vaca Muerta is a worldclass unconventional resource play with current production in excess of 90000 boepd and a production expectation of more than 110000 boepd in 2018 double 2016 production.
Unconventional oil and gas has the potential to transform the future of Argentinas economy.
Why
Vaca
Muerta
Recoverable shale gas resources
Significant investment to date YPF announced JVs with major players over past five years Since 2013 Chevron Dow Since 2014 Shell Total Pan American Energy
Petronas
Since 2015 Wintershall Sinopec Since 2017
Equinor ExxonMobil Vaca Muerta is competitive with worldwide explorationdevelopment opportunities Benefiting from the US shale experience technology transfer and experienced oilfield service providers THE VACA MUERTA FORMATION Recoverable shale oil resources Bn bbl million acres Gas window
Oil window
MENDOZA CITY BUENOS AIRES WORLDCLASS RESOURCE US7.5 Bn invested in unconventional in 2017 in a tough commodity environment Source US EIA Source US EIA Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 6 AT A GLANCE CONTINUED 385tel 4100tel 24900tel 54500tel Characteristics Vaca Muerta Wolfcamp Eagle Ford Marcellus Oil and liquid rich gas Oil Oil and liquid rich gas Gas Area million acres 7.5 11.2 3.0 6.2 Total organic content % 310 3 35 212 Thickness of shale horizon ft 1000 900 250 200 Reservoir pressure kpsi 4.59.5 4.6 7.012.0 2.05.5 TOTAL VACA MUERTA PRODUCTION BOEPD TOTAL DRILLED AND COMPLETED WELLS IN VACA MUERTA CUMULATIVE AB OVE GRO U N D FAC TO RS ESTABLISHED OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY SINCE 1920s Established infrastructure Skilled and trained personnel with deep understanding of assets Developed oilfield service sector with international and domestic players POSITIVE REGULATORY
Federal government actively encourages investment in industry and has deregulated the oil price Provincial governments in Neuqun and more recently in Mendoza introduced supportive regulations for unconventional oil and gas and proactive permitting Industrial labour and fiscal reforms driving efficiency gains and lowering costs B E LOW GRO U N D FAC TO RS Source GandG Energy Consultants Source GandG Energy Consultants Not to scale
Lateral up to 3000 metres STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 7 W e are investing in the longterm development of Argentina and the future of energy Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman Board priorities for 2018 Strategic oversight as Phoenix delivers its operational and oil and gas appraisal objectives Preparing the company for rapid growth in investment drilling and development activity Defining the fiveyear plan to capture the value opportunity in Argentina Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 8 CHAIRMANS STATEMENT Dear shareholders I have been fortunate to visit Argentina regularly since 2001 and I have been involved with BritishArgentine commerce and business for the past several years.
Argentina is an extraordinary country with a proud commercial heritage that is blessed with a wealth of natural resources and a skilled and welleducated workforce.
Following more than a decade of domestic policy that stifled investment the current Macri administration came into power in 2015.
The new administration is progressing a business friendly growth agenda that has reconnected Argentina to the international community.
Since being elected the administration has delivered significant advances with regard to foreign policy economic normalisation and social reform.
Argentina is on a fasttrack process to join the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD and has been designated as the G20 chair for 2018.
The Argentine Peso has been fully deregulated with exchange controls removed and has been freely floating since December 2015.
Revised monetary policy has been introduced by the central bank aimed at bringing inflation under control and protecting the value of the Peso over the medium to long term.
The government has introduced important labour tax and capital markets reforms which are helping to attract investment both domestically and from abroad and reactivate the economy.
The fiscal deficit is being tackled and unemployment is gradually reducing.
In 2017 the Argentine Merval Index was the bestperforming stock market index globally.
The recent currency volatility and devaluation driven by domestic inflation concerns highlights the challenges Argentina faces.
However the administrations reaction to this recent volatility and the IMFs positive response is encouraging.
The new policy agenda is attracting substantial amounts of foreign capital investment.
The oil industry is at the forefront of this trend with its ability to rapidly improve the countrys balance of trade.
International oil companies investing in Argentina and specifically in the Vaca Muerta shale include ExxonMobil BP Shell Total Equinor previously Statoil Chevron Sinopec Petronas and Schlumberger.
These factors provided the backdrop for the transformative corporate combination of Andes Energia and Trefoil Holdings B. completed in August 2017.
Phoenix Global Resources is our new identity and marks a new beginning with new management and a new strategy.
Our business has effectively quadrupled in terms of scale.
We have greatly enhanced our operating capability strengthened our financial position and our access to capital.
We have created a very different and investible platform of substantial conventional resources and reserves underpinning a much larger unconventional opportunity in the Vaca Muerta shale.
The Vaca Muerta is the only commercially producing shale formation outside of North America and it is currently producing at a rate of more than 90000 boepd.
Importantly during 2017 we have upgraded and revamped our corporate governance both at board level and within the operating business.
We welcomed many new faces to the board and now have a strong experienced board.
During the year I was appointed chairman Anuj Sharma was appointed CEO and Philip Wolfe was appointed
We welcomed John Bentley and Garrett Soden as independent non executive directors and also Guillaume Vermersch as nonexecutive director.
Importantly following the appointment of John and Garrett to the board the number of independent nonexecutive directors has increased to four.
The second half of the year was one of transformation and consolidation with focus on driving forward the operational and corporate integration of the two businesses before yearend.
Having recently announced our accelerated business plan and recapitalised our business with the support of the Mercuria Group Phoenix is now reset to capitalise on the significant unconventional oil and gas growth opportunities in Argentina including in the world class Vaca Muerta shale formation.
I am very pleased to be the new chairman of Phoenix and am excited as we look forward to growing our business and realising its significant potential over the next 12 months and beyond.
Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 4 June 2018 H OW WE M AI N T AI N S T R O N G A N D E FFE C TI V E G O VE R NAN C E
We have assembled a new board with significant oil and gas and Argentina experience that is focused on corporate governance Read more on page 52
The company has elected to report against the requirements of the UK Corporate and Governance Code and to substantially comply with its provisions Read more on page 56
We are implementing procedures to assess the effectiveness of the board and of the individual directors Read more on page 56 Engaging with stakeholders A relationship agreement is in place with our major shareholder to protect the rights of minority shareholders Read more on page 59 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION 9 Applying the best technology to appraise and develop our unconventional assets can unlock significant value and upside Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer Creation of Phoenix The completion of the combination of Andes Energia and Trefoil in the year has created a pure play Argentinafocused independent exploration and production company with real scale and the ability to finance an active unconventional work programme in the Vaca Muerta.
Production reserves and resources At 31 December 2017 Phoenix had production of more than 11000 boepd representing approximately 1% of Argentinas total oil and gas production.
Our 2P reserves have been independently assessed at 57.2 million boe and our contingent and prospective resources have been independently assessed at 1795 million boe.
We have working interest acreage in the Vaca Muerta of approximately 560000 acres  equivalent to approximately 7.5% of the formation acreage as a whole.
We firmly believe that Vaca Muerta and other unconventional resources in Argentina represent the next shale oil revolution and that Phoenix is well positioned to create significant value and play a meaningful part in the growth of the Argentine unconventional oil and gas industry.
Securing operatorship and acreage Since August 2017 we have built on our strategy to consolidate our acreage position and have sought to increase the number of Phoenix operated positions across our portfolio.
In the Rio Atuel licence adjacent to our Puesto Rojas area we successfully negotiated and doubled our participation taking it to 66.7% and secured the operatorship from Tecpetrol in October 2017.
In April 2018 we successfully renegotiated the memorandum of understanding that was previously in place in respect of the Mata Mora and Corralera blocks.
The renegotiation resulted in the formation of a joint venture with GyP the Neuqun provinceowned oil and gas company.
Phoenix has increased its participation in the Mata Mora and the majority of the Corralera areas from 27% to 90%.
In doing so we have also assumed operatorship.
Additionally in the recent Neuqun province bidround we acquired four new blocks with development potential in the unconventional Vaca Muerta Mulichnico and Agrio formations.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 10 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT PHOENIXS GROWTH POTENTIAL 57 .2 MMboe 2P reserves 207 MMboe Contingent resources 3C 1795 MMboe Contingent and prospective resources 3C  3Pr Summary of reserves by basin 31 December 2016 Production Revision to estimate 31 December 2017
Mbbl
Gas
MMscf
Total
Mboe
Oil
Mbbl
Gas
MMscf
Total
Mboe
Oil
Mbbl
Gas
MMscf
Total
Mboe
Oil
Mbbl
Gas
MMscf
Total
Mboe
Neuquina 1P 17576 17592 1738 727 1859 2P 31265 31397 1738 727 1859 696 3P 43665 43796 1738 727 1859 5511 13755 3218 Austral 1P 3374 16152 306 6704 1423 28 2P 4632 21523 306 6704 1423 54 3P 4762 23149 306 6704 1423 Cuyana 1P 7309  7309 664 92 679 1043 92 1027 5602  5602 2P 7604  7604 664 92 679 940 6000  6000 3P 7849  7849 664 92 679 897 6288  6288 As per Gaffney Cline and Associates year end 2017 reserves audit Integration technology transfer and people In October 2017 we consolidated our teams in Buenos Aires and moved into our new offices at Torre Alem Plaza.
This brought our corporate team together in a single location and fasttracked the integration process.
Moving to a single location and integrating staff has enabled us to instil our corporate culture and the values that underpin our governance objectives across all of our teams.
Phoenix opened its technical excellence centre in Houston in April 2018.
Transferring the knowledge and technology developed in the US shale industry to Argentina and bringing that knowledge to bear in the development of our assets is fundamental to the Phoenix strategy.
We have already made a number of key expert appointments including a senior geophysicist senior geoscientist and have secured the services of a senior directional drilling engineer.
Basing our technical centre in Houston puts our team directly in the engine room of the US shale industry and provides us access to the best and most experienced service providers and consultants in the US.
We have strengthened our team in Mendoza with the appointment of a new asset manager with responsibility for our Argentina asset portfolio and have also recruited a specialist in directional drilling who will oversee the execution of our upcoming horizontal drilling activities.
Our teams in Mendoza and Houston are technologically enabled to work closely with each other to marry incountry operational excellence and a deep understanding of our assets with world class geological geophysical and technical expertise.
This unconventional technical expertise developed over years of working unconventional plays in the US will enable us to optimise our appraisal and evaluation programme of the companys significant unconventional opportunities.
1 As per WD Von Gonten and Company NSAI OPC and Francisco Guilsano reports 2 As per Gaffney Cline and Associates year end 2017 reserves audit report STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 11 Unconventional regulations in Mendoza The recently announced unconventional oil and gas regulations in Mendoza province are very important for our industry.
They provide us with the framework to move forward responsibly with our appraisal and evaluation activities in the northern part of the Neuquina basin where we have approximately 745000 working interest acres of which approximately 445000 are prospective for unconventional development.
These regulations are the result of several months work by the province and its advisers and in our view reflect industry best practice.
The regulations balance the protection of the environment and the communities we operate in with the responsible development of the provinces significant unconventional oil and gas resources.
Importantly the regulations provide the foundation for our continued and increased investment in the province of Mendoza that will bring job creation both in our own operations and in the service industry that supports us.
This investment will also bring direct benefit to the province through taxes and royalties.
Because the combination brought together two existing groups already active in Mendoza province we believe that we benefit from an early entrant advantage in the province on which we are well positioned to capitalise as we appraise and evaluate the Vaca Muerta and Tight Agrio formations.
Business development As well as investing in our existing asset base Phoenix continues to evaluate nonorganic growth opportunities including participating in new licence bid rounds and other thirdparty sale processes.
In April 2018 the company successfully participated in the Neuqun province bid round securing four additional operated blocks that are prospective for unconventional appraisal.
In addition the company participated in the bidding round in the Mendoza province bidding for blocks which are proximate to our existing interests in the province.
Outlook
The 2018 accelerated business plan more than doubles our 2017 capital expenditure programme.
Phoenix plans to target capital expenditure on key assets in and around the Puesto Rojas area and on our Mata Mora licence.
2018 accelerated business plan 70% focused on unconventional appraisal and evaluation The capital expenditure programme also involves a new 3D seismic survey being shot on the southern part of the Puesto Rojas and the La Brea and Rio Atuel licences together with drilling nine additional vertical wells to appraise the Vaca Muerta and Tight Agrio formations.
Later in the year we plan to drill our first horizontal wells in the Puesto Rojas area which if successful will be an important milestone in demonstrating the potential for largescale unconventional development in the Puesto Rojas area.
In the second half of 2018 we plan to drill and complete our first two unconventional horizontal wells on the Mata Mora licence area.
Again the results of our pilot well and initial horizontal wells will inform our plan for a fullscale development programme of Vaca Muerta at Mata Mora.
Mata Mora is a core concession for the group as it represents a significant operated acreage position in Vaca Muerta and lies ontrend with a number of existing unconventional production areas.
These existing production areas account for almost all of the current commercial oil production from the Vaca Muerta formation.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 12 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT CONTINUED Phoenix will also continue to invest in its conventional reserves in the Neuquina basin that provide the company with low risk and high netback production.
At the Puesto Rojas area the company has net 2P conventional reserves of 17.2 MMboe.
Similarly we have net 2P conventional reserves of 6.0 MMboe at Chachahuen where we continue to invest with our operating partner YPF.
In addition our assets in the Austral and Cuyana basins will continue to provide Phoenix with steady profitable gas and oil production respectively.
We are committed to the judicious deployment of our capital to the projects that will create the greatest value for our shareholders.
In the medium term this will involve balancing shortterm production growth with the longer term objective of migrating our significant unconventional resources to reserves and on into profitable production.
I believe that Phoenix has many attractive investment opportunities across our asset base in Argentina and I look forward to the challenge of developing our unconventional exploration opportunities into worldclass production assets.
Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer 4 June 2018 Our overriding objective is to build value over the medium to long term focusing our efforts on the following priority areas Proving up and derisking our extensive unconventional acreage.
Phoenix is one of the largest holders of acreage with unconventional potential in
The companys initial focus is on appraising derisking and developing this large unconventional asset base.
We plan to progressively move our assets into development phase as we appraise and derisk working across our substantial asset portfolio.
Building our organisation to prepare for large scale development of our unconventional resources.
Phoenix will continue to strengthen our organisation adding expertise through specific appointments and developing our people through training programmes as we prepare for the large scale development of our unconventional resources.
Bringing the right expertise from the US independents shale experience remains key to the efficient development of Argentinas vast unconventional resources.
Phoenix will continue to leverage that experience through our Houston technical centre.
Opportunistic inorganic growth through farmins joint ventures partnerships and portfolio rationalisation.
While Phoenix holds a large portfolio of both unconventional and conventional assets and is well set for long term organic growth the group remains open to working with others to develop our own portfolio or to add new prospects to our portfolio.
This may be through acquisition farminout opportunities joint ventures or partnerships in the Neuquina basin and other attractive basins throughout Argentina.
We will focus on opportunities where we can realise attractive synergies share knowhow or where such arrangements have clear strategic and operational alignment with other operators.
SPRINGBOARDING OFF A STABLE LONG LASTING
PLATFORM TO FOCUS ON UNCONVENTIONAL
APPRAISAL AND DEVELOPMENT FOR LONG TERM GROWTH STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Future priorities Ov erview of the Argentina oil and gas market Brent crude opened the year at US55.05 per barrel and struggled to make upward progress through the first half before hitting a low in June of US44.09 per barrel.
In the second half of 2017 both the Brent and WTI benchmark indices strengthened as the impact of the predicted rebalancing of global oil inventories began to provide more robust support for prices.
Brent closed the year at US66.73 per barrel.
This reflected lower levels of investment over the last several years coupled with stronger quota compliance among OPEC member countries continuing to suppress inventories.
Prices have remained firm into 2018 with the US70.00 per barrel Brent crude threshold breached on 8 May 2018 for the first time since December 2014.
Prices have increased further through May and breached the US80.00 per barrel threshold.
Whilst industrywide investment in exploration and development activity remains at relatively low levels a number of prospective investment bright spots have emerged notably including Argentina where the Vaca Muerta and other relatively virgin unconventional formations have continued to attract significant levels of interest and investment.
The current administration continues to welcome inward investment as regulatory and fiscal reform continues apace.
The oil and gas industry can play a significant role in the economic rehabilitation of Argentina through its potential to make a rapid and meaningful impact on the balance of trade.
Increased domestic oil and gas production will reduce the reliance on expensive oil and gas imports and will lead to job creation in Argentina driving further economic prosperity.
Commodity price volatility continued to be a feature of our market in 2017.
ARGENTINAS ENERGY MIX Argentina has a relatively high level of dependence on hydrocarbons for its energy with approximately 89% of the countrys energy needs satisfied by oil and gas.
Coal consumption is low reflecting the low level of coal deposits in Argentina compared to other nations resulting in comparatively low CO emissions.
Market statistics Source Argentine Ministry of Energy Other 11% Oil 36% Gas 53% Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 14 OUR MARKET DRIVERS 511954 550teltel bpd 44teltel
OIL PRODUCTION Domestic oil production has declined by approximately 13% in the period from 2012 to 2017.
The rate of decline has accelerated in recent years as an increasing number of mature conventional oil fields are affected by natural decline.
Average daily production fell from approximately 512000 bpd in 2016 to approximately 479000 bpd in 2017 a decrease of approximately 6.4% year on year.
GAS CONSUMPTION The majority of gas consumption is in three sectors namely power generation industrial manufacturing and gas for domestic heating and cooking.
GAS PRODUCTION Gas production has been relatively consistent in the period from 2012 to 2017 with decline from conventional gas assets in the period to 2014 replaced by initial gas production volumes from Vaca Muerta and other unconventional and tight gas formations from 2015 through 2017.
WHO PRODUCES OIL AND PHOENIXS POSITION Oil production in Argentina is dominated by YPF the stateowned production company and Pan American Energy the joint venture between BP and
Phoenix currently accounts for approximately 1.6% of total oil production in Argentina.
The substantial majority of this production is from relatively mature conventional assets.
The companys position as an early entrant in the unconventional sector bolstered by the steady acquisition and consolidation of acreage provides the springboard for Phoenix to play a significant role in the development of the industry and of unconventional production in Argentina.
OIL IMPORTS In 2017 Argentina imported approximately a net 17500 bpd accounting for approximately 3.5% of total consumption.
GAS IMPORTS Approximately 23% of Argentinas annual gas needs are currently sourced through import either through pipeline from Bolivia or internationally in the form of LNG.
Source Argentine Ministry of Energy Source Argentine Ministry of Energy Source Instituto Mosconi Source Argentine Ministry of Energy Phoenix 1.6% Chevron 1.8% Tecpetrol 2.5% Sinopec 5.2% Other 14.3% Pluspetrol 6.3% PAE 20.3% YPF 46.5% Petrobras 1.5% Other 6.2%
21.6% CNGautomotive 5.7% Power generation 38.6%
27.9% STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 15 THE ISSUE OUR RESPONSE LINK TO STRATEGY Argentina previously operated a semi regulated pricing regime that was removed in October 2017.
Sales contracts are typically priced by reference to Brent with a locationquality discount applied.
Whilst the removal of the semiregulated pricing removes downside price protection it does allow companies to participate in upside gains.
Oil and gas prices have been volatile in the last several years including periods of consistently low prices driven by oversupply.
Exposure to oil price risk can significantly affect the amount of cash generated from operations from one period to the next.
Oil prices have been strengthening recently and the company has implemented a hedging policy to fix prices when it is commercially appropriate to do so.
In fixing prices through swap contracts the company is able to have clarity on funds from operations to underpin budgeted capital expenditure.
This is particularly important in periods of significant development activity.
The company only enters hedging arrangements in respect of a portion of the production derived from our proved developed producing pdp wells.
In addition we do not hedge anticipated increases in production upfront.
Argentina has a natural gas deficit and relies on imports of gas from Bolivia and also LNG cargoes from the international market.
Argentina has little to no coal reserves and relies heavily on gas for power generation.
The import price for gas is high with imports from Bolivia averaging US4.8 per MMbtu in 2017 and LNG priced on average at US5.7 per MMbtu.
The 2017 domestic gas price averaged only US3.6 per MMbtu.
This results in an import loss of US1.2  US2.1 per MMbtu that directly affects the countrys balance of trade.
In order to encourage domestic production and reduce the reliance on imported gas a number of incentive schemes are in place whereby a producer can receive a higher price for gas in certain circumstances.
Argentine shale gas currently attracts a premium of approximately US3.6 per MMbtu over the prevailing domestic price.
Phoenix is a price taker for gas and does not seek to hedge production.
The majority of Phoenixs current gas production is derived from conventional assets in the Santa Cruz Sur area.
The companys objective for gas production in the long term is to develop the unconventional gas resources that we have within our portfolio where commercially viable.
We will continue to work with our partner ROCH S. to maximise Santa Cruz production.
The company will participate in gas incentive arrangements where possible.
Market issues Oil prices Gas prices Read more on our strategy and business model on pages 18 to 21.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production Control and consolidate
Profitable production Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 16 OUR MARKET DRIVERS CONTINUED The Argentine Peso has historically been weak and has suffered extended periods of devaluation.
Concurrently cost inflation in Argentina has been high with the Consumer Price Index showing inflation of 24.8% 38.0% and 25.0% in 2015 2016 and 2017 respectively.
Bringing inflation under control together with stabilising and strengthening the Peso is a key tenet of the current administrations policy agenda that has a goal of bringing price inflation down to the 5% level by 20202021.
The oil and gas industry in Argentina benefits from a degree of natural hedge protection from currency risk as sales contracts for oil are denominated in US Dollars by reference to the Brent benchmark price.
In addition oilfield service contracts for example those related to drilling and completion are also mostly denominated and settled in US Dollars.
Cost inflation affects the company in relation to salaries and wages that are denominated in Peso and are adjusted for inflation periodically before performance or other increases.
In addition contracts for parts materials services or property sourced domestically will increase year on year due to inflation.
The unconventional oil and gas industry in Argentina has seen a significant uptick in investment and activity in the last several years.
There are a limited number of drilling rigs in the country that are capable of drilling the long lateral horizontal wells that are required for evaluation and ultimately large scale production.
In addition the number of unconventional completion crews with international experience is limited and their availability is driven by demand.
The company seeks to form relationships with trusted service providers and individual crews.
Contracts for drilling and completion services are put in place in advance and campaigns are scheduled to maximise operational efficiencies and crew and equipment mobilisation and demobilisation synergies where possible.
Argentina is a net importer of both oil and gas.
The unconventional industry has the potential to make Argentina self sufficient in terms of its energy needs and to help redress the countrys balance of payments.
Currency and inflation
Profitable production
Explore and develop
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 S U P P O R T E D B Y A R O B U S T G OV E R N A N C E FR A M E W O R K
Phoenix operates in a leading shale region with the second largest recoverable shale gas resources and the fourth largest recoverable shale oil resources in the world much of which is located in the Vaca Muerta formation.
OUR VALUE ENABLERS
We use the latest international technology to appraise and develop our assets.
Our Houston technical office puts us in the engine room of the US shale industry alongside the best and most knowledgeable shale industry expertise
Our technical and operational teams combine deep knowledge of the Argentina oil and gas industry with unconventional specialism and the cutting edge industry expertise from the US Financial capital We benefit from strong financial backing from a supportive major shareholder and have a history of securing financing in
Our dual listing in London and Buenos Aires gives us access to domestic and international equity markets
AND APPRAISAL THE RIGHT ASSETS Identify assets We seek to secure operatorship on the assets that we participate in We acquire acreage positions that are contiguous with our existing areas and have unconventional potential or acreage positions that are proximate to or on trend with existing unconventional producing areas Combining local knowledge and experience with the best international technology to evaluate the potential of our assets Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 18 OUR BUSINESS MODEL S U P P O R T E D B Y A R O B U S T G OV E R N A N C E FR A M E W O R K SUPPORTED BY A ROBUST GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK
AND SALE OUTPUTS AND
DEVELOPMENT
Returns to shareholders Our ultimate objective is to build a sustainable portfolio of unconventional production assets that delivers capital for shareholder return
Reinvestment
Reinvesting cash from operations into our assets in the medium term to achieve financing self sufficiency Optimising cost upgrading and enhancing our production and infrastructure assets maximising margins and participating in production incentive schemes where possible Enhancing and adapting drilling and completion techniques to support the large scale development of our unconventional resource base STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 19 Strategy and capital allocation OUR STRATEGIC O B J EC TIVES Phoenix holds significant licence acreage in Argentina.
Our focus is to secure operatorship and consolidate our ownership position of that acreage and to add additional acres with exposure to unconventional resources including the Vaca Muerta.
Our exploration and development activity is focused on appraising and evaluating the groups unconventional acreage.
We apply the latest US shale technologies on our Argentina assets to define a consistent repeatable drilling and completion solution for our unconventional resources.
Control and consolidate
Our strategy HOW WE DO THIS AND WHAT WE HAVE DONE The 2017 combination transaction provided the foundation for this growth strategy.
In October 2017 we successfully increased our participation in the Rio Atuel licence that sits adjacent to our existing Puesto Rojas acreage from 33.34% to 66.67% and assumed the operatorship at the same time.
In April 2018 the group participated in the Neuqun province licensing round and secured four additional operated blocks.
Phoenix also reached agreement with GyP the Neuqun provinceowned oil and gas company and our partner in the Corralerra and Mata Mora concessions to increase our participation in these blocks from 27% to 90% and to assume operatorship.
We focus our exploration and appraisal work where we have significant contiguous acreage positions  such as the Puesto RojasMalarge area  and where our acreage is proximate to areas where others have found success  for instance at Mata Mora which sits close to a number of successful Vaca Muerta producing licences including Sierras Blancas and Loma Compana.
We have continued the Vaca Muerta appraisal drilling programme on our Puesto Rojas and neighbouring concessions that we started in late 2016 completing four wells in 2017 and have also drilled an initial well into the tight Agrio formation also at Puesto Rojas with encouraging initial results.
We continue to exploit and develop our high margin conventional assets providing us a conventional production base as we continue to evaluate unconventional opportunities for development.
In 2017 the group had net production of 11070 boepd  sourced principally from conventional assets.
We continued to perform workovers on existing conventional wells and drilled a number of infill wells targeting high margin areas.
In 2017 we completed 13 workovers and drilled 134 new conventional wells including 118 wells at Chachahuen.
Our unconventional activity will continue to be accretive to production as we complete new appraisal wells.
In February 2018 the group announced the restructuring of its financing arrangements with the Mercuria Group that will underpin the accelerated business plan in 2018.
Focusing on current cash flow as well as development potential the group entered a swap agreement in January 2018 to fix the price received for a portion of our production at a Brent benchmark price of US65.97 per barrel.
This protects revenue in 2018 and hence cash generated for reinvestment in our exploration appraisal and development projects.
M E A S U R I N G O U R PROGR ESS Total Vaca Muerta and unconventional acreage % of acreage operated by Phoenix Absolute reserve and resources volumes Yearonyear reserves growth Migration of resource and reserve categories Yearonyear production volumes Opex per boe produced EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxes depreciation amortisation and exploration expenses Total shareholder return LINK TO KPIs POTENTIAL RISKS  Competition for acreage especially Vaca Muerta and other unconventional acreage May not be possible to obtain operatorship Ability to fulfil licence commitments Exploration and development risk The timely availability of capital to fund operations Homogenous well completion Availability of experienced service crews Competition for services and related costs Formation integrityability to achieve design typecurve Commodity prices and volatility Impact of inflationforeign exchange risk Fiscal risk Financing risk Final decommissioning costs and obligations Ability to optimise asset portfolio through acquisitiondivestment licencing rounds and farminout Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 20 OUR STRATEGY AND KPIs Phoenix has existing economic production from our conventional oil assets in the Neuquina and Cuyana basins and our gas assets in the Austral basin.
Our
Realising value for all of our shareholders is fundamental to what we do.
Demonstrating the commerciality of our assets and bringing forward production through accelerating asset development is key to creating value.
Profitable production
Our KPIs For performance measurement management remuneration.
We measure our performance and remunerate management based upon the following key performance indicators.
HOW WE DO THIS AND WHAT WE HAVE DONE The 2017 combination transaction provided the foundation for this growth strategy.
In October 2017 we successfully increased our participation in the Rio Atuel licence that sits adjacent to our existing Puesto Rojas acreage from 33.34% to 66.67% and assumed the operatorship at the same time.
In April 2018 the group participated in the Neuqun province licensing round and secured four additional operated blocks.
Phoenix also reached agreement with GyP the Neuqun provinceowned oil and gas company and our partner in the Corralerra and Mata Mora concessions to increase our participation in these blocks from 27% to 90% and to assume operatorship.
We focus our exploration and appraisal work where we have significant contiguous acreage positions  such as the Puesto RojasMalarge area  and where our acreage is proximate to areas where others have found success  for instance at Mata Mora which sits close to a number of successful Vaca Muerta producing licences including Sierras Blancas and Loma Compana.
We have continued the Vaca Muerta appraisal drilling programme on our Puesto Rojas and neighbouring concessions that we started in late 2016 completing four wells in 2017 and have also drilled an initial well into the tight Agrio formation also at Puesto Rojas with encouraging initial results.
We continue to exploit and develop our high margin conventional assets providing us a conventional production base as we continue to evaluate unconventional opportunities for development.
In 2017 the group had net production of 11070 boepd  sourced principally from conventional assets.
We continued to perform workovers on existing conventional wells and drilled a number of infill wells targeting high margin areas.
In 2017 we completed 13 workovers and drilled 134 new conventional wells including 118 wells at Chachahuen.
Our unconventional activity will continue to be accretive to production as we complete new appraisal wells.
In February 2018 the group announced the restructuring of its financing arrangements with the Mercuria Group that will underpin the accelerated business plan in 2018.
Focusing on current cash flow as well as development potential the group entered a swap agreement in January 2018 to fix the price received for a portion of our production at a Brent benchmark price of US65.97 per barrel.
This protects revenue in 2018 and hence cash generated for reinvestment in our exploration appraisal and development projects.
M E A S U R I N G O U R PROGR ESS Total Vaca Muerta and unconventional acreage % of acreage operated by Phoenix Absolute reserve and resources volumes Yearonyear reserves growth Migration of resource and reserve categories Yearonyear production volumes Opex per boe produced EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxes depreciation amortisation and exploration expenses Total shareholder return LINK TO KPIs POTENTIAL RISKS  Competition for acreage especially Vaca Muerta and other unconventional acreage May not be possible to obtain operatorship Ability to fulfil licence commitments Exploration and development risk The timely availability of capital to fund operations Homogenous well completion Availability of experienced service crews Competition for services and related costs Formation integrityability to achieve design typecurve Commodity prices and volatility Impact of inflationforeign exchange risk Fiscal risk Financing risk Final decommissioning costs and obligations Ability to optimise asset portfolio through acquisitiondivestment licencing rounds and farminout 1 Number of reportable HSE incidents 2 Year on year growth of reserves and resources by category 3 Operating cost per boe 4 Production volume increasedecrease 5 EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation and exploration expense 6 Personalgroup project delivery and milestone targets STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 21 Working interest Vaca Muerta acres Contingent and prospective resources
2P reserves production Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 22 OPERATING REVIEW AT A GLANCE Working interest Vaca Muerta acres Contingent and prospective resources
MMboe
MMboe
MMboe boepd 2P reserves production STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 23 Existing production is predominantly conventional while future appr aisal and de v elopment activity is focused on the u n c on v e n ti on a l op p ort u n i ty Neuquina basin Gross acres 2499389
Operated working interest acres 627380 Basin production 2017 net WI 5026 boepd Wells drilled 2017 127
Production from the Puesto Rojas area was consistent year on year with average production of 2697 boepd in 2017 compared to 2704 boepd in 2016.
This reflects the focus on exploration drilling in the period that was not immediately accretive to production together with the workover of a number of wells aimed at improving production and arresting natural decline.
Drilling activity A total of nine wells were drilled on the Puesto Rojas concession in 2017 of which seven were completed.
Of the nine wells five were drilled as unconventional vertical wells targeting the Vaca Muerta formation.
Four of these wells were completed using our secondgeneration hydraulic fracture design that aims to generate a larger fracture surface area.
This fracture design was applied on all six production horizons of the Vaca Muerta with certain horizons then individually tested to evaluate the performance of the completion technique.
The design appears to have been successful in VM3 horizon of the Vaca Muerta and it is expected that economically viable horizontal wells can be drilled in this horizon in the future using this fracture design.
Emulsion issues were encountered on all of the wells when using the fracture design in the thicker VM6 horizon of the Vaca Muerta which is the primary producing horizon of the successful CP1010 well.
While minor emulsion issues were also encountered in the CP1010 well it is believed that these issues were more severe in the newer wells due to the lower conductivity of the fracture that can result from fractures designed to generate a higher surface area.
The emulsion issues have been replicated in laboratory experiments using a combination of the produced oil water from the hydraulic fracture and formation solids.
We continue to explore options for remediation of the emulsion issues in these wells.
Javier Vallesi Chief operating officer Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 24 OPERATING REVIEW Vega Grande Puesto Rojas Rio Atuel Cerro Alquitran La Paloma Cerro Mollar Norte Cerro Mollar Oeste La Brea
El Manzano Oeste Cajon de los Caballos Phoenix area Production area
Basin boundary NEUQUINA BASIN PUESTO ROJAS AREA
Puesto
Rojas
Cerro
Mollar
Norte
Cerro
Mollar
Oeste
Operator Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix ProductionExploration Production Production Production Phoenix working interest % 100.0 100.0 100.0 Area gross acres 46950 1236 26934 2017 production net WI boepd 2485tel production net WI boepd 2569 37 98 Active production wells 18 3 3 2P reserves MMboe 16.733 0.192 0.277 Expiry Jan 2027 Jul 2022 Jul 2027 of a hydraulic fracture being performed in the Agrio formation.
Following completion of the twostage hydraulic fracture the production rate from CDM3002 increased to a maximum rate of over 600 boepd and it continues to produce at over 500 boepd.
Should this process be found to be repeatable this could significantly increase both reserves and production from the Agrio formation at the Puesto Rojas concession.
Further tests of the Agrio formation are included in the 2018 accelerated business plan.
The results of the CDM3002 workover have further potentially positive implications if the process can be found to also work in the organic rich source rock intervals of the Lower Agrio also referred to as the Tight Agrio.
If the process can be made to work successfully in these formations the company could potentially have an entirely new unconventional play on its acreage in addition to its Vaca Muerta position.
Future appraisal and development activity The 2018 planned drilling programme is focused on accelerating the appraisal and development of Phoenixs significant Vaca Muerta and other unconventional resources in the Neuquina basin.
The company plans to spend up to US120 million of total budgeted 2018 capital expenditure on developing these unconventional resources.
This activity is expected to derisk a significant portion of unconventional acreage and also provide the basis for robust production growth going forward.
The companys 2018 business plan focuses on the drilling and completion of further vertical development and exploration wells in the Puesto Rojas area targeting up to nine prospects in the unconventional Vaca Muerta and Agrio formations as well as drilling one conventional target.
The drilling plan for the companys unconventional assets together with the acquisition and processing of new seismic data in the south of Puesto Rojas and La Brea and Rio Atuel concessions is designed to prepare these assets for largescale development.
The acquisition of approximately 60000 acres of new seismic data is complete with the processing and interpretation of that data under way.
In the fourth quarter of the year the company plans to drill and complete its rst horizontal wells in the Puesto Rojas area following appraisal of its vertical wells to identify which horizons are likely to deliver the best rates and economic return.
One well CDM3001 was awaiting completion pending clarification of the permitting process associated with the new unconventional oil and gas regulations that were announced by the province of Mendoza in February 2018.
Once the permitting process is in place CDM3001 will be completed together with two planned new wells.
The planned completion will use a combination of higher conductivity and higher surface area fractures in order to determine the optimum completion for each zone of the Vaca Muerta.
The ultimate objective of this work is to design an effective repeatable and economic completion design for horizontal wells in the area.
The remaining four wells were conventional vertical wells drilled into the Agrio and Chachao formations at the Cerro Pencal field.
One well CP1014ST came online above expectations with initial production in excess of 750 boepd from the Chachao alone.
The Agrio remains behind pipe in this well and will be completed at a later date.
Two wells CP1011 and CP1012 had initially strong test results though on extended testing these wells appear to have limited natural fracture networks and as such are candidates for hydraulic fracture in 2018.
The fourth well CP1019 was completed in early 2018 and is currently under evaluation.
Workover activity In addition to the new wells drilled two workovers of existing wells were performed on the Puesto Rojas concession in 2017.
Of these the workover performed on CDM3002 is potentially significant for the longterm development of the Puesto Rojas area.
The CDM3002 well was drilled in 2016 as an exploration well and initial results were disappointing with production of only 47 boepd at the time of recompletion.
The 2017 workover involved two stages NORTH NEUQUINA BASIN STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 25 Corralera Noreste Corralera Sur Bajo del Toro El Orejano Bandurrias Norte Aguada de Castro I Aguada Pichana Aguada de Castro II Santo Domingo I
Chihuido de la Sierra Negra La Tropilla I Aguada Federal Bandurrias Sur Cruz de
Sierras Blancas Loma Campana Bajada de Aelo Laguna el Loro Mata Mora Phoenix area Production area
Basin boundary
NEUQUINA BASIN MATA MORA AND CORRALERA Licence Mata Mora
Noreste
Corralera
Sur
Operator Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix ProductionExploration Exploration Exploration Exploration Phoenix working interest % 90 90 90 Area gross acres 55240 27240 29040 2017 production net WI boepd 2016 production net WI boepd Active production wells 2P reserves MMboe Expiry Apr 2021 Apr 2021 Apr 2021 Future exploration and development activity In the Neuqun province the company is moving forward with its investment plans on its Mata Mora and Corralera licences further to increasing its ownership to 90% and securing operatorship in April 2018.
The company plans to drill its first two unconventional horizontal wells under its new agreement with GyP the Neuqun provinceowned oil and gas company on its Mata Mora block in Q3 of 2018.
These two horizontal wells should be completed in Q4 2018.
SOUTH NEUQUINA BASIN Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 26 OPERATING REVIEW CONTINUED NEUQUINA BASIN CHACHAH U E N Licence Chachahuen Operator YPF S.
ProductionExploration Production Phoenix working interest % 20.0 Area gross acres 1109007 2017 production net WI boepd 1976 2016 production net WI boepd 1521 Active production wells 246 2P reserves MMboe 6.053 Expiry Oct 2038 Exploration activity Of the wells drilled four were completed in the Centenario formation in the exploration portion of the Chachahuen concession.
This area is expected to provide growth potential at Chachahuen pending the results of additional evaluation of these wells.
Should these wells prove economic for further development it is likely that application will be made to the government to convert a portion of the exploration concession to an additional exploitation concession that would enable further development on the concession in due course.
Future exploration and development activity In 2018 the company plans to continue its investment on its Chachahuen development together with our operating partner YPF.
The development plan includes participating in approximately 80 new wells in the year.
Chachahuen should continue to deliver lowrisk and lowcost production growth adding both new producing wells and water injectors.
The development plan also contemplates the continuing conversion of underperforming production wells to water injection wells.
Continued horizontal development is also expected as this appears to be a more capital efficient means of developing certain horizons that are presently underdeveloped.
Once development of the exploitation portion of the concession is completed in around 2020 it is expected to generate high quality low cost cash flows for the company for several years to come.
Production
Chachahuen represents the companys most significant nonoperated production block in terms of activity and production.
Production has increased by 29.9% from an average of 1521 boepd in 2016 to 1976 boepd in 2017.
This reflects the impact of the 2017 drilling campaign on production and also the continued use of waterflood on the Chachahuen concession.
Drilling activity In 2017 118 wells were drilled and 112 wells were completed on the Chachahuen concession.
Of these 92 wells came online as producers in the Rayoso formation and yielded results in line with expectation.
Average maximum 30day production rates from these wells was 50 boepd.
In many cases performance is expected to improve over time due to the waterflood response on the Chachahuen concession.
YPF continues to drill water injectors on Chachahuen as needed and also converts selected underperforming production wells to water injections where remediation is not feasible.
In November 2017 YPF commenced drilling the first horizontal well ChuS 600h into the Rayoso formation.
The well was completed in December achieving a maximum 30day oil production rate of 182 bpd.
Since coming on stream production from the well has been steady with current production of approximately 170 bpd.
At the end of 2017 YPF drilled an additional horizontal well CHuS601h with similar initial results.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 27 Phoenix area Production area
Basin boundary
Aike
Rio Cullen
Las Violetas
Oceano
Moy Aike
Bremen
Puesto
Peter
Maria
Ines
Santa Cruz I Block C La Terraza Santa Cruz II Block C Caadon Alfa Tierra del Fuego Block A Tierra del Fuego Block A AUSTRAL BASIN TIERRA DEL FUEGO AREA
Las
Violetas Angostura Rio Cullen Operator ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ProductionExploration Production Production Production Phoenix WI % 12.615 12.615 12.615 Area gross acres 299244 103043 95135 2017 production net WI boepd production net WI boepd 733 2 24 Active production wells 50 3 3 2P reserves MMboe combined 2.271 Expiry Aug 2026 Aug 2026 Aug 2026 Austral basin Gross acres 1162876
Operated working interest acres Basin production 2017 net WI 3900 boepd Wells drilled 2017 6
Production from the Tierra del Fuego assets was marginally down on the prior year at 720 boepd compared to 759 boepd in 2016.
This was as a result of a production decline in the Las Violetas concession where no new drilling was undertaken and offset by an increase in the Angostura concession from the successful exploration well in the Tobifera formation.
Exploration and development activity A successful exploration well in the Tobifera formation on the Angostura concession was drilled in 2017.
The well fulfilled the licence commitments on the concession and yielded initial gross production of 2132 bpd of oil and 656 mscfd of gas.
The results of the initial well are highly promising in terms of the further development of the Tobifera formation.
A single well targeting the Springhill formation on the Rio Cullen concession was also drilled in 2017.
The well gave average initial production of 1038 Mscfd of gas and 2 bpd of oil.
Results were generally below expectation and while this well was a geologic success further development of this asset is not currently planned.
AUSTRAL BASIN Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 28 OPERATING REVIEW CONTINUED AUSTRAL BASIN SANTA CRUZ SUR AREA Licence Chorrillos
Bremen Oceano Moy Aike
Aike
Operator ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ROCH S.
ProductionExploration Production Production Production Production Production Phoenix WI % 70.0 70.0 70.0 70.0 70.0 Area gross acres 159877 169671 26687 176433 132695 2017 production net WI boepd 210tel 2016 production net WI boepd 2 Active production wells 2P reserves MMboe combined 18.420 Expiry Apr 2026 Apr 2026 Aug 2026 Apr 2026 Aug 2026 to the Tobifera formation.
One of the wells was successful and yielded average initial production of 1608 Mscfd of gas and 2 bpd of oil.
These results were in line with predrill expectations.
One of the completed wells appears to have connected to the aquifer during the hydraulic fracturing process and remediation options are being explored for the well.
The final well was successfully completed in January 2018 with an initial rate of approximately 1200 Mscfd.
The results of this programme indicate the potentially lower risk of further planned infill development in the Tobifera formation at Chorrillos.
In addition three workovers were performed at Chorrillos adding an average of 487 Mscfd of production.
Future exploration and development activity in Austral basin In 2018 the company plans to continue to invest in its Austral basin licences together with its partner ROCH S. in the basin.
Production
Average daily production for the concessions in the Santa Cruz Sur area showed marginal decline in the period with 3180 boepd in 2017 as compared to 3314 boepd in 2016.
This is primarily due to a decline in production in the Oceano concession where no new drilling or workover activity took place in the period.
Exploration and development activity In 2017 three conventional vertical wells were drilled on the Chorrillos concession of which two wells were completed.
These wells targeted the Tobifera formation and were an attempt to use more modern hydraulic fracturing technology to bring more reliable results IN 2018 THE COMPANY PLANS TO CONTINUE TO INVEST IN ITS AUSTRAL BASIN LICENCES TOGETHER WITH ITS PARTNER ROCH S.
IN ORDER TO INCREASE GAS PRODUCTION IN THE BASIN.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 29 Cuyana basin Gross acres 70385
Operated working interest acres 60294 Basin production 2017 net WI 2136 boepd Wells drilled 2017 1 CUYANA BASIN
Refugio
Tupungato Atamisqui
Herrados
Operator Phoenix Phoenix Medanito ProductionExploration Production Production Production Phoenix WI % 100.0 100.0 78.0 Area gross acres 6672 53622 10091 2017 production net WI boepd 1014tel production net WI boepd 1079 350 776 Active production wells 39 17 28 2P reserves MMboe 3.313 0.767 1.920 Expiry Jan 2026 Sep 2025 Nov 2027 SUMMARY OF OTHER CONCESSIONS BY BASIN N EUQU I NA CU YANA GOLFO SAN JORGE NOROES TE
Cajon de los
Cajon
Oriental La Paloma
Alquitrn
El Manzano Oeste La Brea
El Loro Malarge
Atuel
Vega
Grande
La
Tropilla I
Domingo I Aguada de Castro I Aguada de Castro II Puesto Pozo Cercado Confluencia
Bernado
Sur Rio
Este Cobres Gemes
Cachaquies
Operator
ROCH
S.
YPF
S.
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix YPF S.
Phoenix Phoenix YPF
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Medanito
YPF
S.
YPF
S.
ROCH
S.
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix
Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Phoenix WI %
40.0 other Area gross acres 20016 197684 606 795 65483 35583 125499 382766 283703 72043 12009 27676 29653 20263 42053 278329 763986 76108 765359 2216799 1607514 2017 production net WI boepd 2016 production net WI boepd Active production wells 2P reserves MMboe 2017 activity summary performed.
Awaiting installation of storage for production WI increased from 33.37% assumed operatorship Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round
June 2017
Sep
Sep
Nov
Nov
Oct
Oct
Jul
Pending permits
Jul
Mar
Under renegotiation
Under renegotiation
Production from the mature Tupungato and Atamisqui concessions was slightly down with average daily combined production of 1347 boepd in 2017 compared to 1429 boepd in 2016.
Production at Chaares Herrados declined from 776 boepd to 514 boepd primarily due to natural decline and no new drilling activity.
Exploration and development activity Two workovers were performed at Tupungato in 2017 both of which were acid stimulations aimed at arresting decline in the wells.
While the production increase from the wells was modest the decline curve appears to have flattened.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 30 OPERATING REVIEW CONTINUED Barancas
Refugio
Chaares
Herrados
Ceferino
Atamisqui
La Ventana
Piedras
Coloradas
Phoenix area Production area
Basin boundary SUMMARY OF OTHER CONCESSIONS BY BASIN N EUQU I NA CU YANA GOLFO SAN JORGE NOROES TE
Cajon de los
Cajon
Oriental La Paloma
Alquitrn
El Manzano Oeste La Brea
El Loro Malarge
Atuel
Vega
Grande
La
Tropilla I
Domingo I Aguada de Castro I Aguada de Castro II Puesto Pozo Cercado Confluencia
Bernado
Sur Rio
Este Cobres Gemes
Cachaquies
Operator
ROCH
S.
YPF
S.
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix YPF S.
Phoenix Phoenix YPF
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix Medanito
YPF
S.
YPF
S.
ROCH
S.
Phoenix Phoenix Phoenix
Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Production Exploration Exploration Exploration Phoenix WI %
40.0 other Area gross acres 20016 197684 606 795 65483 35583 125499 382766 283703 72043 12009 27676 29653 20263 42053 278329 763986 76108 765359 2216799 1607514 2017 production net WI boepd 2016 production net WI boepd Active production wells 2P reserves MMboe 2017 activity summary performed.
Awaiting installation of storage for production WI increased from 33.37% assumed operatorship Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round Licence won in bid round
June 2017
Sep
Sep
Nov
Nov
Oct
Oct
Jul
Pending permits
Jul
Mar
Under renegotiation
Under renegotiation There was limited new activity on Atamisqui in the period with a single conventional vertical exploration well drilled.
The well targeted the Rio Blanco formation that had been identified on 3D seismic.
In early 2018 evaluation of the well log and preliminary test data indicated that while having discovered hydrocarbons and thus being a geologic success the well is tight and will require fracture stimulation before its commerciality can be determined.
A single workover was performed at Chaares Herrados adding perforations and acid stimulation.
The results of the workover remain under evaluation.
Future exploration and development activity In 2018 the company plans to invest in additional exploration and development wells aimed at increasing oil production in the Cuyana basin.
CUYANA BASIN STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31 Phoenix is reset for growth following the integration and recapitalisation of our business
The groups 2017 financials include the performance of Trefoil for the full year plus Andes from 10 August 2017 and are compared with the 2016 financials for the standalone performance of Trefoil.
Overview
The groups revenue for the year was US141.8 million 2016 US129.3 million.
Cash flow from operating activities was US7.0 million 2016 US32.6 million and the group ended the year with US23.7 million of cash on hand 2016 US5.2 million.
Capital expenditure in the year was US82.8 million 2016 US31.0 million.
Adjusted EBITDAX for 2017 was US40.6 million and EBITDAX was US7.7 million 2016 US48.8 million.
Oil sales volumes increased to 2319184 bbl 2016 1974924 bbl due to the inclusion of Andes volumes from August 2017.
Gas sales volumes were stable at 165063 Mm 2016 163800 Mm Realised oil prices declined yearonyear from US55.88 per bbl in 2016 to US50.46 per bbl in the current period.
The decline in oil prices was as a result of the regulated pricing regime which gradually reduced the oil price month by month.
From October 2017 the oil price has been deregulated.
Following deregulation realised prices achieved for the groups oil production have on average been approximately 10% lower than the quoted Brent crude benchmark price.
Realised prices have recovered somewhat in 2018 as the Brent crude and other international benchmarks have trended upwards.
Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 32 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW Realised gas prices increased year on year from US3.08 per MMbtu in 2016 to US4.07 per MMbtu in 2017 due to improved spot sale prices in the Austral basin.
The group realised a net operating loss of US275.0 million 2016 profit US20.2 million.
The loss in the current year was after nonrecurring expenses of US32.9 million 2016 nil the substantial majority of which related to costs incurred as a result of the combination transaction and are included within administrative expenses.
The group recorded an impairment loss of US224.2 million 2016 nil related to the writedown of goodwill recognised as part of the combination transaction.
In a business combination where the purchase consideration given takes the form of shares the value of the consideration is calculated by reference to the closing share price on the day of the transaction.
At close on 10 August 2017 the companys share price was 0.49.
This relatively high share price resulted in a calculated purchase consideration of US385.1 million that has resulted in transaction goodwill of US224.2 million.
The assets and operations acquired relate in whole to oil and gas production in Argentina and as such do not result in access to new markets or customers for the group.
Reflecting this and the fact that oil and gas production is a commodity business the directors did not consider it appropriate to recognise any of the transaction goodwill and as such it has been impaired.
Income statement Gross profit declined yearonyear in absolute terms from US32.2 million in 2016 to US8.4 million in 2017.
The gross margin percentage also fell from 24.8% to 5.9%.
The reduction in profitability is largely due to the lower realised oil price and a natural decline in production from the conventional asset base which has a higher proportion of fixed costs.
Operating costs were US62.8 million in 2017 compared with US61.4 million in 2016.
Netback after deduction of royalties turnover tax and operating expenses was US52.6 million compared with US45.1 million in 2016.
The netback averaged US15.79 per boe in 2017 compared with US16.68 per boe in 2016.
Phoenix achieved a much higher netback per boe on its Neuquina basin production as compared with the Austral and Cuyana basin due to the lower operating expense in the Neuquina basin.
Cost of sales includes US49.3 million of depreciation 2016 US28.2 million related to property plant and equipment.
The groups conventional assets continue to produce positive cash flows.
The group will continue to invest in selected drilling as well as maintenance and workover activity related to the conventional production base so long as the assets remain cash positive and the investment return is attractive.
The cash generated from the conventional production assets is an important element in the financing of the 2018 accelerated business plan.
2017 sales volumes and prices by basin Oil Neuquina Austral Cuyana Total Volumes bbl 1332289 327633 659262 2319184 Revenue US000 66293 16878 33860 117031 Realised price USbbl 49.76 51.51 51.36 50.46 Gas Neuquina Austral Cuyana Total Volumes Mm 219 164844  165063 Revenue US000 38 24730  24768 Realised price USMMbtu 4.69 4.07  4.07 SINCE AUGUST 2017 OUR FOCUS HAS BEEN ON INTEGRATION REORGANISATION AND ON IMPLEMENTING A GROUPWIDE
INFORMATION SYSTEM.
THIS UNDERPINS IMPROVEMENT TO INTERNAL CONTROLS THE MONITORING OF COSTS AND FINANCIAL
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 33 Administrative expenses increased in the year from US7.6 million to US40.0 million largely driven by transaction costs incurred of US24.1 million.
These costs included costs related to transaction advice legal and financial diligence and capital market advisory fees associated with the preparation of the AIM admission document and associated professional diligence.
In addition the group incurred US2.2 million of severance costs directly related to the integration of the businesses and the restructuring of the management and administrative teams.
An additional US2.4 million related to other oneoff professional fees and expenses.
An impairment of US4.2 million was also recognised in respect of a receivable previously held in respect of an incentive plan for gas production that in the view of the company is unlikely to be recovered.
Due to the nature of the above items none are expected to recur in future periods.
The group also recognised a loss of US8.2 million 2016 nil related to the relinquishment of the Puesto Pozo Cercado block.
The licence previously held included very high exploration commitments that were not in line with the longer term strategic direction of the group hence the licence was relinquished.
Balance sheet The net assets of the group increased from US125.5 million to US282.5 million primarily as a result of the combination transaction.
The provisional fair value of net assets brought onto the balance sheet as a result of the combination transaction amounted to US125.1 million with goodwill of US35.8 million recognised due to the effect of deferred taxes.
An analysis of the assets and liabilities included in the balance sheet as a result of the combination is included in note 14 to the financial statements.
Assets acquired in the combination transaction and recorded at fair value include US132.2 million in respect of producing assets primarily Chachahuen and La Brea and a further US161.8 million related to unconventional and exploration upside primarily Mata Mora and Corralera.
In addition to assets acquired in the combination transaction in 2017 the group invested US82.8 million 2016 US31.0 million primarily in the evaluation of the groups unconventional acreage.
The focus of this investment was continuing the appraisal work related to Vaca Muerta and expanding that work to include the Tight Agrio formations and Chachao formations.
In 2017 the group has also continued to invest in further production wells at Chachahuen together with its partner YPF.
The group also substantially upgraded the oil processing and fire safety systems at the Cerro Mollar concession.
ADDITIONAL EQUITY AND DEBT FUNDING HAS ALLOWED US TO ACHIEVE A MORE BALANCED CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND REDUCE THE GROUPS OVERALL FUNDING COSTS Netback by basin US000 Neuquina Austral Cuyana Total Oil revenues 66.3 Gas revenues  24.7  24.7 Gross revenues 66.3 Royalties and turnover tax 13.0 6.7 6.6 26.4 Net revenues 53.3 Operating costs 14.7 27.7 20.5 62.9
USboe Neuquina Austral Cuyana Total Oil revenues USbbl 49.76 Gas revenues USMMbtu 4.69 Gross revenues 49.74 Royalties 9.72 5.04 10.00 7.89 Net revenues 40.02 Operating costs 11.04 20.62 31.05 18.85
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 34 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW CONTINUED Financing and liquidity As part of the combination transaction Mercuria advanced a bridging and working capital facility to the company for the amount of US160.0 million.
Of this amount US87.0 million was used to redeem outstanding loans and other liabilities related to the former Andes Energia at the completion date with the remainder for investment in capital expenditure and general corporate purposes.
At 31 December 2017 US162.6 million including accrued interest was outstanding under the bridging and working capital facility.
In addition to this facility the group had a total of US29.9 million borrowings locally in Argentina at 31 December 2017.
The
Argentina borrowings are with a small selection of local banks and carry fixed interest rates ranging from 2.2% to 4.25% for US Dollar denominated loans and fixed interest rates ranging from 20.0% to 27.0% for Argentine Peso denominated loans.
The term of these loans held in Argentina ranges from 90 days to 24 months.
At 31 December 2017 the group had cash on hand of US23.7 million 2016 US5.2 million.
In February 2018 Mercuria converted US100.0 million of the bridging and working capital facility into ordinary shares of the company at a price of 0.37 per share.
The remaining US60.0 million of the bridging and working capital facility was restructured into a new convertible revolving credit facility of US160.0 million providing US100.0 million of fresh debt capital to the group.
This fresh capital together with the cash expected to be generated from operations provides the funding for the group to move forward with the accelerated business plan in 2018.
The original bridging and working capital facility carried a variable interest rate of LIBOR plus 7% that increased on certain predetermined dates of the facility.
The new convertible revolving credit facility carries a fixed interest rate of three month LIBOR plus 4% resulting in a saving of approximately US11.0 million in cash interest in 2018.
The loan is convertible at 0.45 per share until maturity in December 2021.
Taxation
In December 2017 the Argentine federal tax authority announced a reform of the corporate income tax rules that saw the corporate income tax rate reduce from 35% to 30% for the fiscal years ended 31 December 2018 and 2019.
The corporate income tax rate is then set to reduce to 25% for fiscal year 2020 and beyond.
The reduction in the corporate income tax rate relates to profits reinvested in Argentina.
Should a company wish to pay a dividend then the tax rate for the amount of profit being used to support the dividend is increased from the relevant marginal rate back to 35%.
This tax reform will benefit the group and reduce its exposure to cash taxes during the exploration and development phase when the intention is to reinvest cash from operations back into the business.
Hedging
In January 2018 the group entered a swap arrangement with Mercuria to give price protection for a portion of its production from proved developed producing reserves at a price of US65.97 per bbl Brent crude.
The hedge was entered to underpin the capital expenditure programme for 2018 alongside the renewed funding arrangements put in place with Mercuria and announced in February 2018 concurrent with the announcement of the 2018 accelerated business plan.
Dividend
Given the companys high growth objectives the directors do not recommend the payment of a dividend.
Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer 4 June 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 35 How we manage risk to deliver our operational and commercial goals Managing business risks Understanding our principal risks and ensuring that we have sufficient controls in place is critical to our growth and success.
Managing business risks and opportunities is a key consideration in determining and then delivering against the groups strategy.
The groups approach to risk management is not intended to eliminate risk entirely but provides a means to identify prioritise and manage risks and opportunities.
This in turn enables the group to effectively deliver on its strategic objectives in line with its appetite for risk.
The boards responsibility for
risk management
The board has overall responsibility for ensuring the groups risk management and internal control frameworks are appropriate and are embedded throughout the organisation.
Principal risks are reviewed by the board and are specifically discussed in relation to setting the group strategy developing the business plan to deliver that strategy and in agreeing annual work programmes and budgets.
Group risk management framework
Define strategic objectives Determine risk appetite
Risk assessment
TOP DOWN BOTTOM UP The management of risk and opportunity plays a key role in the delivery of the groups strategy as shown below.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 36 RISK REVIEW RISK MANAGEMENT High Low
Rare
Probability
Impact
Integration activity related to
risk management
A new board was formed in August 2017 on completion of the combination transaction.
Five new members joined the board and a number of former members resigned or stepped down.
At the same time the audit and risk committee was formally established together with the remuneration committee.
Following the combination the group has commenced a comprehensive ground up reassessment of business risk which is being undertaken through documented interviews with directors management and staff throughout the organisation in addition to representatives of the groups key advisers.
The purpose of the interviews is to define a holistic view of actual and perceived risks that could affect the business and hence the ability to deliver on our strategic objectives.
The board believes that the work undertaken represents a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the business.
Consideration has been given to those which could threaten the successful delivery of our strategy impact future performance solvency or liquidity.
The risks identified are being documented in updated risk registers compiled through detailed interviews with operations and central functions including board members.
As part of that documentation the group will identify risk owners within the business and at the board level who will be specifically responsible for the stewardship of and reporting related to risks that have been assigned to them.
The role of the audit and risk committee The audit and risk committee assists the board in monitoring risk and in discharging its risk management responsibilities.
Performance measures are set to assist in objectively assessing business performance and risk management.
A number of performance measures will be established as key performance indicators that the group and management will measure itself against when evaluating performance against strategic objectives.
Mapping our principal risks Risks we can influence 1 Health safety and environment 2 Exploration development and production 3 Reserve and resource estimation and migration of volumes 4 Portfolio concentration 5 Joint venture partners 6 Financing 7 Bribery and corruption Risks outside our control 8 Commodity prices 9 Competition 10 Fiscal and political Key performance indicators used as performance measures for setting compensation and performance related pay are set in collaboration with the remuneration committee and recommended to the board for approval.
Principal risks and uncertainties The principal risks facing the group at the end of 2017 together with a description of the potential impacts mitigation measures and the appetite for the risk are presented below.
The analysis includes an assessment of the potential likelihood of the risks occurring and the potential impact.
Identified risks are segregated between those that we can influence and those outside our control.
Where we can influence risks we have more control over outcomes.
Where risks are external to the business we focus on how we control the consequences of those risks materialising.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 37 Risk Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Health safety and environment HSE Oil and gas exploration development and production activities are complex and physical in nature.
HSE risks cover many areas including major accidents personal health and safety compliance with regulations and potential environmental harm.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Low The group strives to ensure the safety of its employees contractors and visitors.
We are very conscious of the natural environment that we operate in and seek to minimise our environmental impact and footprint.
We actively promote strict adherence to regulations that govern our operation and the robust application of our own HSE policies and procedures.
There is no reason for anyone associated with our business to take unnecessary risks related to their personal safety the safety of others or the environment that we are privileged to work in.
The group has a very low appetite for risks associated with HSE and strives to achieve a zero incident rate.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The group maintains a programme of HSE asset integrity upgrade and maintenance activity.
This activity is supported by a core group of specifically selected specialist contractors.
In addition to the ongoing exploration and development activity the group has also implemented a continual improvement programme focused on its infrastructure and processing assets.
In 2017 this programme has included an upgrade of processing equipment and fire safety systems at the Cerro Mollar base and the upgrade and remediation work related to oil storage and processing facilities at the Tupungato concession.
The group has an active and continued HSE training programme for its own staff and ensures that contractors are HSE trained on an ongoing basis.
The group promotes an open and transparent culture related to HSE matters and incident reporting.
HSE performance is communicated to the board through the weekly operating and financial summary and is also discussed at each board meeting.
Number of reportable HSE incidents Exploration development and production The ultimate success of the group is based largely on its ability to successfully develop its assets and to produce oil and gas profitably from its unconventional asset base.
The ability to develop a consistent repeatable and costefficient method for drilling and completing horizontal wells is core to the successful development of unconventional oil and gas assets.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The group recognises that the initial development of new unconventional assets is complex and technically challenging.
This can expose the group to higher levels of risk particularly in the early stages of exploration appraisal and into initial development.
The group has some tolerance of this risk and acknowledges the need to have effective controls in place in this area.
Explore and develop
The group understands the importance of technology and operational experience in developing unconventional resources.
We have made a number of key appointments to the subsurface team that bring indepth and current experience of large scale US shale developments.
Our Houston office also provides the fulcrum for the transfer of technology and experience from the US market with the objective of accelerating the appraisal and development of our unconventional assets in Argentina.
The efficient delivery of complex projects underpins the groups exploration and development success and therefore the group seeks to maintain a high degree of control over its assets.
Control is exercised by assuming operatorship where possible and by obtaining increased or majority ownership positions in prospective assets.
This was demonstrated at Rio Atuel where the group obtained operatorship in late 2017 concurrently with increasing its working interest to 66.67% and at Mata Mora and Corralera in the Neuquina basin where the company increased its participation to 90% of the retained acreage and assumed operatorship.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources 4 Production volume Project delivery defined milestones Reserve and resource estimation and migration of volumes The estimation of oil and gas reserves and resources involves a high level of subjective judgement based on available geological technical and economic information.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The growth in absolute reserve volumes and the migration of reserves and resources through the different categorisations is one element of the groups success.
The group has some tolerance of risk in relation to the key activities required to deliver reserve growth such as drilling and the ability to secure additional acreage.
Profitable production
Reserve and resource volumes are estimated using the Petroleum Reservoir Management System developed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers.
The group has a strong focus on subsurface analysis and employs industry technical specialists and qualified reservoir engineers.
Technical specialists work together with the operational teams responsible for delivering asset performance to estimate reserve and resource volumes and when determining detailed development programmes for the groups assets.
The reserve and resource analysis performed is subject to internal review and where appropriate external review.
External review is undertaken by an internationally recognised reservoir engineering firm and led within that firm by a nominated competent person.
The group participates in licensing rounds in Argentina that are organised at the provincial level.
In addition Phoenix has an internal business development group that is focused on optimising existing acreage positions through purchase swap or sale of assets.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources 3 Operating cost per boe Project delivery defined milestones RISK REVIEW PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES RISKS WE CAN INFLUENCE Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 38 Risk Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Health safety and environment HSE Oil and gas exploration development and production activities are complex and physical in nature.
HSE risks cover many areas including major accidents personal health and safety compliance with regulations and potential environmental harm.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Low The group strives to ensure the safety of its employees contractors and visitors.
We are very conscious of the natural environment that we operate in and seek to minimise our environmental impact and footprint.
We actively promote strict adherence to regulations that govern our operation and the robust application of our own HSE policies and procedures.
There is no reason for anyone associated with our business to take unnecessary risks related to their personal safety the safety of others or the environment that we are privileged to work in.
The group has a very low appetite for risks associated with HSE and strives to achieve a zero incident rate.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The group maintains a programme of HSE asset integrity upgrade and maintenance activity.
This activity is supported by a core group of specifically selected specialist contractors.
In addition to the ongoing exploration and development activity the group has also implemented a continual improvement programme focused on its infrastructure and processing assets.
In 2017 this programme has included an upgrade of processing equipment and fire safety systems at the Cerro Mollar base and the upgrade and remediation work related to oil storage and processing facilities at the Tupungato concession.
The group has an active and continued HSE training programme for its own staff and ensures that contractors are HSE trained on an ongoing basis.
The group promotes an open and transparent culture related to HSE matters and incident reporting.
HSE performance is communicated to the board through the weekly operating and financial summary and is also discussed at each board meeting.
Number of reportable HSE incidents Exploration development and production The ultimate success of the group is based largely on its ability to successfully develop its assets and to produce oil and gas profitably from its unconventional asset base.
The ability to develop a consistent repeatable and costefficient method for drilling and completing horizontal wells is core to the successful development of unconventional oil and gas assets.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The group recognises that the initial development of new unconventional assets is complex and technically challenging.
This can expose the group to higher levels of risk particularly in the early stages of exploration appraisal and into initial development.
The group has some tolerance of this risk and acknowledges the need to have effective controls in place in this area.
Explore and develop
The group understands the importance of technology and operational experience in developing unconventional resources.
We have made a number of key appointments to the subsurface team that bring indepth and current experience of large scale US shale developments.
Our Houston office also provides the fulcrum for the transfer of technology and experience from the US market with the objective of accelerating the appraisal and development of our unconventional assets in Argentina.
The efficient delivery of complex projects underpins the groups exploration and development success and therefore the group seeks to maintain a high degree of control over its assets.
Control is exercised by assuming operatorship where possible and by obtaining increased or majority ownership positions in prospective assets.
This was demonstrated at Rio Atuel where the group obtained operatorship in late 2017 concurrently with increasing its working interest to 66.67% and at Mata Mora and Corralera in the Neuquina basin where the company increased its participation to 90% of the retained acreage and assumed operatorship.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources 4 Production volume Project delivery defined milestones Reserve and resource estimation and migration of volumes The estimation of oil and gas reserves and resources involves a high level of subjective judgement based on available geological technical and economic information.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The growth in absolute reserve volumes and the migration of reserves and resources through the different categorisations is one element of the groups success.
The group has some tolerance of risk in relation to the key activities required to deliver reserve growth such as drilling and the ability to secure additional acreage.
Profitable production
Reserve and resource volumes are estimated using the Petroleum Reservoir Management System developed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers.
The group has a strong focus on subsurface analysis and employs industry technical specialists and qualified reservoir engineers.
Technical specialists work together with the operational teams responsible for delivering asset performance to estimate reserve and resource volumes and when determining detailed development programmes for the groups assets.
The reserve and resource analysis performed is subject to internal review and where appropriate external review.
External review is undertaken by an internationally recognised reservoir engineering firm and led within that firm by a nominated competent person.
The group participates in licensing rounds in Argentina that are organised at the provincial level.
In addition Phoenix has an internal business development group that is focused on optimising existing acreage positions through purchase swap or sale of assets.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources 3 Operating cost per boe Project delivery defined milestones N u m b e r o f reportable HSE incidents Key to our KPIs Year on year growth of reserves and resources by category O p e r a t i n g co s t per BOE P r o du c t i o n v o lum e increasedecrease EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation and exploration expense P e r s o n al  gr o up project delivery and milestone targets Read more about our strategy and KPIs on pages 20 and 21 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 39 Risk Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Portfolio concentration The groups assets are concentrated in
Existing production is principally from conventional assets with the main exploration and development opportunities in unconventional assets.
This places emphasis on the groups ability to successfully develop its unconventional resources with the main longterm growth opportunities in the exploration for and development of unconventional oil and gas resources.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The group as it exists now was formed with the specific objective of exploiting its early entrant position in the Argentina unconventional sector.
This position is derived from licence areas where the focus has historically been on conventional production but where the unconventional opportunities are substantial.
Argentina has the largest producing shale oil and gas resources outside of the US and is open to inward investment.
The strategic focus of the group and the positive investment climate in Argentina means the group has a high appetite for this risk.
We accept this risk as our strategy is Argentina focused.
We diversify in terms of basin multiple licences and areas within each basin and also in terms of production objective.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The licensing and regulation of oil and gas in Argentina is governed at the provincial level.
Whilst the group is exposed to macroeconomic and fiscal risk at the country level its asset and regulatory risk is distributed among a number of provinces.
The groups unconventional assets are principally in the Mendoza and Neuqun provinces.
The group participates in industry groups and initiatives in Argentina and maintains open communication with the provincial governments and key stakeholders including labour unions.
Joint venture partners The inability of joint venture partners to fund their obligations can impact the groups operations.
The groups dependence on others is increased where it is not the operator.
Potential impact Medium Potential likelihood Low In certain of its operations the group has joint venture partners as either operator or nonoperators.
The group requires high quality partners.
It recognises that it must accept a degree of exposure to the creditworthiness of its partners and evaluates this aspect carefully as part of each investment decision.
Where we are not the operator we have less influence on the rate of capital expenditure for development.
Realise value The groups primary joint venture partner in its conventional oil operations is YPF the Argentina stateowned oil and gas company.
YPF is well capitalised and has a strategic objective on behalf of the government to develop the industry in Argentina.
The group has a nonoperated interest in gas licences in the Austral basin where it partners with Roch S. who also fulfils the role of operator.
Phoenix has the right to take over operatorship of Santa Cruz Sur at its option.
The group maintains regular dialogue with its partners to anticipate and react to potential operational or financial issues.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources Operating cost per boe Production volume E B I T D A X
The inability to fund financial commitments including licence obligations could significantly delay the development of the groups assets.
Financial or operational commitments are often a precondition to the grant of a licence.
The groups inability to satisfy these could result in financial penalty andor termination of such licence.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The development of unconventional oil and gas assets is capital intensive and production returns from new development activity are not immediate.
The group has used both leverage and equity to fund the development of its assets and has benefited from the support of its major shareholder in doing so.
The group continues to evaluate both debt and equity financing options.
Explore and develop
Realise value Following completion of the 2017 combination transaction Mercuria advanced a US160.0 million bridging and working capital facility to the group.
Of this amount US87.0 million was used to refinance existing debt and obligations with the remainder available to finance the groups operational activities together with its corporate expenditure.
In February 2018 the facility was refinanced with US100.0 million of the original facility converted into share capital of the group and an additional US100.0 million committed which together with US60.0 million of the original facility comprises a new convertible revolving credit facility.
The interest charge on the new facility is significantly lower than the original facility and there are no repayments until mid2019 reducing the financial burden on the group in the initial development phase.
Further details on the groups funding arrangements are included in note 21 to the financial statements.
Operating cost per boe Production volume E B I T D A X Bribery and corruption Risk that third parties or staff could be encouraged to become involved in corrupt practices.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The global oil and gas industry in common with other extractive industries has a higher than average risk of bribery and corruption.
Argentina has historically had a medium to high perceived risk of bribery and corruption.
The current government is focused on tackling corruption and has enacted new anti corruption legislation in 2017.
We have zero tolerance of bribery and corruption.
Explore and develop
Realise value Since the completion of the combination transaction the group has retained a specialist legal adviser to assist us in undertaking an antibribery and corruption risk assessment and the group has put in place new antibribery and corruption policies and procedures.
All board members and members of staff have received antibribery and corruption training and are required to read acknowledge and adhere to this policy and procedure.
Furthermore the group ensures that our third party contractors and advisers follow our procedure and policy.
The group its board and management have a zero tolerance policy towards bribery and corruption.
RISK REVIEW PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED RISKS WE CAN INFLUENCE CONTINUED Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 40 Risk Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Portfolio concentration The groups assets are concentrated in
Existing production is principally from conventional assets with the main exploration and development opportunities in unconventional assets.
This places emphasis on the groups ability to successfully develop its unconventional resources with the main longterm growth opportunities in the exploration for and development of unconventional oil and gas resources.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The group as it exists now was formed with the specific objective of exploiting its early entrant position in the Argentina unconventional sector.
This position is derived from licence areas where the focus has historically been on conventional production but where the unconventional opportunities are substantial.
Argentina has the largest producing shale oil and gas resources outside of the US and is open to inward investment.
The strategic focus of the group and the positive investment climate in Argentina means the group has a high appetite for this risk.
We accept this risk as our strategy is Argentina focused.
We diversify in terms of basin multiple licences and areas within each basin and also in terms of production objective.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The licensing and regulation of oil and gas in Argentina is governed at the provincial level.
Whilst the group is exposed to macroeconomic and fiscal risk at the country level its asset and regulatory risk is distributed among a number of provinces.
The groups unconventional assets are principally in the Mendoza and Neuqun provinces.
The group participates in industry groups and initiatives in Argentina and maintains open communication with the provincial governments and key stakeholders including labour unions.
Joint venture partners The inability of joint venture partners to fund their obligations can impact the groups operations.
The groups dependence on others is increased where it is not the operator.
Potential impact Medium Potential likelihood Low In certain of its operations the group has joint venture partners as either operator or nonoperators.
The group requires high quality partners.
It recognises that it must accept a degree of exposure to the creditworthiness of its partners and evaluates this aspect carefully as part of each investment decision.
Where we are not the operator we have less influence on the rate of capital expenditure for development.
Realise value The groups primary joint venture partner in its conventional oil operations is YPF the Argentina stateowned oil and gas company.
YPF is well capitalised and has a strategic objective on behalf of the government to develop the industry in Argentina.
The group has a nonoperated interest in gas licences in the Austral basin where it partners with Roch S. who also fulfils the role of operator.
Phoenix has the right to take over operatorship of Santa Cruz Sur at its option.
The group maintains regular dialogue with its partners to anticipate and react to potential operational or financial issues.
Year on year growth of reserves and resources Operating cost per boe Production volume E B I T D A X
The inability to fund financial commitments including licence obligations could significantly delay the development of the groups assets.
Financial or operational commitments are often a precondition to the grant of a licence.
The groups inability to satisfy these could result in financial penalty andor termination of such licence.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The development of unconventional oil and gas assets is capital intensive and production returns from new development activity are not immediate.
The group has used both leverage and equity to fund the development of its assets and has benefited from the support of its major shareholder in doing so.
The group continues to evaluate both debt and equity financing options.
Explore and develop
Realise value Following completion of the 2017 combination transaction Mercuria advanced a US160.0 million bridging and working capital facility to the group.
Of this amount US87.0 million was used to refinance existing debt and obligations with the remainder available to finance the groups operational activities together with its corporate expenditure.
In February 2018 the facility was refinanced with US100.0 million of the original facility converted into share capital of the group and an additional US100.0 million committed which together with US60.0 million of the original facility comprises a new convertible revolving credit facility.
The interest charge on the new facility is significantly lower than the original facility and there are no repayments until mid2019 reducing the financial burden on the group in the initial development phase.
Further details on the groups funding arrangements are included in note 21 to the financial statements.
Operating cost per boe Production volume E B I T D A X Bribery and corruption Risk that third parties or staff could be encouraged to become involved in corrupt practices.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The global oil and gas industry in common with other extractive industries has a higher than average risk of bribery and corruption.
Argentina has historically had a medium to high perceived risk of bribery and corruption.
The current government is focused on tackling corruption and has enacted new anti corruption legislation in 2017.
We have zero tolerance of bribery and corruption.
Explore and develop
Realise value Since the completion of the combination transaction the group has retained a specialist legal adviser to assist us in undertaking an antibribery and corruption risk assessment and the group has put in place new antibribery and corruption policies and procedures.
All board members and members of staff have received antibribery and corruption training and are required to read acknowledge and adhere to this policy and procedure.
Furthermore the group ensures that our third party contractors and advisers follow our procedure and policy.
The group its board and management have a zero tolerance policy towards bribery and corruption.
N u m b e r o f reportable HSE incidents Key to our KPIs Year on year growth of reserves and resources by category O p e r a t i n g co s t per BOE P r o du c t i o n v o lum e increasedecrease EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation and exploration expense P e r s o n al  gr o up project delivery and milestone targets Read more about our strategy and KPIs on pages 20 and 21 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 41 RISK REVIEW PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED RISKS OUTSIDE OUR CONTROL
Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Commodity prices A material decline in oil and gas prices adversely affects the groups operations and financial position.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium Considerable exposure to commodity price risk is inherent in the business.
We will seek to mitigate this risk through hedging if appropriate and particularly when doing so provides firm support for near term capital expenditure budgets.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The oil and gas industry in Argentina has historically benefited from a semiregulated price regime that provided an effective floor to the oil price but also capped upside gains.
This downside price protection was removed in October 2017 as part of the economic reforms being implemented in Argentina by the current administration.
The oil price in Argentina now moves largely inline with international market prices.
The group monitors oil price sensitivity relative to its capital commitments and has implemented a policy that allows hedging.
The group has hedged approximately 1.2 million barrels for 2018 at a price of US65.97 per barrel.
The group will continue to monitor its anticipated production together with its capital commitments to determine whether any further hedges should be put in place.
The group has defined limits for the maximum amount of production in absolute and percentage terms that can be hedged in a given period.
E B I T D A X
The group operates in a competitive environment.
Competition exists in relation to the acquisition of acreage securing oil and gas services and attracting the right talent and experience to the group.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The unconventional oil and gas industry in Argentina has emerged rapidly with significant investment commitments being made by a number of major International Oil Companies and National Oil
In the US the unconventional oil and gas industry developed quickly over a relatively short space of time driven by continual innovation and technical developments that provided the cost efficiencies required for economic production.
The relatively early stage of the unconventional oil and gas industry in Argentina and the opportunity to establish the group as a leading operator translates to a high appetite for this risk.
We cannot influence demand by others but can ensure we have the right relationships with suppliers and contractors.
Control and consolidate
The group has a substantial acreage position with a focus on operatorship of its key assets.
Key assets are characterised as assets where the group holds multiple contiguous licences that provide exposure to unconventional prospects and those that are proximate to existing successful unconventional development assets and areas.
The group maintains good relations with oil and gas service providers that have unconventional expertise and crews based in Argentina.
The group constantly keeps the market under review.
Fiscal and political Argentina has a history of political instability and economic uncertainty that has been characterised by high inflation and significant currency devaluation.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium In December 2015 the current administration was elected into government.
This has resulted in a significant and marked shift in policy direction that is now firmly probusiness and proinvestment.
The reintegration of Argentina into the international community is central to the current political agenda.
The government has made many changes in the past two years including fiscal tax capital markets and labour reforms.
Given the nature and location of its operations this country specific risk is intrinsic to the group.
We participate in appropriate industry groups and maintain dialogue with national and provincial government.
Control and consolidate The group employs appropriately qualified and experienced staff across all disciplines operational commercial and administrative in Argentina and works with reputable and high quality advisers in order to anticipate and comply with changes in the legislative or fiscal environment.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 42 Risk Risk appetite Link to strategy
Relevant KPI by prioritysignificance Commodity prices A material decline in oil and gas prices adversely affects the groups operations and financial position.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium Considerable exposure to commodity price risk is inherent in the business.
We will seek to mitigate this risk through hedging if appropriate and particularly when doing so provides firm support for near term capital expenditure budgets.
Control and consolidate
Profitable production
The oil and gas industry in Argentina has historically benefited from a semiregulated price regime that provided an effective floor to the oil price but also capped upside gains.
This downside price protection was removed in October 2017 as part of the economic reforms being implemented in Argentina by the current administration.
The oil price in Argentina now moves largely inline with international market prices.
The group monitors oil price sensitivity relative to its capital commitments and has implemented a policy that allows hedging.
The group has hedged approximately 1.2 million barrels for 2018 at a price of US65.97 per barrel.
The group will continue to monitor its anticipated production together with its capital commitments to determine whether any further hedges should be put in place.
The group has defined limits for the maximum amount of production in absolute and percentage terms that can be hedged in a given period.
E B I T D A X
The group operates in a competitive environment.
Competition exists in relation to the acquisition of acreage securing oil and gas services and attracting the right talent and experience to the group.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium The unconventional oil and gas industry in Argentina has emerged rapidly with significant investment commitments being made by a number of major International Oil Companies and National Oil
In the US the unconventional oil and gas industry developed quickly over a relatively short space of time driven by continual innovation and technical developments that provided the cost efficiencies required for economic production.
The relatively early stage of the unconventional oil and gas industry in Argentina and the opportunity to establish the group as a leading operator translates to a high appetite for this risk.
We cannot influence demand by others but can ensure we have the right relationships with suppliers and contractors.
Control and consolidate
The group has a substantial acreage position with a focus on operatorship of its key assets.
Key assets are characterised as assets where the group holds multiple contiguous licences that provide exposure to unconventional prospects and those that are proximate to existing successful unconventional development assets and areas.
The group maintains good relations with oil and gas service providers that have unconventional expertise and crews based in Argentina.
The group constantly keeps the market under review.
Fiscal and political Argentina has a history of political instability and economic uncertainty that has been characterised by high inflation and significant currency devaluation.
Potential impact High Potential likelihood Medium In December 2015 the current administration was elected into government.
This has resulted in a significant and marked shift in policy direction that is now firmly probusiness and proinvestment.
The reintegration of Argentina into the international community is central to the current political agenda.
The government has made many changes in the past two years including fiscal tax capital markets and labour reforms.
Given the nature and location of its operations this country specific risk is intrinsic to the group.
We participate in appropriate industry groups and maintain dialogue with national and provincial government.
Control and consolidate The group employs appropriately qualified and experienced staff across all disciplines operational commercial and administrative in Argentina and works with reputable and high quality advisers in order to anticipate and comply with changes in the legislative or fiscal environment.
N u m b e r o f reportable HSE incidents Key to our KPIs Year on year growth of reserves and resources by category O p e r a t i n g co s t per BOE P r o du c t i o n v o lum e increasedecrease EBITDAX  earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation and exploration expense P e r s o n al  gr o up project delivery and milestone targets Read more about our strategy and KPIs on pages 20 and 21 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 43 Investing to maintain our competitive advantage Acting with transparency and integrity while investing in our people and the communities we work in is fundamental to the success of our operations.
Our people Phoenix has a responsibility and a duty of care to the people that work for us.
We are responsible for their health wellbeing and personal safety when they are working with us and for their personal and professional development in the roles that they perform for us.
We are committed to supporting and developing talent and to promoting a collaborative and rewarding working environment.
Our objective is to create a working environment that supports our people while challenging them to deliver their best and to develop their own skills and experiences.
The success and wellbeing of our people and their own personal and professional development underpins all that we do.
We also recognise the importance of diversity to our business.
Diversity may relate to gender nationality faith personal background or any other factor.
We understand how diversity benefits our business and how the individual experiences of our people can contribute to a positive environment when they are at work.
We are committed to promoting an environment where our people learn and develop in a collaborative manner regardless of who they are.
Gender diversity total group 1 Including directors
21%
79% Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 44 SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW Modern Slavery Personal freedom is a fundamental human right.
The UK Modern Slavery Act was brought into law in 2015 and Phoenix fully supports the principles it promotes and the personal rights and freedoms it protects.
We have zero tolerance for any form of slavery or any practices that could constitute or be perceived as slavery whether they be in our own business or those of our suppliers partners or consultants.
Antibribery and corruption ABC We have a zero tolerance policy in relation to bribery corruption and related unethical conduct.
Our policies require compliance across our businesses with all applicable ABC laws and in particular the UK Bribery Act the US FCPA and the Argentinian Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.
Substantially all of our operations and people are based in Argentina.
In 2017 Transparency Internationals corruption perception index ranked Argentina 85 out of 180 participating countries worldwide with a score of 39.
To give context within our own operations this compares to the United Kingdom ranked at eight with a score of 82 and the United States of America ranked at 16 with a score of 75.
We also operate in a competitive market and face competition in securing and maintaining licence interests attracting and retaining the best service providers and in dealing with unions to secure and retain the right people for our business.
We are very aware of the pressures and challenges that we face.
However we are committed to upholding the highest levels of corporate and operational behaviour and our objective is to develop our business responsibly and with integrity at all levels.
On completion of the August 2017 combination transaction one of our first tasks was to assess our ABC risks in accordance with the UK adequate procedures guidance and consequent upon that to update and enhance our existing ABC policies and procedures to implement a consistent policy framework across the group and ensure appropriate governance of ABC matters.
We now have policies and supporting procedures in relation to Antibribery and corruption Gifts and entertainment Thirdparty representatives
As part of our November 2017 board meeting that was held in Buenos Aires the board was given specific training on ABC by a senior partner from our external London legal counsel.
Immediately following the board meeting an employeefocused version of the training was delivered to the Buenos Aires office staff.
Following the training in Buenos Aires we organised the same ABC training sessions for our Mendoza office and other field staff at Tupungato delivered by our external Argentina legal counsel.
All of our training and policy materials are maintained in Spanish and English.
The reporting processes most importantly in respect of whistle blowing are also dual language and we provide our staff the opportunity to report concerns or potential noncompliant behaviour through our external legal counsel as an alternative to reporting internally.
On completion of the combination transaction in 2017 we established a programme of ABC training across the group together with our London and Buenos Aires external legal counsel.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ABC training The policy documents are issued to each member of staff by the relevant department head or supervisor and a system of positive confirmation that each individual within the company has read and understood the policies has been implemented.
Environment
We are very conscious of the natural environment that we operate in and work hard to minimise our impact on that environment.
Phoenix is committed to the responsible stewardship of the environment and on the conclusion of our operations to return our sites to the condition in which we found them.
The majority of our exploration and production operations are located in highaltitude desert areas.
Site preparation mainly consists of clearance of scrub and levelling off the ground to allow safe access.
We seek to operate from compact drill sites in order to minimise disruption to the natural habitat and also plan multiple drill pads at single locations thereby reducing the number of locations that we prepare.
Water usage Unconventional oil and gas operations can also use significant amounts of water.
Together with Halliburton we have developed a fracture fluid system that uses produced water that is a natural byproduct when we produce oil and gas.
This produced water is separated out and stored in tanks for use in operations.
This system has helped us to minimise the use of fresh water in our operations.
Phoenix is also subject to strict operating procedures imposed on us by the provinces in which we work and related to our infield pipeline networks and river crossings.
We are required to maintain a system of pressure gauges to monitor pressure across the pipeline network because a drop in pressure is one of the main indicators that a line may have been breached.
We have installed automatic shutoff or line break valves at points where our lines cross rivers that automatically and immediately shut off the line when a drop in pressure is detected.
For our more mature fields we have been actively fulfilling all remediation activity required by the provinces where we operate including remediation related to activity prior to our ownership or operatorship.
Phoenix Global Resources plc STRATEGIC REPORT 46 SUSTAINABILITY REVIEW CONTINUED Health and safety The health and safety of our employees contractors and visitors to our sites is paramount.
Anyone working at or visiting a Phoenix operational site is provided with personal protective equipment appropriate to the location and will also be allocated to a supervisor or guide who is responsible for their safety while on site.
When there are active operations taking place such as drilling operations or facilities upgrade we establish clear boundaries to limit access to operational areas.
We have also established a system for the regular monitoring of noxious or flammable gases at our gathering or loading facilities and at our operational sites and regularly check lines and transmission networks for leaks.
In
2017 we significantly upgraded our fire safety systems at our Cerro Mollar gathering station.
Our objective is for zero lost time injuries incidents and zero spills or leaks.
Unfortunately in 2017 we had one significant reportable incident that resulted in a fatality.
A contractor working onsite was fatally struck by a wellhead pump while completing a maintenance job at one of our well locations.
As a company we were deeply saddened by the incident that was ultimately preventable.
Since the accident we have made a thorough review of all our HSE policies and particularly those related to ensuring strict adherence to our personal protective equipment requirements and our standard operating procedures.
We have also recruited a senior HSE specialist who is responsible for reinforcing of our supervision and monitoring procedures as well as undertaking a comprehensive and groundup review of our HSE procedures and practices.
Taxation
Phoenix is a responsible operator and corporate citizen and is committed to adhering to all relevant tax laws in all of our jurisdictions.
This includes compliance at the national provincial or municipal level.
Our operations in Argentina are subject to a complex fiscal system that includes corporate income taxes royalties sales taxes VAT payroll taxes and certain banking taxes amongst others.
In addition we are required to deduct and remit withholding taxes in respect of contractor payments direct to the Argentinian tax authorities.
In 2018 we have implemented a new accounting system in Argentina that will improve the timeliness and accuracy of our management reporting but importantly that has been specifically tailored to the unique taxation system in Argentina.
Compliance with tax laws and regulations is fundamental to our licence to operate and is an obligation that we take seriously.
The Strategic Report from pages 1 to 47 was approved by the board and signed on its behalf by Anuj Sharma chief executive officer on 4 June 2018.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 47 GOOD GOVERNANCE IS AT THE CENTRE OF EVERYTHING WE DO.
Phoenix Global Resources plc Our approach to governance IN THIS SECTION 50 Chairmans statement on corporate governance 52 Board of directors 56 Corporate governance report 60 Nomination committee report 62 Audit and risk committee report 65 Letter from the remuneration committee chairman 67 Remuneration policy report 76 Annual report on remuneration 81 Directors report 85 Statement of directors responsibilities STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Driving performance through culture and corporate governance Dear shareholders I am pleased to present my first corporate governance report to you as chairman.
2017 was a milestone year for your company.
The combination transaction that completed in August created Phoenix adding size and scale to an already enviable asset position in
In Mercuria we have gained a particularly supportive shareholder that understands our industry and is able to help provide the funding catalyst to kickstart our ambitious growth plans.
The year has not been without its challenges however.
The company has grown in size rapidly as a result of the transaction.
This growth is not only in terms of asset base and opportunities but also in terms of people operations and compliance and regulatory obligations.
When businesses grow rapidly there is always a risk that the development of effective governance systems and processes lags behind giving rise to unnecessary risk.
Our governance focus in 2017 was to ensure that we moved forward on physical integration of teams and locations with urgency while simultaneously enhancing and upgrading our governance arrangements in a robust and meaningful manner.
Effective governance is driven by a mindset and attitude that has at its core both the desire and the willingness to do the right thing  whatever the situation faced.
Effective governance operates where common cultures and values ensure that the right procedures are followed effectively and without holding back progress.
I believe that while we still have work to do the governance enhancements and changes that we have implemented provide a solid foundation for continued and controlled growth in the future.
Enhancing the effectiveness and leadership of your company I was very pleased to welcome Anuj Sharma and Philip Wolfe to the board in August.
Anuj as your CEO brings a wealth of operational experience in oil and gas and significantly a deep understanding of the development of the US shale industry.
Anuj has been working in Argentina for five years providing operational and technical leadership to the legacy Petsa business and more recently the legacy Andes business.
Anujs understanding of our combined asset base and of the environment that Phoenix operates in is invaluable to the companys growth plans.
Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman Phoenix Global Resources plc
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT ON CORPORATE GOVERNANCE programme in order to keep all shareholders informed and engaged.
Adopting an enhanced governance framework Phoenix believes that effective corporate governance supports enhanced company performance while safeguarding the interests of all stakeholders both internal and external.
In the AIM admission document that was published on announcement of the combination the directors as a group made a clear and explicit collective statement that we are committed to operating your business under the highest standards of corporate governance.
We made a pledge to measure ourselves and report against the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
In doing so we volunteered to assess our governance arrangements and performance as if we were a FTSE 250 company.
I personally believe that voluntarily holding ourselves up to the lens of scrutiny that comes with applying and reporting against the Code demonstrates how seriously we as a board view effective governance.
Embedding our culture and values across the business Promoting and embedding a system of culture and values is only possible where teams are integrated work together to advance common objectives and are willing to put the interests of the whole ahead of the interests of the individual.
Our management teams have worked hard since August to rapidly integrate our business and operations.
We took the decision to commence integration of key systems on dayone post completion when we started recording all financial transactions in a common system.
During this post completion phase we commissioned a new integrated financial reporting system that was implemented in Q4 2017 and went live on 1 January 2018.
In addition our reserves and production databases have also been consolidated and now operate on a common platform.
This rapid integration of systems and processes helps to ensure the integrity of operating data and management reporting.
Taking these decisions so soon after completion was not easy and placed additional burden on our teams.
Importantly however these achievements demonstrate the willingness and desire among our people to pursue a common objective with open minds and to strive to do the right thing for the good of the company.
In conclusion As a board we are committed to continual improvement and enhancement of our governance arrangements.
I am very proud to lead a team that is both committed and forwardlooking and that keeps the best interests of all of our stakeholders at its core.
Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 4 June 2018 Requirement Board statement Where to find more Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code The company has elected to report against the provisions of the Code Corporate governance report page 56 Going concern statement The directors have conducted their assessment of going concern and made a positive statement Directors report page 83 Robust assessment of principal risks and uncertainties The directors have considered the risk and uncertainties facing the group their likelihood and potential impact and the mitigation of those risks and uncertainties Risk review pages 36 to 43 Fair balanced and understandable The directors have read the content of the annual report and financial statements and consider it provides the information necessary for stakeholders to assess the companys performance business model and strategy
Philip leads the Phoenix finance team as CFO and brings more than 25 years experience of advising international oil and gas companies both in raising capital and through periods of transformative growth.
Philip also brings a strong understanding of the London market and its attendant governance requirements.
We also welcomed John Bentley and Garrett Soden to the board in 2017.
John and Garrett are both experienced independent nonexecutives with significant knowledge of the oil and gas industry.
Their appointment materially enhances governance at the board level.
Finally Guillaume Vermersch also joined the board as one of two Mercuria appointees alongside Matthieu Milandri.
Similar to Anuj Matthieu has been involved with both legacy businesses for some years and brings that experience to bear in his current role.
The continued support of our major shareholder is important in this initial growth stage for Phoenix.
Protecting minority shareholders rights The Phoenix board recognises our obligation to minority shareholders and we consider that the protection of minority shareholders rights is fundamental to responsible corporate governance.
As part of the combination the company has implemented a relationship agreement with the Mercuria group that regulates the influence that Mercuria can exercise over the company.
By implementing such a relationship agreement Phoenix is in line with the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys requirements for premium listed companies where a majority shareholder exists.
Stock market communications Phoenix is committed to a more active ongoing market communications STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sir Michael Rake age 70 A Nonexecutive chairman First appointed 19 September 2016 Skills and experience Sir Michael was chairman of BT Group plc from 2007 to 2017 president of the Confederation of British Industry from 2013 to 2015 a member of the Prime Ministers Business Advisory Group from 2010 to 2015 nonexecutive director of Barclays plc from 2008 becoming deputy chairman from 2012 to 2015 chairman of the private equity oversight group the Guidelines Monitoring Committee from 2008 to 2013 chairman of EasyJet plc from 2010 to 2013 and the first chairman of the UK Commission for Employment and Skills from 2007 to 2010.
He was a director of the Financial Reporting Council from 2004 to 2007.
From May 2002 to September 2007 Sir Michael was international chairman of
Prior to his appointment as international chairman he was chairman of KPMG in Europe and senior partner of KPMG in the UK.
Sir Michael received his knighthood in 2007.
In 2011 he received the British American Business UK Transatlantic Business Award in recognition of outstanding business leadership.
In 2013 he received the Channing Award for Corporate Citizenship was voted the FTSE 100 nonexecutive director of the year and received the ICAEW outstanding achievement award.
Anuj Sharma age 44 Chief executive officer First appointed 10 August 2017 Skills and experience Anuj has 20 years experience in the oil and gas industry and was appointed as nonboard level CEO of Andes Energia in March 2017 and joined the board of Phoenix in August 2017.
Prior to this Anuj headed Mercuria Energy Groups investments in Argentina.
As the head of Mercuria Energy Groups Argentine subsidiaries he led PETSA Mercuria Groups upstream oil and gas company in Argentina to significant exploration and development success which resulted in more than a doubling of PETSAs production and reserves.
Prior to that he was the vice president and director originating investment opportunities for a multibillion dollar family office in Houston USA.
Anuj has held positions in upstream equity research and also portfolio management for a large commodity investment firm making principal investments in the upstream oil and gas sector and managing the firms unconventional shale portfolio in the
He started his oil and gas career as an engineer for Schlumberger Oil Field Services.
Committee membership Audit and risk committee Nomination committee Remuneration committee
Observer
Meet the board of directors External appointments Lead director Worldpay Inc.
Director SandP Global Chairman Majid Al Futtaim Holdings LLC Director British Argentine Chamber of Commerce
Chartered accountant External appointments
Qualifications
Bachelor of Electrical Engineering Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur MBA Duke University Phoenix Global Resources plc
BOARD OF DIRECTORS John Bentley age 70 Independent nonexecutive director First appointed 10 August 2017 Skills and experience John has over 40 years experience in the natural resources sector.
He is an experienced board member being a past managing director of Gencors Brazilian mining company Sao Bento Mineracao and chief executive of Engens exploration and production division.
In 1996 John was instrumental in floating Energy Africa Ltd on the Johannesburg stock exchange and was chief executive for the following five years.
More recently he was executive chairman of First Africa Oil plc and served on the boards of Rift Oil plc Adastra Minerals Ltd Caracal Energy Inc and Scotgold Resources Limited.
He is currently on the board of a number of EandP companies including as chairman of Faroe Petroleum plc deputy chairman of Wentworth Resources Ltd and nonexecutive director of Africa Energy Corp.
Garrett Soden age 43 Independent nonexecutive director First appointed 10 August 2017 Skills and experience Garrett has extensive experience as a senior executive and board member of various public companies in the natural resources sector.
He has worked with the Lundin Group for over a decade.
He is currently President and CEO of Africa Energy Corp.
Africa.
He is also a nonexecutive director of Etrion Corporation Gulf Keystone Petroleum Ltd.
Panoro Energy ASA and Petropavlovsk plc.
Previously he was chairman and CEO of RusForest AB CFO of Etrion and PetroFalcon Corporation and a nonexecutive director of PA Resources
Prior to joining the Lundin Group Garrett worked at Lehman Brothers in equity research and at Salomon Brothers in mergers and acquisitions.
He also previously served as senior policy advisor to the U.
Secretary of Energy.
Philip Wolfe age 49 Chief financial officer First appointed 10 August 2017 Skills and experience Philip has 28 years experience working in the oil and gas industry as an adviser and corporate financier.
Most recently Philip was chief financial officer and a board member of Soma Oil and Gas a UK registered independent oil and gas company.
Prior to being a CFO Philip was MD head of oil and gas EMEA at UBS Investment Bank and global head of oil and gas at
Previously he was a director at Deutsche Banks global energy and utilities team in London and vice president of Merrill Lynchs oil and gas team in Singapore.
During his eight years at Merrill Lynch Philip was based in Singapore from 1996 to 1998 and was previously in London for four years and New York for two years.
During his 23 years as an investment banker to the oil and gas industry his expertise was predominantly in buying and selling assets and companies including farmouts and raising equity and debt for oil and gas companies across the entire energy chain with a particular interest in the EandP sector.
External appointments
Qualifications
BSc Hons Economics University of Bristol External appointments Chairman Faroe Petroleum plc Deputy chairman Wentworth Resources Ltd Nonexecutive director Africa Energy Corp.
Qualifications
B. ech Hons Metallurgy Brunel University External appointments President and CEO Africa Energy Corp.
Nonexecutive director  Etrion Corporation Nonexecutive director Gulf Keystone Petroleum Limited Nonexecutive director  Panoro Energy ASA Nonexecutive director Petropavlosk plc
BSc Hons London School of Economics MBA Columbia Business School STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 David Jackson age 69 Independent nonexecutive director First appointed 17 July 2012 Skills and experience David has more than 30 years experience in international banking and finance having held senior positions in investment banking and investment management in Standard Chartered Bank from 19902008 where he was a managing director in London and Hong Kong Scandinavian Bank from 19771990 in London Bahrain Singapore and Hong Kong where he was an executive director and a member of the banks general management committee.
David served as senior legal adviser to Finance for Industry now 3i from 19731977.
He stepped down from Standard Chartered Bank in 2008 to focus on a portfolio career working more closely with developing companies.
Javier Alvarez age 46 Independent nonexecutive director First appointed 17 July 2012 Skills and experience Javier has more than 20 years experience of sustainable development and natural resources projects in Latin America Africa and Europe involving working with diverse stakeholders including international organisations national and local governments and corporations.
This experience covers a number of sectors including oil and gas agribusiness and public services.
In 1992 he cofounded a large national NGO dealing with natural resources and CSR projects where he was CEO for more than a decade.
He later worked with an international foundation based in London.
Javier was executive director of the British Argentine Chamber of Commerce BACC from 2007 to 2011 and he has been overseas director of the BACC since then.
Committee membership Audit and risk committee Nomination committee Remuneration committee
Observer
External appointments British Argentine Chamber of Commerce Overseas Director and Member of the Board
Agricultural Engineer Masters Environmental Politics and Globalisation Kings College London External appointments Director Burges Grove Management Company Limited Chairman Emergex Vaccines Holding Limited
LL.
Hons Leeds University
Phoenix Global Resources plc
BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONTINUED Nicols Mallo Huergo age 48 Nonexecutive director First appointed 2 October 2007 Skills and experience Nicols was Chairman of Andes Energia plc until August 2017 and is an experienced corporate lawyer.
Within his area of specialisation he has advised national and foreign firms on corporate matters mergers acquisitions privatisations and financing unsolicited bids tender offers exchange offers and proxy fights adoption of stock option plans leveraged buyouts spinoffs recapitalisations and other restructuring transactions strategic investments and joint ventures venture capital transactions and project finance.
His experience includes operational structuring acquisitions of telecommunications and media companies and cross border contracts with international corporations.
Guillaume Vermersch age 48 Nonexecutive director First appointed 10 August 2017 Skills and experience Guillaume serves as the group chief financial officer of Mercuria Energy Group and Mercuria Energy Trading.
He started his career with Arthur Andersen as an external auditor in Paris and joined the Bank Credit Agricole Indosuez subsequently in Paris and Geneva as account manager in the commodity finance division  oil and energy products desk where he served until 1997.
Guillaume then joined the INGBBL bank in Geneva as accounts chief officer in the energy finance division.
Guillaume left INGBBL Bank in 2000 to become head of credit and finance for Europe with Sempra Oil Trading SARL Geneva.
Matthieu Milandri age 42 Nonexecutive director First appointed 21 August 2013 Skills and experience Matthieu has been investment director at Mercuria Energy Trading since December 2011 with a particular focus on upstream oil and gas assets.
Previously Matthieu was chief financial officer of Candax Energy Inc a TSXlisted upstream company and business development and financing manager at Geopetrol a private upstream group.
Matthieu spent nine years with BNP Paribas in Frankfurt Paris New York Houston and Geneva working in the oil and gas and commodities groups which gave him a detailed understanding of junior oil and gas companies across the world.
External appointments Director Integra Investment S.
Director Integra Capital S.
Qualifications
Law Universidad Catlica Argentina Master in law LLM.
Hons
NorthWestern University School of Law Chicago External appointments Investment Director Mercuria Energy Trading Director Starc Holdings Limited
MBAFinance ESSEC Business School External appointments Chief financial officer Mercuria Energy Group Chief financial officer Mercuria Energy Trading
Masters financial audit and consulting Ecole Superieure De Commerce de Paris MBA corporate finance Manchester Business University STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance and the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code The directors of the company are committed to the highest standards of corporate governance and whilst the company is not required to comply with the Code it has nevertheless elected to report against and to substantially comply with the provisions of the Code.
Phoenix was formed on 10 August 2017 following the combination of Andes Energia Plc with Trefoil Holdings B. and gas operations in Argentina.
The directors recognised in advance of the combination that full compliance with the Code would not be possible immediately on completion nevertheless the directors and senior management team committed to work to continually enhance governance procedures in place through the integration period.
Notwithstanding the board considers that the group has been substantially in compliance throughout the period other than in respect of the following Code Provision A.4.1 The board should appoint one of the independent nonexecutive directors to be the senior independent director to provide a sounding board for the chairman and to serve as an intermediary for the other directors when necessary.
The senior independent director should be available to shareholders if they have concerns which contact through the normal channels of chairman chief executive or other executive directors has failed to resolve or for which such contact is inappropriate.
Company position In 2017 the board considered that in light of the significant combination transaction in August and the convening of a new board for the company it was appropriate to allow the new board to operate for a period of time in order to assess which individual director should take the role of senior independent director.
The board expects to make this appointment in 2018.
Code Provision B.1.2 Except for smaller companies at least half of the board excluding the chair should comprise nonexecutive directors determined by the board to be independent.
A smaller company should have at least two independent directors.
Company position Excluding the chairmen four of the nine directors are determined to be independent representing just less than 50% of the board.
Given the substantive reorganisation of the board in the period the directors considered it prudent to allow the new board to operate for a period of time before making any further appointments.
In addition the relationship agreement in place with the companys major shareholder governs how Matthieu Milandri and Guillaume Vermersch participate in certain matters thereby increasing the influence of the independent directors.
Code Provision B.6.1 The board should state in the annual report how performance evaluation of the board its committees and its individual directors has been conducted.
Company position Phoenix was formed on 10 August 2017 following the combination of Andes Energia Plc with Trefoil Holdings B. operations in Argentina.
Since the combination the focus of the board has been on the integration of the legacy businesses and the board itself has only existed in its current form for less than five months.
The effectiveness of the board its committees and its individual directors will be formally assessed in 2018.
The workings of the board The board was reorganised following the August 2017 combination transaction to reflect the focus and strategy of the enlarged business.
The reorganisation was also effected with the objective of enhancing corporate governance and increasing the number of independent nonexecutive directors sitting on the board.
On 10 August 2017 five new board members were appointed contingent on the completion of the combination transaction.
At the same time two board members resigned and two further members Nigel Duxbury and Juan Carlos Esteban stepped down from the board.
Nigel remains the company secretary and Juan Carlos Esteban continues to work for the company.
The board is chaired by Sir Michael Rake who has close links to Argentina through his other interests and brings a wealth of experience and insight to the board and to the group.
The number of independent nonexecutive directors has been increased from two to four with the appointments of John Bentley and Garrett Soden both of whom bring significant experience in the independent oil and gas exploration and production sector.
Anuj Sharma and Philip Wolfe joined the board as executive directors CEO and CFO respectively.
Biographies of all of the directors that include an overview of the skills and experience each director brings to the board together with details of their applicable qualifications are included on pages 52 to 55.
The biographies also include relevant external appointments currently held by each director.
At 31 December 2017 the board included eight nonexecutive directors including the chairman and two executive directors.
Four of the nonexecutive directors are considered to be independent.
Two of the nonexecutive directors Matthieu Milandri and Guillaume Vermersch were proposed by the major shareholder Mercuria Energy Group Limited and one further director Nicols Mallo Huergo was proposed by Vetalir International S. shareholder.
For the purposes of the combination transaction Vetalir International S. the representative minority shareholder.
Our commitment to the highest standards of corporate governance Phoenix Global Resources plc
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT All directors are appointed for a period of three years.
The independence and objectivity of the independent directors will be formally assessed on an annual basis following the fifth anniversary of their original appointment.
The independence and objectivity of the board is monitored on an ongoing basis.
The board plans to meet at least eight times per calendar year with up to two of those meetings being held in
Additional meetings of the full board or its committees are organised on an adhoc basis as required.
In 2017 one board meeting was held in Buenos Aires.
Following the meeting two of the independent nonexecutive directors John Bentley and David Jackson undertook a site visit to the groups operational office located in Mendoza and also to the Puesto Rojas and Tupungato concessions in the Neuquina and Cuyana basins.
John and David were accompanied on the site visit by Javier Vallesi the group chief operating officer who is based in Mendoza.
Relationship agreement As discussed in the directors report on page 82 a relationship agreement is in place between the company and the Mercuria Energy Group that governs matters relating to the proposal and appointment of nominee directors the composition of the board involvement in the day to day running of the group and transactions between the group and Mercuria Energy Group and its affiliates that are to be undertaken on an arms length basis.
The relationship agreement seeks to protect the rights of minority shareholders in accordance with guidance from the Financial Conduct Authority.
Attendance at board meetings After 10 August 2017
Meetings attended Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 44 Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer 34 Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer 44 John Bentley Independent nonexecutive director 44 Garrett Soden Independent nonexecutive director 34 Javier Alvarez Independent nonexecutive director 44 David Jackson Independent nonexecutive director 44 Nicols Mallo Huergo Nonexecutive director 44 Matthieu Milandri Nonexecutive director 44 Guillaume Vermersch Nonexecutive director 44 Prior to 10 August 2017
Meetings attended Nicols Mallo Huergo Executive chairman 99 Alejandro Jotayan Chief executive officer to 30 March 2017 German Rantfl Chief financial officer 89 Juan Carlos Esteban Executive director 89 Nigel Duxbury Nonexecutive director 99 David Jackson Nonexecutive director 89 Carolina Landi Nonexecutive director 89 Javier Alvarez Nonexecutive director 89 Matthieu Milandri Nonexecutive director 89 Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive director 89 1 Resigned 30 March 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Management of the group
Nomination committee Audit and risk committee
Senior management
Board of directors Attendance at board meetings The attendance of directors at board meetings through the year is as set out on the previous page.
For the purpose of reporting 2017 attendance and reflecting the reorganisation of the board on 10 August 2017 details of attendance are shown separately for the period to 10 August and for the period afterwards.
The board is responsible to the shareholders for the proper management of the group.
The board sets the strategy of the group and is responsible for ensuring appropriate funding and financing arrangements are in place to support that strategy.
The board reviews and approves the business plan and annual budgets that are compiled by the executive board members together with the senior management team and in doing so provides robust challenge.
Members of the senior management team are invited to attend specific board meetings where technical or operational matters that affect the delivery of the group strategy are being discussed.
Such invitation is made to give the board the opportunity to discuss operational plans directly with those responsible for assisting in formulating and ultimately executing those plans.
The board meets regularly to review trading performance monitor strategy approve annual budgets and major capital expenditure projects monitor changes to the business environment and the risks facing the group and to examine other significant financing matters.
The board reports to the shareholders on these matters as required or where appropriate to provide the shareholders with additional information on the group and its operations.
The board delegates authority for the daytoday business to management under a defined set of delegated authorities that cover routine operational matters financial authority limits contract approval procedures purchasing procedures banking mandates and the hiring of full time and temporary staff and consultants.
Committees of the board Three permanent committees of the board have been organised to discharge the boards delegated responsibilities in relation to director nomination remuneration and audit and risk matters.
Each committee reports to the board though the respective committee chair.
The workings of these committees their activities in the year and details of their membership are included in each of the separate committee reports on pages 60 to 80.
The report of the remuneration committee incudes details of the directors remuneration interests in options or other equity instruments and details of their service contracts.
No director is involved in decisions related to his or her own remuneration.
Board structure Phoenix Global Resources plc
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED Training and access to advice New directors receive an induction to the group on appointment to the board.
The induction covers the activities and operations of the group and the key business and financial risks faced.
New directors have the opportunity to meet privately with existing directors members of the senior management team and the companys advisers prior to appointment.
The company provides additional specific training to directors on topics considered to be relevant to the discharge of their duties as directors in addition to holding specific information sessions related to the assets and operations of the business or the legal legislative fiscal and political environment in which it operates.
During 2017 specific information and training sessions were provided to the board on matters including an antibribery and corruption update held in Buenos Aires and led by Herbert Smith Freehills and presentations by senior management related to the subsurface geology of the groups unconventional oil and gas assets and the technologies expected to be deployed to exploit these resources.
All directors have access to the advice and services of the company secretary who is responsible to the board for ensuring compliance with laws and regulations applicable to the company.
The company secretary is also responsible for ensuring that board procedures are followed.
The directors collectively or individually are able to take independent professional advice if they believe such advice is required in the furtherance of their duties.
Where such advice is taken it is at the companys expense.
Provision of information to directors Board and committee agendas are distributed to board members by the company secretary in advance of meetings.
Any supporting information or analysis related to agenda items is distributed at the same time.
The directors are able to request that management prepares any additional analysis that they believe is required for the assessment of issues or risks facing the group or to support board discussion related to specific topics.
The board receives a weekly operational and financial update that includes key metrics related to business performance production and sales and financial performance including liquidity.
This report includes a discursive summary of the activities of the operations and finance team for the week together with key items or activities upcoming.
Directors and officers liability insurance The company has directors and officers liability insurance in place that provides coverage for costs incurred by the directors and officers individually in the event of a legal or regulatory claim being made against the company or the directors.
Directors other commitments The chairman and nonexecutive directors have other thirdparty commitments including directorships of other companies as disclosed in the director biographies.
The company is satisfied that these associated commitments have no measurable impact on the ability of directors to discharge their responsibilities to Phoenix effectively.
Relations with shareholders Communications with shareholders are given high priority by the board.
Phoenix responds promptly to correspondence from shareholders and the groups website contains a range of information on the group and its operations including a dedicated investor relations section where readers can access historical financial reports and presentations as well as RNS announcements issued by the company.
The group issues its results promptly and also publishes them in full on its website site.
The board uses the annual general meeting to communicate with private and institutional shareholders and welcomes their participation.
Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 4 June 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Phoenix recognises that the role of its nomination committee working together with the board as a whole is key to promoting effective board succession and the alignment of board composition with the companys culture values and strategy.
The nomination committee was formally established following the combination with Trefoil Holdings B. of Phoenix.
Prior to the combination the responsibilities of the nomination committee had been performed by the full board.
In recognition of the importance of effective integration post combination the board continued to discharge the responsibilities of the nomination committee through to the end of 2017.
From 2018 the nomination committee will meet at least twice per year and more frequently as necessary and will report on its activities to the full board.
Purpose
The nomination committee is formed with the purpose of monitoring the balance of skills knowledge experience independence and diversity of the board and its committees.
Consideration of diversity includes gender diversity as well as diversity of nationality background skills and experience.
The committee is charged with ensuring that there is a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the nomination and appointment of new directors and that appropriate procedures are in place for their nomination selection and training of directors.
Ensuring a high quality board with the right mix of skills Sir Michael Rake Chairman nomination committee
Members Date appointed
Sir Michael Rake chair Aug 2017 2 members Javier Alvarez Aug 2017 John Bentley Aug 2017 Nicols Mallo Huergo Aug 2017 observer
Gender Male Female Board 10 Senior management team 9 1 Group 92 25 Nationality Argentina
Kingdom
United
States France Board Senior management team 9  1 Status Independent
Number % 40% 40% 20% 100% Phoenix Global Resources plc
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT Membership The nomination committee comprises three nonexecutive directors two of whom are required to be independent.
The committee is chaired by Sir Michael Rake who is also chairman of the board of directors.
The terms of reference of the committee state that it can be chaired by either the group chair or by an independent nonexecutive director.
Where the chair of the committee is also the chair of the board he or she is required to absent themselves from the discussion or selection of potential successors to the chair of the board to avoid any potential conflict of interest.
Similarly individual members are excused from discussion related to their own appointment as chair of board committees.
Responsibilities
The principal responsibilities of the nomination committee are to review the structure size and composition of the board taking account of the groups strategic objectives and make recommendations in regard to any changes required plan for the succession of directors and other senior executives identify and nominate for board approval candidates to fill board vacancies as they arise annually review the time commitment required of nonexecutive directors together with the number and type of external appointments held by those directors make recommendations to the Board in regard to the membership of both the audit and risk committee and the remuneration committee in consultation with the relevant committee chair and assist the board with its periodic evaluation of the performance of individual directors and of the board as a whole.
Diversity
When considering board composition the group policy continues to be that the group recruits the best candidate available for any position based on merit and against objective criteria in order to achieve the most effective board.
The application of this policy is delegated to the nomination committee and applied throughout the group.
The experience of the board is very diverse in terms of experience and expertise that covers not only a wealth of oil and gas operational experience but also extensive technical operational financial governance legal and commercial expertise.
The board recognises the strength that comes with diversity and the different viewpoints and innovative thinking that can come from a combination of diverse life experiences.
We are committed to continue to work hard to ensure that we recruit the very best candidates throughout our business regardless of gender nationality or background.
Priorities for the coming year The nomination committees main priority for 2018 will be to undertake the initial assessment of the effectiveness of the board of directors its committees and its individual directors.
This will be a formal process and the committee will report its findings to the board on conclusion of the assessment.
The effectiveness assessment may involve input from external consultants as considered necessary by the committee.
Overboarding
We are aware of and have considered recent guidance recommending that shareholders vote against the reelection of directors where shareholders consider that a director is attempting to undertake too many roles in addition to the responsibilities that come with being a member of the companys board.
While we are satisfied that the members of the board do have sufficient time to fulfil their duties we recognise that some directors currently hold a number of external appointments.
We will continue to monitor the workload and external commitments of our board members as the groups activities and the level of its operations grow and develop in order to make sure that each member of our board is able to commit sufficient time to fulfil their responsibility to the shareholders and to their fellow directors in an effective manner.
Conflicts of interest The board operates a policy to identify and where appropriate manage conflicts or potential conflicts with the groups interests.
In accordance with the directors interest provisions in the Companies Act 2006 all of the directors are required to submit details to the company secretary of any situations that might give rise to a conflict or potential conflict of interest.
The board monitors and reviews potential conflicts of interest on a regular basis.
Sir Michael Rake Chairman nomination committee 4 June 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The audit and risk committee was established in August 2017 following the combination with Trefoil Holdings B.
Prior to the combination the responsibilities of the audit and risk committee were fulfilled by the board as a whole.
Purpose
The main function of the audit and risk committee is to assist the board in fulfilling its financial oversight responsibilities by reviewing and monitoring the integrity of the financial information provided to shareholders and the groups system of internal control and risk management.
These systems have been established for the purpose of providing relevant accurate and timely information for both external reporting and internal management purposes.
As part of this role the committee is also responsible for the internal and external audit processes and the groups compliance with laws regulations and other ethical codes of practice.
Membership
As required by the UK Corporate Governance Code the audit and risk committee consists exclusively of nonexecutive directors.
The terms of reference for the committee require that it has at least three members the majority of whom are independent.
The members are all appointed by the board on the recommendation of the nomination committee and in consultation with the committee chair.
The chair of the board may be a member of the committee though only where he or she is considered independent Ensuring the integrity and clarity of financial reporting
Members Date appointed Quorum Meetings attended 2017 audit cycle Garrett Soden chair Aug 2017 2 members Sir Michael Rake Aug 2017 44 Javier Alvarez Aug 2017 44 David Jackson Aug 2017 44 Guillaume Vermersch Aug 2017 observer na Meeting frequency
Oct
Jan
Mar
May
Review and approve external audit plan for Review and approve external audit fees subject to the audit plan Review level and nature of nonaudit fees paid to PwC Key risks judgements and uncertainties related to the halfyear and yearend financial statement reports from both management and PwC Evaluate quality independence and objectivity of PwC Consider appropriateness of going concern assumption Corporate governance update Review group risk report Review annual report and accounts Garrett Soden Chairman audit and risk committee Phoenix Global Resources plc
AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE REPORT on appointment as chair of the board but cannot chair the committee.
Sir Michael Rake currently sits on the audit and risk committee.
In accordance with Code provision C.3.1 at least one member of the committee is required to have recent and relevant financial experience.
The board is satisfied that Garrett Soden fulfils this requirement.
Meetings are normally attended by the chief financial officer and key members of the finance team as appropriate and at the invitation of the committee.
In addition representatives of the external auditor are invited to attend meetings.
The committee chair maintains an ongoing dialogue with key individuals involved in the companys governance including the external auditor.
The chair also meets privately with the external auditor at least once per year but will meet more frequently as circumstances dictate.
Responsibilities
The principal responsibilities of the audit and risk committee are to monitor the integrity of the financial statements including the annual and interim financial statement reporting required by both the London and Buenos Aires stock exchanges together with any other formal or informal reporting regarding financial reporting such as analyst and investor presentations annual results presentations and financial information contained in press releases and other communications to report to the board on financial reporting issues and significant judgments including matters discussed with the external auditor provide oversight of the work of the external auditor and make recommendations to the board in relation to their appointment or reappointment including related to the retendering or termination of the external audit contract provide oversight of the relationship with the external auditor including agreeing terms of reference scope and remuneration including both audit and nonaudit fees maintenance of internal controls and risk management systems together with arrangements for internal audit and monitoring policies and procedures related to ethics fraud and whistleblowing.
Meeting frequency The committee will meet at least four times per year with the calendar of meetings specifically designed around the key phases of the external financial reporting cycle including audit planning interim results preliminary announcement and the conclusion of the annual financial statement audit.
In relation to the 2017 reporting cycle the committee has met four times since its formation on 10 August 2017.
A summary of the items discussed at each meeting is set out on page 62.
Internal audit The group does not currently have an internal audit function and no internal audit reviews were undertaken in 2017.
Phoenix was formed on 10 August 2017 and since that time the focus of the board and management team has been on the operational and administrative integration of the legacy businesses comprising the new Phoenix group.
This has included relocating the Buenos Aires administrative offices of Trefoil and Andes to a single location and the opening of a new corporate head office in London.
In Mendoza the two offices have been integrated albeit the company still retains two locations.
The group has also established a technical centre in Houston to facilitate the transfer of handson experience of large scale shale projects and the specific technologies developed in the United States to support these developments.
In the same period the group has implemented an integrated financial accounting system in Argentina and has updated and continued to refine the system of internal control over the operational and financial activities of the group.
The board did not commission any specific internal audit reviews in 2017 in order to allow group management to focus on advancing the primary postclose integration activities.
Given the current size of the group and its level of activity it is likely that any operational or financial reviews that either management or the board consider appropriate during 2018 will be undertaken via a specialist internal audit provider.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 External audit The group has elected to comply with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code that require FTSE 350 companies to put the external audit contract out to tender at least every ten years.
The committees terms of reference require the group to consider whether to put the audit out to tender after five years and annually thereafter.
PwC was first appointed as external auditor for the year ended 31 December 2012 and their appointment was reconsidered in light of the tendering requirements after the 2016 audit and will be considered again on conclusion of the 2017 audit.
Nonaudit services The audit and risk committee has established a policy for the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor to ensure that these services do not impair the auditors independence or objectivity.
The policy identifies those services that the auditor may provide services that are precluded in normal circumstances and sets guidance around the level of nonaudit fees that the committee considers to be acceptable depending on the type of service being proposed and the circumstances related to the provision of that service.
In 2017 a significant amount of nonaudit fees were incurred primarily related to reporting accountant services associated with the combination with Trefoil Holdings B. to the reverse nature of the transaction.
The type and nature of reporting related to the combination that was provided by PwC to both the group and to its advisers is customary for UK capital markets transactions.
In considering which services the external auditor can and cannot provide the governing principles applied by the audit and risk committee are that the auditor cannot audit its own work perform management functions or act as an advocate for the group.
Nevertheless each piece of work that it is proposed that the external auditor could provide is formally assessed prior to its commencement.
In addition the scope of individual projects is monitored throughout their delivery to identify any potential conflicts as work progresses.
Garrett Soden Chairman audit and risk committee 4 June 2018 2017 year end significant accounting issues The significant issues considered by the audit and risk committee in 2017 in relation to the financial statements and how each of these were addressed are shown in the table below Significant accounting issue Consideration and conclusion Accounting for the combination transaction On 10 August 2017 the former Andes Energia plc Andes acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Trefoil Holdings B.
Trefoil.
The transaction was deemed to represent a reverse takeover under IFRS 3 Business combinations and so Trefoil is treated as the acquirer and the comparative figures in the financial statements represent those of Trefoil.
The committee assessed managements accounting treatment for the combination transaction and the associated key judgments around the identity of the accounting acquirer and acquiree.
The committee also reviewed the presentation of the financial statements including the disclosures related to the combination transaction in note 14 of the financial statements.
Acquisition accounting and purchase price allocation IFRS requires that acquisitions are accounted for at fair value.
The consideration given is fair valued and is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in relation to their assessed fair value.
The assessment of fair value is subjective and can be complex.
It involves a number of different valuation methodologies depending on the nature of the individual asset or liability being assessed.
The committee assessed managements accounting treatment for the acquisition and the purchase price allocation exercise.
The committee considered the valuation reports of the independent experts as well as managements judgments around the fair value adjustments to the working capital balances and the treatment of the goodwill arising.
The committee reviewed disclosures related to the purchase price allocation exercise in note 14 of the financial statements.
Impairment of longterm assets and goodwill Management is required to assess assets for impairment where indicators exist that the asset may not be fully recovered.
Two principal assets were considered to be impaired being the goodwill recognised on the business combination and also the Puesto Pozo Cercado concession that was relinquished in the year.
The committee considered managements assessment of the carrying value of the goodwill and the factors related to the relinquishment of Puesto Pozo Cercado including the rationale for the impairment recognised.
The committee also considered the calculation of the impairment charge recorded in each case.
The committee agrees with managements assessment that no other indicators of impairment exist in respect of the groups other assets.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
AUDIT AND RISK COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Letter from the remuneration committee chairman John Bentley Chairman remuneration committee STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder As chairman of the remuneration committee I am pleased to present the first directors remuneration report for Phoenix.
Although Phoenix is currently London Stock Exchange AIM quoted the board recognises the importance of shareholder transparency and standards of governance.
The board at the time of the reverse takeover indicated its intention to report against and comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
As 2017 is a transition year this report is split into four sections with the first section including the information required to be disclosed as an AIM quoted company and the subsequent two sections detailing the information required by the reporting regulations that would be applicable were the company listed on the London Stock Exchange main market including the directors remuneration policy and our annual report on remuneration detailing director remuneration from Admission to 31 December 2017 and the proposed implementation of our remuneration policy for 2018.
Our approach to developing Phoenixs remuneration policy Our aim is for remuneration at Phoenix to attract and retain individuals of a high calibre and appropriate experience align incentives with the companys strategic goals and business plans deliver rewards for strong and sustainable business performance and align the interests of the executive directors with those of shareholders.
The remuneration committee intends to keep its approach to remuneration under regular review for continued appropriateness and in light of market practice and regulatory requirements and corporate governance bestpractice as applicable to the company over time.
Our remuneration policy set out on pages 67 to 75 has been developed to reinforce these objectives.
The committee believes that its approach to remuneration will support the delivery of these aims while remaining appropriately flexible so as to evolve as the group establishes itself as a listed company.
Looking ahead to 2018 Implementation of executive director remuneration policy for 2018 base salary Executive director salaries will remain at current levels for 2018 and will be first reviewed later in the year with any increases that may be awarded being effective 1 January 2019.
Annual bonus For 2018 the executive directors each have a maximum bonus opportunity of 100% of salary.
The ontarget bonus opportunity is 50% of maximum.
Two thirds of any bonus earned will be paid in cash with the remainder being deferred Phoenix shares for a further threeyear period vesting prorata annually.
The annual bonus for 2018 will be based on quantitative corporate KPIs and qualitative individual KPIs.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT 66
Phoenix Global Resources plc
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP In 2018 the executive directors will receive conditional awards of shares under the Phoenix LTIP with a face value of 200% of salary for each of the CEO and CFO.
The 2018 LTIP will vest after three years subject to the companys threeyear relative and absolute TSR performance as detailed on page 79.
Relative TSR has been selected by the committee to closely align executive interests with those of shareholders.
Phoenix TSR performance will be measured over the period commencing 10 August 2017 and compared to peer group companies on the basis of TSR rank.
Absolute TSR has been selected by the committee to align LTIP outcomes directly with longterm shareholder returns.
The performance target ranges have been set at stretching levels and commensurate with the targets set for the relative TSR element of the LTIP median to 75th percentile.
To provide further alignment with shareholders LTIP awards will be subject to an additional postvesting holding period.
To the extent an award vests subject to threeyear performance shares will be required to be held for a further two years i. anniversary of the date of grant.
In line with our policy LTIP awards will also be subject to the groups malus and clawback provisions.
Implementation of nonexecutive director remuneration policy for 2018 Nonexecutive director fees will remain at the levels set at the time of Admission.
As appointees of the Groups significant shareholders Matthieu Milandri and Guillaume Vermersch have waived their right to receive fees in connection with their appointment as nonexecutive directors of the company.
We trust that you find that this report sets out clearly our policy and how we intend to implement it as well as the rationale for our decisions.
The committee believes that the policy and the approach to its implementation in 2018 are in the best interests of all shareholders.
John Bentley Chairman remuneration committee 4 June 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT
The AIM rules require the disclosure of each directors remuneration in respect of the financial year.
The information in the table below provides this information.
In compliance with the AIM rules it provides information relating solely to fees received and accrued for services provided to the company as opposed to the group during the year
Emoluments
US000
Emoluments
US000
Sir Michael Rake 122 23 Anuj Sharma appointed 10 August 2017 282 Philip Wolfe appointed 10 August 2017 335 Javier Alvarez 35 17 John Bentley appointed 10 August 2017 30 David Jackson 29 7 Nicols Mallo Huergo Matthieu Milandri Garrett Soden appointed 10 August 2017 31 Guillaume Vermersch appointed 10 August 2017 Alejandro Jotayan resigned 30 March 2017 200 232 German Ranftl resigned 10 August 2017 Juan Carlos Esteban resigned 10 August 2017 Nigel Duxbury resigned 10 August 2017 303 165 Carolina Landi resigned 10 August 2017 Total 1383 461 1 Accrued not paid Details of total emoluments received by directors in 2017 are included in the table below
US000
Taxable benefits
Annual bonus
LTIP
US000
Pension benefit
Severance
US000
Other
US000
Total
US000
Director
Sir Michael Rake 122       122 Anuj Sharma appointed 10 August 2017 247 10   25   282 Philip Wolfe appointed 10 August 2017 152 6 110  15  52 335 Javier Alvarez 35       35 John Bentley appointed 10 August 2017 30       30 David Jackson 29       29 Nicols Mallo Huergo 137  50     187 Matthieu Milandri Garrett Soden appointed 10 August 2017 31       31 Guillaume Vermersch appointed 10 August 2017 Alejandro Jotayan resigned 30 March 2017 92 12    800  904 German Ranftl resigned 10 August 2017 20       20 Juan Carlos Esteban resigned 10 August 2017 78 30      108 Nigel Duxbury resigned 10 August 2017 131  172     303 Carolina Landi resigned 10 August 2017 33 16    98  147 Total 1137 74 332  40 898 52 2533 Exchange rate US 1.29 Exchange rate ARUS 15.97 1 Annual bonus accrued not paid 68 Phoenix Global Resources plc
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT CONTINUED
Although the company being AIM quoted is not subject to the Directors Remuneration Regulations 2008  the Regulations the committee recognises the importance of transparency and standards of governance.
This report has therefore been prepared largely in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and Schedule 8 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2013 as though the company were listed on the London Stock Exchange Main Market.
This section of the report sets out the remuneration policy for the directors that has been developed to reflect our remuneration principles and that was outlined in the companys admission document dated 24 July 2017.
Remuneration policy for the executive directors Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Base salary To attract and retain talented executive directors to deliver the groups strategy by ensuring base salaries and the implied total package are competitive in relevant talent markets while not overpaying.
Base salaries will be reviewed by the committee annually and benchmarked periodically against comparable roles at international Exploration and Production peers as well as UKlisted companies of similar size and complexity.
In deciding base salary levels the committee considers personal performance including the individuals contribution to the achievement of the groups strategic objectives.
The committee will also consider employment conditions and salary levels across the group and prevailing market conditions.
Salaries are set on a caseby case basis to reflect the role and the experience and qualifications of the individual.
Base salary increases for the executive directors will not normally exceed the average increase awarded to the wider workforce other than in exceptional circumstances such as a material change in responsibilities size or complexity of the role or if a director was intentionally appointed on a below market salary.
Base salaries are disclosed in the annual report on remuneration.
Pension
To provide an appropriate structure and level of postretirement benefit for executive directors in a costefficient manner that reflects local market norms in the relevant jurisdiction.
Executive directors may receive a contribution to a personal pension plan a cash allowance in lieu or a combination thereof.
Salary is the only element of remuneration that is pensionable.
Executive directors are eligible for a company contribution from the group of up to 10% of base salary.
Details of the pension contributions made to executive directors during the year are disclosed in the annual report on remuneration.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Other benefits To provide noncash benefits which are competitive in the market in which the executive director is employed.
The group may provide benefits in kind including but not limited to a company car or car allowance private medical insurance or allowance in lieu for the executive directors and their family permanent health insurance and life insurance.
Executive directors may also be provided certain other benefits to take account of individual circumstances such as but not limited to payment of tax financial andor legal adviser fees expatriate allowance relocation expenses housing allowance and tax equalisation including associated interest penalties or fees plus in certain circumstances or where the committee consider it appropriate any tax incurred on such benefits.
Executive directors may also be offered any other future benefits made available either to all senior employees globally or in the region in which the executive director is employed.
Benefits for executive directors are set at a level which the committee considers appropriate compared to wider employee benefits as well as competitive practices in relevant markets.
It is not anticipated that the costs of benefits provided will increase significantly in the financial years over which this policy will apply although the committee retains discretion to approve nonmaterial increases in cost.
In addition the committee retains discretion to approve a higher cost in exceptional circumstances e. expatriation etc. have changed e. increases in insurance costs.
Benefits in respect of the year under review are disclosed in the annual report on remuneration.
Annual bonus To incentivise executive directors to deliver strong financial and operational performance on an annual basis and reward the delivery of the groups strategic aims that will underpin the longerterm health and growth of the business.
Deferral into shares enhances alignment with shareholders.
Performance measures targets and weightings are set by the committee at the start of the year.
After the end of the financial year the committee determines the level of bonus to be paid taking into account the extent to which these targets have been achieved.
To the extent that the performance criteria have been met onethird of the annual bonus earned will normally be compulsorily deferred into shares under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
Deferred shares vest prorata annually over three years.
The remainder of the bonus will be paid in cash.
Dividends may accrue on deferred bonus shares over the deferral period and if so will be paid in cash or additional shares on deferred shares that vest at the time these are released to the executive director.
Malus provisions apply to the deferred bonus in certain circumstances as set out in the notes to the policy table.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity is 100% of base salary.
The payout for ontarget performance is 50% of maximum threshold performance results in zero payout.
Bonuses will be based primarily on a combination of stretching annual business and individual objectives.
Business objectives whether financial operational or nonfinancialstrategic will be selected to reflect the groups shortterm KPIs financial goals and strategic drivers.
The weighting of measures will be determined by the committee but will always include a strong focus on business performance.
The committee may adjust the formulaic annual bonus outcomes including to zero to avoid unintended outcomes align pay outcomes with underlying group performance and ensure fairness to shareholders and participants.
Further details will be disclosed in the relevant annual report on remuneration.
Performance targets set for each year will be disclosed retrospectively to the extent they are considered not to be commercially sensitive usually in the annual report on remuneration in respect of the year to which such performance targets relate.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT CONTINUED
Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP To align the interests of executive directors and shareholders in growing the value of the group over the long term.
Executive directors are eligible to receive annual awards over Phoenix shares under the LTIP either in the form of conditional share awards or nil cost options.
Awards granted under the LTIP to executive directors will have a performance period of at least three years.
If no entitlement has been earned at the end of the relevant performance period awards will not vest.
Shares received as a result of an award vesting will normally be subject to an additional twoyear holding period.
Dividends may accrue on LTIP awards over the vesting period and if so will be paid in additional shares or in cash on shares that vest at the end of the vesting period.
LTIP awards granted to executive directors will be subject to malus and clawback provisions as set out in the notes to the policy table.
The maximum annual LTIP opportunity is 200% of base salary.
In exceptional circumstances the remuneration committee has discretion to make awards of up to 300% of base salary.
25% of an award will vest if performance against each performance condition is at threshold and 100% if it is at maximum with straightline vesting in between.
Further details of the LTIP awards granted to each of the executive directors will be disclosed in the relevant annual report on remuneration.
Vesting of the LTIP is subject to continued employment during the performance period and the achievement of performance conditions aligned with the groups strategic plan and shareholder value creation.
The performance conditions may include marketbased measures such as total shareholder return and internal measures of financial or operational performance.
Performance measures will be selected by the remuneration committee at the start of each cycle.
The committee may adjust the formulaic LTIP outcome to ensure it takes account of any major changes to the group e. the performance period.
Further details including the performance targets attached to the LTIP in respect of each year will be disclosed in the relevant annual report on remuneration subject to these being considered not to be commercially sensitive.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the policy table Malus and clawback policy Malus and clawback may be applied to the deferred bonus share element of the annual bonus and LTIP awards in cases of gross misconduct by the executive director or material financial misstatement in the audited financial results of the group.
Deferred bonus shares will be subject to malus over the deferral period and LTIP awards will be subject to malus over the vesting period and clawback from the vesting date to the second anniversary of the relevant vesting date.
Share ownership guidelines The committee recognises the importance of aligning executive directors and shareholders interests through significant shareholdings in the group.
The groups policy as published in the admission document is to require the CEO to build up a shareholding of 200% of base salary 150% of salary for other executive directors and to retain these shares until retirement from the board of directors.
50% of any net vested share awards i. minimum shareholding requirements are met.
Use of discretion The committee may apply its discretion as set out below when agreeing remuneration outcomes to help ensure that the implementation of our remuneration policy is consistent with the guiding principles for Phoenix remuneration.
Payments from outstanding awards The committee reserves the right in certain circumstances to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments where the terms of the payment were agreed before the policy came into effect or at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the group provided that in the opinion of the committee the payment was not agreed in consideration of the individual becoming a director of the group.
For these purposes payments include the satisfaction of variable remuneration awards previously granted but not vested to an individual.
Minor changes to policy The committee retains discretion to make minor nonsignificant changes to the policy set out above for reasons including but not limited to regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without reverting to shareholders for approval for that amendment where seeking such shareholder approval would be disproportionate to the discretion being exercised.
LTIP awards The committee may exercise its discretion as provided for in the LTIP rules.
The committee may also adjust the number of shares comprising an LTIP award or the exercise price if the award comprises options in the event of a variation of share capital demerger special dividend distribution or any other corporate event which may affect the current or future value of an award.
It is intended that any adjustment will be made on a neutral basis i. to not be to the benefit or detriment of participants.
Remuneration policy for the wider workforce The remuneration policy for other employees is based on principles that are broadly consistent with those applied to executive director remuneration with a common objective of driving financial performance and the achievement of strategic objectives and contributing to the longterm success of the group.
Remuneration supports our ability to attract motivate and retain skilled and dedicated individuals whose contribution continues to be a key factor in the groups success.
Annual salary reviews take into account group performance local pay and market conditions and salary levels for similar roles in comparable companies.
Pension entitlements and other benefits vary according to jurisdiction to ensure these remain appropriately competitive for the local market.
Some employees below executive level are eligible to participate in annual bonus schemes opportunities and performance measures vary by organisational level geographical region and an individuals role.
Employee ownership of Phoenix shares is promoted across the group.
Senior executives are eligible for LTIP awards on similar terms as the executive directors although award opportunities are lower and vary by organisational level.
Other executives are eligible for restricted share awards on a discretionary basis.
Phoenix intends to offer all employees the opportunity to participate in a share purchase plan to be implemented in 2018.
Approach to target setting and performance measure selection The committee considers carefully the selection of performance measures at the start of each performance cycle taking into consideration the groups strategic objectives and the macroeconomic environment.
Annual bonus measures are selected to align with the groups shortterm KPIs.
LTIP performance measures are selected to ensure they align with the groups strategy and longterm shareholder value creation.
Measures may change from cycle to cycle subject to the remuneration policy and details of the bonus and LTIP measures selected will therefore be disclosed in the relevant Annual report on remuneration.
Targets are set to be stretching but achievable over the performance period taking account of multiple relevant reference points including typical performance ranges for those measures at other industry peers and FTSElisted companies of comparable size and complexity.
Payforperformance scenario analysis The charts overleaf provide an estimate of the potential future reward opportunities for the executive directors and the potential split between the different elements of remuneration under three different performance scenarios Maximum Ontarget and Minimum.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT CONTINUED
Potential reward opportunities are based on the forwardlooking policy applied to 2018 base salaries and incentive opportunities.
Note that the LTIP awards granted in a year will not normally vest until the third anniversary of the date of grant and the projected value excludes the impact of share price movement.
Pay scenarios CEOAnuj Sharma US000 CFOPhilip Wolfe 000
US682
US1302
OnTarget
US2542
100% 52% 27% 24% 24% 24% 49%
Fixed pay Bonus LTIP
OnTarget
100% 52% 27% 24% 24% 24% 49%
Fixed pay Bonus LTIP
Maximum fixed remuneration salary pension other benefits plus maximum bonus 100% of salary and full vesting of LTIP awards 200% of base salary.
Ontarget fixed remuneration as above plus target bonus 50% of maximum and threshold LTIP vesting 25% of maximum.
Minimum fixed remuneration only being the only element of executive directors remuneration not linked to performance.
Executive Director service contracts In accordance with general market practice each of the executive directors has a rolling service contract.
The executive directors service contracts copies of which are available to view at the groups registered office took effect on Admission 10 August 2017 and are each terminable on 12 months notice from the group and 12 months notice from the executive director save in the event the company serves an immediate termination notice in specified circumstances of constructive dismissal.
This practice may also apply for any new executive directors.
The following table shows the date of the service contract for each executive director that served during the year Executive director Position Date of appointment Date of service agreement Anuj Sharma CEO Admission 10 August 2017 24 July 2017 Philip Wolfe CFO Admission 10 August 2017 24 July 2017 Exit payments policy The groups policy on termination payments is to consider the circumstances on a casebycase basis taking into account the relevant contractual terms in the executives service contract and the circumstances of termination.
Executive directors contracts provide for the payment of a predetermined sum in the event of termination of employment in certain circumstances but excluding circumstances where the group is entitled to dismiss without compensation comprising base salary in respect of the unexpired portion of the notice period.
Termination payments may take the form of payments in lieu of notice.
Payments would normally be made on a phased basis and subject to mitigation.
In addition to contractual provisions the table below summarises how awards under each discretionary incentive plan are typically treated in specific circumstances with the final treatment remaining subject to the committees discretion as provided under the rules of the plan.
In the event of termination any outstanding shares or option granted under allemployee schemes will be treated in accordance with the rules of the scheme which typically do not include discretion.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Treatment of awards on cessation of employment Reason for cessation Calculation of vestingpayment Timing of vestingpayment Annual bonus Injury disability illhealth death redundancy retirement or other such event as the committee determines.
The committee may determine that a bonus is payable on cessation of employment normally prorated for the proportion of the performance year worked and the committee retains discretion to determine that the bonus should be paid wholly in cash.
The bonus payable will be determined based on the performance of the group and of the individual over the relevant period and the circumstances of the directors loss of office.
Following the end of the relevant financial year.
All other reasons including voluntary resignation.
No bonus will be paid for the financial year.
Not applicable.
Deferred bonus shares Resignation or dismissal for cause Awards normally lapse.
Not applicable.
All other reasons e. determines.
Awards will normally vest in full i. prorating should apply.
At the normal vesting date unless the committee decides that awards should vest earlier e. in the event of death.
Change of control.
Awards will normally be prorated for time unless the committee exercises discretion to disapply time prorating.
Awards may alternatively be exchanged for equivalent replacement awards where appropriate.
On change of control.
LTIP awards Resignation or dismissal for cause.
Awards normally lapse.
Not applicable.
All other reasons e. determines.
Awards will normally be prorated for time unless the committee exercises discretion to disapply time prorating and will vest based on performance over the original performance period unless the committee decides to measure performance to the date of cessation.
At the normal vesting date unless the committee decides that awards should vest earlier e. in the event of death.
Change of control.
LTIP awards will normally be prorated for time unless the committee exercises discretion to disapply time prorating and will vest subject to performance over the period to the change of control.
LTIP awards may alternatively be exchanged for equivalent replacement awards where appropriate.
On change of control.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
REMUNERATION POLICY REPORT CONTINUED
Approach to remuneration on recruitment External appointments In cases of hiring or appointing a new executive director from outside the group the committee may make use of all existing components of remuneration set out in the policy table up to the disclosed maximum opportunities where applicable.
When determining the remuneration package for a new executive director the committee will take into account all relevant factors based on the circumstances at that time to ensure that arrangements are in the best interests of the group and its shareholders.
This may include factors such as the experience and skills of the individual internal comparisons and relevant market data.
The committee may also make an award in respect of a new appointment to buy out incentive arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer i. over and above the maximum limits on incentive opportunities set out in the policy table.
In doing so the committee will consider relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to these awards the likelihood of those conditions being met and the time over which they would have vested.
The intention is that the expected value of any buyout award would be no higher than the expected value of the forfeited arrangements and that the structure will replicate as far as reasonably possible that of the awards being forfeited.
The committee may consider it appropriate to structure buyout awards differently from the structure described in the policy table exercising its discretion under the LTIP rules to structure awards in other forms including market value options restricted shares forfeitable shares or phantom awards as the remuneration committee may determine in this context.
Internal promotion Where a new executive director is appointed by way of internal promotion the policy will be consistent with that for external appointees as detailed above other than in relation to buyout awards.
Any commitments made prior to an individuals promotion will continue to be honoured even if they would not otherwise be consistent with the policy prevailing when the commitment is fulfilled although the group may where appropriate seek to revise an individuals existing service contract on promotion to ensure it aligns with other executive directors and good practice.
Disclosure on the remuneration structure of any new executive director including details of any buyout awards will be disclosed in the annual report on remuneration for the year in which recruitment occurred.
External appointments held by executive directors Executive directors may not accept any external appointment without the consent of the board there being no conflicts of interest and the appointment not leading to deterioration in the individuals performance.
Executive directors may retain the fees paid for such roles.
Details of external appointments will be included in the annual report on remuneration.
Consideration of conditions elsewhere in the group The committee seeks to promote and maintain good relations with employees as part of its broader employee engagement strategy considers pay practices across the group and is mindful of the salary increases applying across the rest of the business in relevant markets when considering any increases to salaries for executive directors.
However the committee does not currently consult with employees on its executive remuneration policy.
Consideration of shareholder views The committee will take into consideration all shareholder views received during the year and at the annual general meeting each year as well as guidance from shareholder representative bodies more broadly in shaping the groups implementation of its remuneration policy as well as any future changes to policy.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy for the nonexecutive directors Details of the policy on fees paid to our nonexecutive directors are set out in the table below Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity
Nonexecutive director fees To attract and retain nonexecutive directors of the highest calibre with broad commercial and other experience relevant to the group.
The fees of the chairman are determined by the committee.
The fees paid to nonexecutive directors are determined by the chairman and executive directors.
Additional fees may be payable for acting as senior independent director and for chairing or being a member of the audit and risk committee the remuneration committee and any other board committee.
Fee levels are reviewed annually taking into account external advice on best practice and competitive levels in particular at other FTSE companies of comparable size and complexity.
Time commitment and responsibility are also taken into account when reviewing fees.
Chairman and nonexecutive director fees are paid in cash.
The committee reimburses the chairman and nonexecutive directors for reasonable expenses in performing their duties and may settle any tax incurred in relation to these expenses.
Nonexecutive directors will be reimbursed by the group for expenses including travel and accommodation as required to fulfil their nonexecutive duties.
The fees paid to the chairman and nonexecutive directors are disclosed in the annual report on remuneration.
Fee increases will be applied taking into account the outcome of the annual review.
The maximum aggregate annual fee for all non executive directors including the chairman as provided in the groups articles of association is 750000.
Nonexecutive directors are not eligible to join the groups pension incentives or share schemes or to participate in any of the groups other benefit arrangements.
In recruiting a new nonexecutive director the committee will use the policy set out above.
Nonexecutive director letters of appointment None of the nonexecutive directors has a service contract with the group.
They do have letters of appointment and will be submitted for reelection annually.
The dates relating to the appointments of the chairman and nonexecutive directors who served during the reporting period are as follows Director Role Date of appointment Date of letter of appointment Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 19 September 2016 24 July 2017 John Bentley Independent nonexecutive director 10 August 2017 24 July 2017 Garrett Soden Independent nonexecutive director 10 August 2017 24 July 2017 Javier Alvarez Independent nonexecutive director 16 July 2012 24 July 2017 David Jackson Independent nonexecutive director 16 July 2012 24 July 2017 Nicols Mallo Huergo Nonexecutive director 2 October 2007 24 July 2017 Matthieu Milandri Nonexecutive director 21 August 2013 24 July 2017 Guillaume Vermersch Nonexecutive director 10 August 2017 24 July 2017 76 Phoenix Global Resources plc
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
This section of the remuneration report provides details of how our remuneration policy was implemented from admission 10 August 2017 to 31 December 2017 and how it will be implemented during the year ending 31 December 2018.
Committee membership in 2017 The Committee is currently composed of four nonexecutive directors John Bentley  Committee chairman independent Sir Michael Rake  Nonexecutive chairman Garrett Soden  Nonexecutive director independent David Jackson  Nonexecutive director independent The company secretary acts as secretary to the committee.
The committee met formally on four occasions during the period from admission to 31 December 2017.
The attendance of members of the committee during the period is set out below.
Member Meetings attended John Bentley Chair 44 Sir Michael Rake 44 Garrett Soden 44 David Jackson 44 The committee operates within agreed terms of reference which are available on our website at site The committee is responsible for determining the remuneration policy and packages for the executive directors and other selected senior executives.
The committee is also responsible for agreeing the fees for the nonexecutive chairman.
The CEO and CFO attend meetings of the Committee by invitation Matthieu Milandri and Nicols Mallo Huergo both non executive directors attend in observer capacity only.
The members of the Committee and any person attending its meetings do not participate in any discussion or decision on their own remuneration.
Advisers
Mercer supported the group on remunerationrelated matters in the build up to Admission.
At its first meeting following Admission the committee formally appointed Mercer as its independent adviser.
Mercer reports to the committee chairman.
Mercer is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK site.
Mercer does not have any other connection with the group and is considered to be independent by the committee.
Fees paid to Mercer are determined on a time and materials basis and totalled 65058 excluding expenses and VAT from Admission to 31 December 2017 in their capacity as advisers to the committee.
Single total figure of remuneration for executive directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each executive director for the 2017 financial year from their appointment as executive directors of Phoenix being 10 August 2017.
As both executive directors were newly appointed on admission no prior year figures have been shown.
The values of each element of remuneration are based on the actual value delivered where known.
Director
Base salary
Annual bonus
Pension benefit
Total
Anuj Sharma US 247 10   25  282 Philip Wolfe  118 5 85  The salaries of our executive directors were set in the context of salaries for comparable roles at other international EandP companies and FTSElisted companies of comparable size to Phoenix.
Anuj Sharmas base salary figure reflects his annual salary of US620000 paid by the group from Admission to the yearend.
Philip Wolfes base salary figure reflects his annual salary of 300000 paid by the group from Admission to the yearend 2 Consist primarily of private medical insurance life assurance and permanent health insurance 3 Payment for performance during the year prorated for the period.
Twothirds paid in cash and onethird deferred as an award under the terms of the companys Deferred Bonus Plan.
See below and overleaf for further details 4 Pension benefits in the year equivalent to 10% of base salary from Admission 5 Philip Wolfe received a 40000 sign on bonus in August 2017 77 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Incentive outcomes for the year ended 31 December 2017 Annual bonus in respect of performance in the 2017 financial year As the period from admission is not a full year the awards were determined predominantly on a discretionary basis.
Onethird of the award will be deferred as an award over shares that will vest prorata annually over three years.
The balance of the award will be paid in cash.
For 2017 the CEO waived his right to an award.
The CFO had a maximum opportunity of 100% of his annual salary.
The ontarget opportunity was 50% of the maximum.
The table below summarises the annual bonus payments for the executive directors
Maximum opportunity Bonus outcome % of max Salary earned for the period from Admission to 31 December 2017 Bonus for the period from Admission to 31 December 2017 Anuj Sharma US na na% 247 na Philip Wolfe  100% of salary 72% 118 85 Although targets in relation to the 2017 financial year are not disclosed it will be the committees policy to normally disclose annual bonus targets retrospectively at the same time as the performance outcome is disclosed in the remuneration report after the end of each financial year to the extent they are not considered commercially sensitive.
LTIP awarded in 2017 No LTIP awards were granted in 2017.
Single total figure of remuneration for nonexecutive directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each nonexecutive director for the period from admission to 31 December 2017.
Director
Fees
US000
Sir Michael Rake 81 Javier Alvarez 25 John Bentley appointed 10 August 2017 30 David Jackson 25 Nicols Mallo Huergo 25 Matthieu Milandri Garrett Soden appointed 10 August 2017 31 Guillaume Vermersch appointed 10 August 2017 Total 217 Percentage change in CEO remuneration This section is not applicable as the CEO was only appointed on 10 August 2017 there is no prior year comparison that can be made.
Relative importance of spend on pay There were no dividends paid or share buybacks implemented or other significant distributions payments or other uses of profit or cash flow in the 2017 financial year which the directors consider relevant in assisting an understanding of the relative importance of spend on pay.
Exit payments made in the year No exit payments were made to any director during the period from admission to 31 December 2017 .
Payments to past directors No payments were made to past directors during the period from admission to 31 December 2017.
External appointments Neither executive director currently holds any external appointments.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Review of past performance This graph shows the Groups total shareholder return TSR compared to the FTSE 250 Index as if the group was listed on the main market.
Performance in line with the requirements of the reporting regulations is measured by TSR over the period from admission to 31 December 2017 rebased to 100.
9 Aug 2017 31 Aug 2017 30 Sep 2017 31 Oct 2017 30 Nov 2017 31 Dec 2017 Phoenix Global Resources FTSE 250 Index The table below details the CEOs single total figure of remuneration and incentive outcomes over the same period CEO Anuj Sharma CEO single figure US000 282 Annual bonus % max na LTIP vesting % max na Implementation of executive director remuneration policy for 2018 Base salary Base salaries were set on Admission taking into account competitive practice for similar roles in other international EandP companies and FTSElisted companies of similar size.
The current salaries of the executive directors effective from Admission are set out below Director Base salary Anuj Sharma US620000 Philip Wolfe 300000 Executive director salary levels will remain at these levels for 2018 and will be first reviewed later in the year with any increases that may be awarded being effective 1 January 2019.
Pension
Both executive directors will receive a cash allowance of 10% of base salary in lieu of a pension contributiona contribution to a 401k scheme US pension scheme.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual bonus For 2018 the executive directors will each have a maximum bonus opportunity of 100% of salary.
The ontarget bonus opportunity is 50% of maximum.
Twothirds of any bonus earned will be paid in cash with the remainder deferred into Phoenix shares for a further threeyear period vesting prorata annually.
The annual bonus for 2018 will be based on quantitative corporate KPIs and qualitative individual KPIs.
The committee will normally disclose the annual bonus targets retrospectively in next years annual report on remuneration.
In the event the board considers these targets to remain commercially sensitive they will be disclosed as soon as possible once they are no longer considered to be sensitive.
In line with our policy deferred bonuses in respect of the 2018 financial year will be subject to the groups malus provisions see page 71 for further details.
LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP In 2018 the executive directors will each receive conditional awards of shares under the Phoenix LTIP with face values of 200% of salary.
The 2018 LTIP will vest after three years subject to the following performance measures and targets Measure Weighting
25% vesting
100% vesting 3year relative TSR 50% Median 75th percentile 3year absolute TSR 50% 8% p.
16% p.
Relative TSR has been selected by the committee to closely align executive interests with those of shareholders.
Phoenixs TSR performance will be measured over the threeyear period commencing on 10 August 2017 and compared to the following companies on the basis of TSR rank Company Country of listing Amerisur Resources plc United Kingdom Cairn Energy PLC United Kingdom Canacol Energy Ltd Canada EnQuest plc United Kingdom Faroe Petroleum plc United Kingdom Frontera Energy Corp Canada Gran Tierra Energy Inc United States Hurricane Energy plc United Kingdom Nostrum Oil and Gas PLC United Kingdom Ophir Energy plc United Kingdom Parex Resources Inc Canada Premier Oil plc United Kingdom SOCO International plc United Kingdom Sound Energy plc United Kingdom Tullow Oil plc United Kingdom Absolute TSR has been selected by the committee to align LTIP outcomes with longterm shareholder returns.
The performance target ranges have been set at stretching levels and commensurate with the targets set for the relative TSR element of the LTIP median to 75th percentile.
To provide further alignment with shareholders LTIP awards will be subject to an additional postvesting holding period.
To the extent an award vests subject to threeyear performance shares will be required to be held for a further two years i. fifth anniversary of the date of grant.
In line with our policy LTIP awards will also be subject to the groups malus and clawback provisions.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Implementation of nonexecutive director remuneration policy for 2018 Nonexecutive director fees were set on admission taking into account competitive practice for similar roles in other international EandP companies and FTSElisted companies of similar size.
The current fees payable to the nonexecutive directors are set out below Role Fee Chairman 160000 Nonexecutive director basic fee 50000 Additional fees Chairman of the audit and risk committee 10000 Chairman of the remuneration committee 10000 Nonexecutive director fees will remain at these levels for 2018.
As appointees of the groups significant shareholders Matthieu Milandri and Guillaume Vermersch have waived their right to receive fees in connection with their appointment as nonexecutive directors of the company.
The directors remuneration report has been approved by the board and signed on its behalf by John Bentley Chairman remuneration committee 4 June 2018 81 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT Group directors report for the year ended 31 December 2017 The directors of Phoenix Global Resources plc formerly Andes Energia plc present their Annual Report and audited financial statements of the company for the year ended 31 December 2017.
These will be laid before the shareholders at the AGM to be held on 28 June 2018.
General information The company is a public limited company incorporated in England and Wales under the Companies Act 2006 Registered no.
The company operates two overseas branches one each in Mendoza Argentina and Bogota Colombia.
The immediate parent of the company is Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited a subsidiary of Mercuria Energy Group Limited the ultimate beneficial owner of both the group and the company.
Change of name On 10 August 2017 the company changed its name to Phoenix Global Resources plc.
The change of name was made following completion of the combination transaction with Trefoil Holdings B.
AIM market of the London Stock Exchange.
Share capital The companys share capital during the year consisted of ordinary shares of 0.10 each ordinary shares.
Each ordinary share carries one vote.
Prior to the 10 August 2017 combination with Trefoil Holdings B. there were 605558515 ordinary shares in issue.
The transaction consideration was satisfied by the issue of 1899106385 ordinary shares in the company to Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited in return for 100% of the issued share capital of Trefoil Holdings B.
Also on 10 August 2017 a further 14766666 were issued to Mercuria Energy Asset Management B. related to deferred consideration from previous transactions.
Following the admission to trading of an additional 1913873051 ordinary shares on 10 August 2017 there were 2519431566 shares in issue.
In the period from August 2017 to the year end 17746660 warrants were exercised and a further 17746660 ordinary shares were admitted to trading with 2537178226 ordinary shares being in issue at 31 December 2017.
In the period to 31 May 2018 no further warrants have been exercised.
On 16 February 2018 the company announced the conversion of US100.0 million of the previously existing bridging and working capital facility from Mercuria Energy Trading S. to new ordinary shares at 0.37 per share.
As a result 194387299 additional shares were issued to Mercuria Asset Holdings Hong Kong Limited a subsidiary of Mercuria Energy Group Limited Mercuria Group.
The company has not repurchased any of its shares in the period and does not hold any shares in treasury.
At 31 May 2018 a total of 2746709408 ordinary shares were in issue.
Substantial and significant interests in shares
Number of ordinary shares As a % of the issued ordinary shares Mercuria Energy Group Limited 2183053961 79.48% Jos Luis Manzano and family 104289545 3.80% 1 Mercuria Energy Group holds the above shares in the company through its subsidiaries Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited 1917478357 shares Mercuria Asset Holdings Hong Kong Limited 201387299 shares and Mercuria Energy Asset Management B.
64188305 shares 2 These shares in the company are held through Vetalir International S.
Manzano 79328285 shares Integra Capital USA LLC 12162250 shares and directly by Jos Luis Manzano 12799010 shares Placement of shares Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of Mercuria Energy Trading Limited received 1899166385 new ordinary shares of the company as consideration for its contributing the shares of Trefoil Holdings B. the combination transaction completed on 10 August 2017.
At the same date a further 14766666 shares were issued to Mercuria Energy Asset Management B. related to deferred consideration from previous transactions.
In addition to ordinary shares of the company Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited also received 179838924 warrants to subscribe for ordinary shares of the company.
The number of warrants issued to Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited was calculated in order to allow it the option to maintain its postcombination shareholding percentage in Phoenix in the event that holders of warrants that existed prior to the combination elected to exercise their warrants.
The warrants held by Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited following the combination transaction are exercisable prorata and conditional on the exercise of a previously existing warrant and have exercise prices reflecting the exercise price of those warrants.
On 16 February 2018 194387299 ordinary shares of the company were issued to Mercuria Asset Holdings Hong Kong Limited at a price of 0.37 per share in a partial conversion of the US160.0 million bridging and working capital facility previously advanced to the company by the Mercuria Group.
At 31 May 2018 Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited has exercised 10228089 of the warrants received by it as part of the combination transaction.
Majority shareholder Mercuria Energy Group Limited is the ultimate majority shareholder of the group.
A relationship agreement is in place between and amongst the company and Mercuria Energy Group companies.
This relationship agreement restricts shareholder rights with respect to board composition voting on director appointments and removals and the day to day running of the business by the executive directors.
The board of directors is composed of a majority of independent directors.
Matters related to governance are discussed further in the corporate governance report on pages 56 to 59.
Contracts of significance At 31 December 2017 the company is participant to a bridging and working capital agreement advanced by Mercuria Energy Group with aggregate value of US160.0 million.
Funds received under the agreement were used to redeem approximately US87.0 million of existing credit facilities at 10 August 2017 with the remainder being made available for general and working capital purposes.
On 16 February 2018 US100.0 million of this facility was converted into 194387299 ordinary shares of the company at a price of 0.37 per share.
The remaining US60.0 million was refinanced as part of a new convertible revolving credit facility from Mercuria details of which are included in note 32 to the consolidated financial statements.
On 22 January 2018 the company entered a commodity price swap agreement with Mercuria Energy Trading S. company fixed the price it receives per barrel of oil sold over an 11month period effective 15 January 2018.
The contract is priced by reference to a Brent benchmark of US65.97 per barrel in respect of 1215954 barrels in total and does not contain provision for margin requests.
Significant contracts with related parties are discussed in note 27 to the consolidated financial statements.
Dividends
As part of the combination transaction with Trefoil Holdings B. companys interest in shares of Interoil Exploration and Production ASA.
The distribution was made to the shareholders of record at 8 August 2017.
The company does not intend to pay any further dividend in respect of 2017.
The directors do not expect to make distributions by way of dividend payments for the foreseeable future.
The directors consider that it is in the best interest of the shareholders for the company to reinvest any profits derived from the groups operations in growth opportunities and further developing those operations.
Directors
Details of the directors who have served the company during the year including their dates of their appointment and where relevant their resignation are as follows Board role First appointed Resigned Nigel Duxbury Nonexecutive and company secretary 7 April 2004 10 August 2017 Nicols Mallo Huergo Nonexecutive 2 October 2007 na Juan Carlos Esteban Vice president exploration and production 24 June 2009 10 August 2017 Javier Alvarez Nonexecutive independent 17 July 2012 na David Jackson Nonexecutive independent 17 July 2012 na Carolina Landi Nonexecutive 17 July 2012 10 August 2017 German Ranftl Chief financial officer 17 July 2012 10 August 2017 Alejandro Jotayan Chief executive officer 16 April 2013 30 March 2017 Matthieu Milandri Nonexecutive 21 August 2013 na Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman 19 September 2016 na John Bentley Nonexecutive independent 10 August 2017 na Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer 10 August 2017 na Garrett Soden Nonexecutive independent 10 August 2017 na Guillaume Vermersch Nonexecutive 10 August 2017 na Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer 10 August 2017 na Nigel Duxbury stepped down as nonexecutive director on 10 August 2017.
Nigel continues as Company Secretary Nicols Mallo Huergo previously served as Executive Chairman.
He stepped down from this role on 10 August 2017.
Nicols continues as a nonexecutive director Phoenix Global Resources plc
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED The current directors were appointed to the board with a threeyear service term and will not be proposed for reelection at AGM prior to the expiration of that term.
The directors who joined the board in August 2017 were appointed at a meeting of the board of directors of the company.
Accordingly resolutions to reappoint these directors will be proposed at the upcoming AGM.
Directors indemnities As permitted by the articles of association of the company the directors have been given the benefit of an indemnity which is a qualifying thirdparty indemnity provision as defined in section 234 of the Companies Act 2006.
The indemnity was in place throughout the year and continues to be so.
The company has directors and officers liability insurance in place that provides insurance cover to the directors in the event of a claim or legal action.
This insurance was also in place throughout the year and remains in place.
Political and charitable donations No political or charitable donations were made nor was any political expenditure incurred by any group company in the year ended 31 December 2017 2016 nil.
Auditors and disclosure of relevant audit information As far as each director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the companys auditor is unaware.
In addition each director has taken all the steps that ought to have been taken in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that PwC the companys auditor in the period is aware of that information.
Following a review of both the independence and the effectiveness of the auditor and the indication from PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP of its willingness to continue in office a resolution that PwC be reappointed will be proposed at the annual general meeting.
Corporate governance The companys statement on corporate governance can be found in the corporate governance report on pages 56 to 59 of this annual report.
The corporate governance report forms part of this directors report and is incorporated by reference here.
Annual general meeting The companys AGM will be held at Herbert Smith Freehills LLP Exchange House Primrose Street London EC2A 2EG on 29 June 2018.
Formal notice of the AGM including details of special business is set out in the notice of AGM which accompanies this annual report and is available on the companys website at site Going concern The groups business activities together with a description of the factors likely to affect its future development are set out in the group strategic report.
The financial position of the group its cash flows and liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the financial review set out in the annual report.
Details of the groups commitments are set out in note 26 to the group financial statements.
In addition note 22 to the group financial statements includes details of the groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of financial instruments held and its exposure to credit and liquidity risk.
The group principally generates cash from its existing conventional oil and gas production operations.
Nevertheless Phoenix was formed with the stated intention of undertaking a significant exploration evaluation and development programme focused on the groups unconventional oil and gas assets in Argentina including the Vaca Muerta formation.
In developing these assets management expects to leverage skills expertise and technology from the United States to complement the groups own understanding and experience of the assets it holds in Argentina that has been built up over many years.
Substantially all planned expenditure related to the further development of the groups oil and gas assets is discretionary in nature and is at the option of the group.
The significant majority of all minimum work commitments or expenditure obligations associated with the groups oil and gas licences in Argentina have already been fulfilled.
The groups business plan and exploration programme for 2018 is supported by the conversion of US100.0 million of a US160.0 bridging and working capital agreement previously advanced to the group by Mercuria Energy Trading S. capital.
In addition the group has entered a new convertible revolving credit facility with the Mercuria Group in February 2018.
This new facility provides US100.0 million of additional capital and through the restructuring of the interest provisions compared to those in the original facility results in US11.0 million cash interest cost savings for the remainder of 2018.
Additional funding options remain under consideration and could include securing additional thirdparty bank debt or the issue of new equity in the future.
The directors therefore have a reasonable expectation that the group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Consequently the directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
The financial statements do not include any adjustments that would be required if the group was unable to continue as a going concern.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Further disclosures Further disclosure requirements as required by the Companies Act 2006 Schedule 7 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 and the FCAs Listing Rules and Disclosure and Transparency Rules are found on the following pages of the companys annual report and are incorporated into the directors report by reference
Page number Future developments 13 Acquisitions and disposals 115 Antislavery disclosure 45 Corporate governance statement 56 to 59 Gender diversity 44 60 Financial risk and financial instruments 121 129 Important events subsequent to the year end 129 By order of the board Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer 4 June 2018 Phoenix Global Resources plc
DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED The directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have prepared the group and company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and of the profit or loss of the company for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRS as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the group and company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the group and company financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the company and the group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the company and the group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the groups website site Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The directors consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the directors whose names and functions are listed in the directors report confirm that to the best of their knowledge the group and company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and loss of the group and company and the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the group and company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
By order of the board Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer 4 June 2018 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES 86 Phoenix Global Resources plc Financial statements IN THIS SECTION 88 Independent auditors report 93 Consolidated income statement 94 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 95 Consolidated statement of financial position 96 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 97 Consolidated statement of cash flows 98 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 130 Company statement of financial position 131 Company statement of changes in equity 132 Company statement of cash flows 133 Notes to the company financial statements STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
In our opinion Phoenix Global Resources plcs Phoenix group financial statements and company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups loss and the groups and the companys cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the companys financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and accounts the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated and company statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated and company statements of cash flows and the consolidated and company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
Our audit approach
Materiality  Overall group materiality US1570000 based on 1% of net assets excluding the net identifiable assets acquired as part of the combination transaction detailed in note 14.
Overall company materiality US1050000 based on the lower of group materiality and 1% of the companys net assets but capped at an amount lower than overall group materiality.
Audit scope  We conducted full scope audits at six significant components based on their size and risk characteristics five operating entities in Argentina and the parent company in London.
Our audit work enabled us to obtain coverage of 99% of consolidated revenue and 83% of total assets for the group.
Specific audit procedures were performed on certain balances and transactions at a further two reporting units relating to property plant and equipment borrowings and deferred income tax liabilities.
Members of the group audit team visited the Argentinian operations twice as part of our audit in order to have sufficient oversight of the work of our component auditors in Argentina.
This included a site visit to the Neuquina and Cuyana basins in the Province of Mendoza.
Key audit matters Our key audit matters comprised Impairment of long term assets and goodwill group and parent.
Accounting for the combination transaction group.
Accounting for the purchase price allocation PPA group.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Phoenix Global Resources plc
88 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF PHOENIX GLOBAL RESOURCES PLC Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Impairment of longterm assets and goodwill Impairment assessments require significant judgement and there is the risk that the valuation of the assets may be incorrect and any potential impairment charge or reversal miscalculated.
As such this was a key focus for our audit due to the material nature of the balance.
As disclosed in note 13 the group has property plant and equipment of US354.2 million and exploration and evaluation assets of US171.4 million as at 31 December 2017.
This is after the recognition of a US8.2 million impairment charge disclosed in note 13.
The group also has goodwill of US35.8 million within the Chachahuen Mata Mora and Corralera Cash Generating Units CGUs which must be tested for impairment on an annual basis.
Management has determined that the recoverable amount of the goodwill balance exceeded the carrying value.
In addition management has performed an impairment trigger assessment for each CGU.
The carrying values of the groups assets are supported by value in use calculations which are based on future cash flow forecasts.
As part of the reverse takeover process new reserve estimates were obtained for all CGUs and these were used by management as part of their impairment assessment Refer to note 2 for an explanation of the combination transaction and the legacy businesses.
Impairment indicators were identified for the CHPPC CGU following the relinquishment of the Puesta Pozo Cercado PPC licence in July 2017.
The CHPPC CGU had a preimpairment carrying value of US23.2 million and a US8.2m impairment charge was booked as a result of the relinquishment of the PPC licence.
Management has determined that there were no triggers for impairment in any of the other CGUs having considered factors such as long term prices interest rates reserves and production.
Management has additionally considered the recoverability of the investments in subsidiaries held in the company financial statements and recognised an impairment of US463.2 million calculated as the difference between the carrying amount of the individual investments and the relevant recoverable amount calculated as the day one fair value difference between the fair value of the acquired investment and the value of the deemed consideration calculated in accordance with IFRS 3.
For the Chachahuen Mata Mora and Corralera CGUs which have goodwill allocated to them we assessed the reasonableness of managements future forecasts of capital and operating expenses included in the cash flow forecasts in light of the historical accuracy of such forecasts and the current operational results.
In assessing the valuation of the other CGUs we assessed and challenged managements impairment trigger analysis and in particular considered changes in key assumptions such as commodity prices reserves and discount rates.
We concurred with managements view that the only trigger identified was in the CHPPC CGU.
We evaluated managements assumptions and estimates used to determine the recoverable value of the CHPPC CGU as well as reading third party reserve reports.
With respect to the impairment of the CHPPC CGU as the interests within the PPC licence have been relinquished we agreed that there is no future value attributable to PPC.
We used our valuation experts to assist us in evaluating the appropriateness of key market related assumptions in managements valuation models including commodity prices and discount rates.
We challenged managements assessment of the carrying value of the investments including the exchange ratio at the date of the transaction and the relative fair values of the investments and considered the assessment to be appropriate.
We concurred with managements decision to impair the investments for the reasons explained within note 13 to these consolidated financial statements and note 4 in the company financial statements.
Based on our analysis we did not identify any material issues with managements impairment conclusions the impairment charges recognised and the associated disclosures.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 89 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Accounting for the combination transaction Given the significance and complexity around accounting for the reverse takeover there is a risk that the accounting treatment may be incorrect and as such this was a key focus for our audit.
As disclosed within the basis of preparation the company issued shares during the year to the former shareholders of the Trefoil Group in return for 100% of the share capital of Trefoil Holdings
The transaction was considered to be a reverse takeover under IFRS 3 refer to note 2 for further explanation.
Accounting for a reverse takeover is complex and involves judgement around identifying which company is considered to be the accounting acquirer and which the acquiree as well as how the transaction should be reflected in the financial statements.
Trefoil Holdings B. by the nature of its shareholding over the enlarged group.
The accounting implications of the reverse takeover require that the comparative balances in these financial statements reflect the balance sheet of the legal acquirer Trefoil Holdings B. plc formally Andes Energia plc.
We obtained and reviewed managements assessment of the transaction and obtained and read the share purchase agreement.
We assessed the identification of the appropriate accounting treatment as well as the legal acquirer and acquiree and the implications of this on the presentation of the financial statements this included the comparative numbers being those relating to the Trefoil group and not the previous Andes group.
We considered the presentation of the Trefoil group comparatives to be appropriate given the nature of the transaction.
Accounting for the purchase price allocation PPA Given the significance and complexity around the transaction there is a risk that the accounting treatment may be incorrect and as such this was a key focus for our audit.
As disclosed in note 14 the assets and liabilities of the legacy Andes group were fair valued as required by IFRS 3 as at 10 August 2017.
Management engaged independent external experts to perform the valuation using discounted cash flow models for the noncurrent assets.
Management made further fair value adjustments to working capital balances as required based on facts and circumstances and managements own assessment of recoverability.
Goodwill of US260.0 million arose as a result of the transaction being the difference between the fair value of the acquired net assets and the value of the deemed consideration calculated in accordance with IFRS 3.
Other than the portion of this goodwill balance relating to deferred tax which must be recorded under IFRS3 management determined that there is no basis for recording any amount of goodwill in excess of this amount of US35.8 million.
Accordingly they have recognised an impairment of US224.2 million in the income statement.
We used our valuation experts to assist us in assessing the commodity prices discount rates and comparable transaction multiples used by managements external experts.
We benchmarked these to external data and challenged the assumptions based on our knowledge of the group and the industry within which it operates.
We also assessed the competence and objectivity of managements experts.
We challenged managements key assumptions used in each valuation model for noncurrent assets including output volumes capital expenditure operating costs and the expected life of the assets by comparing these assumptions against available external data and obtaining explanations for variances.
We recalculated the consideration and found the deemed consideration of 385.1 million to be calculated appropriately under the principles of IFRS 3.
We assessed managements assumptions in the fair value exercise of other assets particularly around the recoverability of long term receivables and held for sale assets.
We challenged managements assessment of the fair value of all identifiable assets and liabilities and the completeness of this assessment and found managements assessment to be complete.
We concurred with managements decision to impair US224.2 million of goodwill for the reasons explained within note 14 to these financial statements.
Based on our analysis we did not identify any material issues with the reasonableness of the fair values recognised and the resulting disclosures.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group and the company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
In establishing the overall approach to the group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the statutory reporting unit level by us as the group audit team or through involvement of our component auditors in Argentina.
The groups assets and operations are primarily located within three oil and gas basins in Argentina.
Financial reporting is undertaken in offices in London Buenos Aires Mendoza City and Houston.
Where work was performed by our component auditors in Argentina we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work for each reporting unit to be able to conclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as Phoenix Global Resources plc 90 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED a basis for our opinion on the group financial statements as a whole.
As part of our year end audits the group teams involvement comprised of site visits conference calls review of component auditor work papers attendance at component audit clearance meetings and other forms of communication as considered necessary.
In addition senior members of the audit team performed a site visit to various assets in the Neuquina basin in the Province of Mendoza.
The group audit team directly performed the work over the parent company the intermediate holding companies as well as the consolidation.
We identified six components which in our view required an audit of their complete financial information either due to their size or risk characteristics.
This included the five main operating subsidiaries in Argentina as well as the parent company in the United Kingdom.
Specific audit procedures on certain balances and transactions were also performed on a further two reporting components relating to property plant and equipment borrowings and deferred income tax liabilities.
The above gave us coverage of 99% over consolidated revenue and 83% over consolidated total assets.
This together with additional procedures performed at the Group level gave us the evidence we needed for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall materiality US1570000.
US1050000.
How we determined it 1% of net assets excluding the net identifiable assets acquired in the combination transaction detailed in note 14.
Based on net assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied In assessing the most appropriate benchmark to use as a basis for materiality we considered the nature of the newly enlarged group since the reverse takeover.
Given the overall importance of the groups exploration assets and the significant one off costs incurred during the year which impacted EBITDAX we believe that using net assets was the most appropriate benchmark.
We have assessed that the most appropriate benchmark for the parent company is net assets however we have capped this at an amount lower than overall group materiality.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between US150000 and US1050000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
The identifiable net assets acquired as part of the combination transaction were audited to a specific materiality less than overall group materiality.
We agreed with the audit committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above US100000 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups and companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups and companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 91 there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the strategic report and directors report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Strategic report and directors report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and directors report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the strategic report and directors report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the statement of directors responsibilities set out on page 85 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
OTHER REQUIRED REPORTING Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Timothy McAllister Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
4 June 2018 Phoenix Global Resources plc 92 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT CONTINUED
US000
US000
Revenue 7 141799 129264 Government incentives  713 Cost of sales 8 133387 97777 Gross profit 8412 32200 Exploration expenses 931 Impairment charge 13 232407 Selling and distribution expenses 5036 3908 Administrative expenses 9 39978 7581 Other operating incomeexpense 10 5040 Operating lossprofit 274980 20234 Presented as Adjusted EBITDAX 40555 48839 Nonrecurring expenses 32900 EBITDAX 7655 48839 Impairment charge 232407 Depreciation depletion and amortisation 49297 28454 Exploration cost written off 931 151 Operating lossprofit 274980 20234 Finance income 15 1976 Finance costs 15 13726 Lossprofit before taxation 286730 17870 Taxation 16 16635 Lossprofit for the year 270095 4579 Lossprofit per ordinary share US US Basic and diluted lossprofit per share 29 0.19 0.01 The above consolidated income statement should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 93 CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
US000
Lossprofit for the year 270095 Translation differences 546 2440 Total comprehensive lossprofit for the year 269549 2139 The above items will not be subsequently reclassified to profit and loss.
There are no impairment losses on revalued assets recognised directly in equity.
The above consolidated statement of comprehensive income should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 94 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
US000
US000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 13.1 354245 187890 Intangible assets and goodwill 13.2 207231 Other receivables 18 8322 Deferred tax assets 23 11629 1352 Total noncurrent assets 581427 200796 Current assets Inventories 24 14375 Trade and other receivables 18 44925 25410 Cash and cash equivalents 19 23696 5243 Total current assets 82996 39923 Total assets 664423 240719 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 20 7168 Borrowings 21 162502 Deferred tax liabilities 23 81714 39360 Provisions 25 17215 Total noncurrent liabilities 268599 48295 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 20 82355 22562 Income tax liability 654 Borrowings 21 29974 Provisions 25 367 385 Total current liabilities 113350 66880 Total liabilities 381949 115175 Net assets 282474 125544
Share capital and share premium 329877 150881 Other reserves 116299 21961 Retained earnings 68896 3376 Total equity 282474 125544 The above consolidated statement of financial position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
The financial statements on pages 93 to 129 were approved by the board of directors and authorised for issue on 4 June 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 95 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Capital and reserves Called up share capital
Share premium account
Retained earnings
Other
US000
Total equity
At 1 January 2016 98414 52467 8720 19521 122640 Profit for the year   4579  4579 Translation differences Acquisition of noncontrolling interest   765 Total comprehensive profitloss for the year   5344 2440 2904 At 31 December 2016 98414 52467 3376 21961 125544 Loss for the year   270095  270095 Other comprehensive income    546 546 Total comprehensive lossprofit for the year   270095 546 Effect of change of functional currency 19699 9162  28861 Acquisition of subsidiary 248803   136255 385058 Capital reduction  50549 310549 260000 Transaction with owners   31713  31713 Fair value of share based payments   105  105 Issue of ordinary shares 2359 7244   9603 At 31 December 2017 329877  68896 116299 282474 Other reserves
US000
Warrant reserve
Translation reserve
Deferred consideration
Total other reserves
At 1 January 2016 26099 2105  4473 19521 Other comprehensive income   2440  2440 At 31 December 2016 26099 2105 2440 4473 21961 Translation differences   546  546 Effect of change of functional currency 29446   585 28861 Acquisition of subsidiary 140143   3888 136255 Capital reduction 260000    260000 At 31 December 2017 116510 2105 1894 The above statement of consolidated changes in equity should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 96 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
US000
US000
Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 30 9042 42576 Income taxes paid 2006 9930 Net cash inflow from operating activities 7036 32646 Cash flows from investing activities Payments for property plant and equipment and intangibles 82687 24977 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment  18422 Net cash acquired from acquisition of subsidiary 14 1062 Net cash outflow from investing activities 81625 6555 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issues of shares and other equity instruments 9603 Proceeds from borrowings 178607 12430 Repayment of borrowings 89875 29224 Interest paid 4215 5989 Acquisition of noncontrolling interest  1676 Net cash fromused in financing activities 94120 24459 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 19531 1632 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial year 5243 4200 Effects of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 1078 589 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 19 23696 5243 The above consolidated statement of cash flows should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 97 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 1.
General information The company is a Public Limited Company plc incorporated in England and Wales and is domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The Registered Office address is 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP.
The company is listed on the AIM market of the London Stock Exchange and maintains a secondary listing on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange.
The principal activities of the company and its subsidiaries together the group are the exploration for and the development and production of oil and gas in Argentina.
Basis of preparation These consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union the associated interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee together IFRS and the Companies Act 2006.
The significant accounting policies applied in preparing these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied throughout the period and to each subsidiary of the group.
The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention except as where stated.
Going concern At the time of approving the consolidated financial statements the directors have a reasonable expectation that the company has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for a period of at least 12 months.
Accordingly the consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
In making their assessment of going concern the directors have considered the groups budgets capital commitments cash flow forecasts and associated risks.
Foreign currency Functional currency  items included in the financial information of the individual companies that comprise the group are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates its functional currency.
The primary economic environment is often related to the country of operations and in many cases the functional currency of an entity will be the same as the currency of the company in which it operates.
There is no concept of a group functional currency and therefore individual entities within a group may have functional currencies that are different to each other.
In some circumstances the functional currency may be different to the currency of the country in which an entity operates.
This can happen when significant contracts sales services funding etc. are denominated in or by reference to a currency that is different to that of the country of operation.
For instance in the oil and gas industry many sales and service contracts are denominated in or priced by reference to the US Dollar given that the benchmark prices for crude oil Brent WTI etc.
US Dollar.
Presentation currency  the consolidated financial statements are presented in US Dollars rounded to the nearest thousand US000 except where otherwise indicated.
Foreign currency transactions  transactions in currencies other than an entitys functional currency foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate on the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at the balance sheet date of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income within either finance income gains or finance costs losses.
Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the financial information of Phoenix Global Resources plc as well as its subsidiary undertakings.
Noncontrolling interests Noncontrolling interests are included within other reserves.
All of the noncontrolling interests US1220000 were acquired by the company in January 2016.
There is no noncontrolling interest at either 31 December 2016 or 2017.
Subsidiaries
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the company has control.
The company controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date at which control is transferred to the company.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Joint arrangements Oil and gas operations are usually conducted by the group as colicencees in unincorporated joint operations with other companies.
The groups financial statements reflect the relevant proportion of production assets liabilities income and expenses of the joint operation applicable to the groups interests.
The groups current interests in joint operations are detailed in the operating review on pages 24 to 31 and typically represent a percentagebased working interest in the joint operation.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 98 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Acquisitions The group allocates the purchase consideration relating to the acquisition of a subsidiary to the assets and liabilities acquired on the basis of fair value at the date of acquisition.
Any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of assets and liabilities is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset and is subject to annual review for impairment.
Goodwill is written off where circumstances indicate that the recoverable value of the underlying cash generating unit CGU including the asset may no longer support the carrying value of goodwill.
Any such impairment loss is recognised in the income statement for the year.
Impairment losses relating to goodwill cannot be reversed in future years.
Comparative financial information On 10 August 2017 the company completed a business combination transaction with the Trefoil Holdings B.
Trefoil whereby the company issued new ordinary shares to the shareholders of Trefoil in return for 100% of the issued share capital of Trefoil Holdings B.
As a result of this transaction the former shareholders of the Trefoil group hold the majority of the issued share capital of the company and accordingly the combination transaction represents a reverse takeover for accounting purposes.
When a business combination is determined to be a reverse takeover for accounting purposes the company that is acquired the legal acquiree is determined to be the accounting acquirer.
Conversely the legal parent is the company that issued the purchase consideration determined to be the acquired company for accounting purposes.
The comparative financial information that is presented in these group financial statements then is the comparative financial information of the Trefoil group as it is the Trefoil group that is the acquiring entity for accounting purposes.
The former Andes Energia plc group is determined to be the acquired party and therefore its assets liabilities revenues costs and cash flows are consolidated in these group financial statements from the date of acquisition being 10 August 2017.
In addition it is the assets and liabilities of the former Andes Energia plc group that are the subject of the purchase price allocation and are recorded at their fair values at the date of acquisition.
Notwithstanding the legal share capital and share premium of the former Andes Energia group remains the share capital of the combined group.
Any difference between the total share capital and associated share premium and the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as merger reserve.
Significant accounting policies 3.1 New accounting standards issued but not yet effective Standards issued and relevant to the group but not yet effective at the date of these group financial statements are listed below.
The standards discussed are those that the group reasonably expects to be applicable to the financial statements in the future and therefore do not include those standards or interpretations that the directors consider will not be relevant to the group.
The group intends to adopt these standards when they become effective.
The directors do not expect that the adoption of these standards will have a material impact on the groups financial statements either in the period of initial application or thereafter.
An assessment of the impact of each relevant standard is included below.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9
IFRS 9 is effective for accounting periods starting on or after 1 January 2018 and deals with the classification and measurement of financial instruments.
Financial instruments will include loans receivablepayable derivative financial instruments and accounts payable and receivable balances.
Measurement remains broadly consistent with previous guidance with the main options being to recognise financial assets and liabilities at fair value or amortised cost.
Where financial assets and liabilities are carried at fair value the standard provides guidance on where to recognise periodic changes in fair value with the primary options being through the income statement or directly to reserves.
The standard also provides guidance on hedge accounting where a company elects to apply hedge accounting.
The most significant change in the new standard that impacts the group relates to the measurement of credit risk and the recognition of that risk through adjusting the carrying value of the underlying instrument.
The standard requires a company to assess the 12month expected credit losses on inception of a financial instrument generally an asset and recognise those expected losses in the income statement by way of an allowance.
Where the expected credit risk increases significantly and is not considered to be low the full credit loss that is expected over the lifetime of the asset is recorded.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued How the standard applies to Phoenix Global Resources plc The table below summarises the principal financial instruments that the group is party to together with an assessment of the impact of the provisions of IFRS 9.
Type of instrument
Loans payable.
Amortised cost.
The primary loans payable relate to the convertible revolving credit facility with Mercuria.
The assessed credit risk of Mercuria is low and the group intends to hold the loans to maturity.
No impact.
Continue to record at amortised cost.
Loans receivable.
Amortised costcapital contribution.
Financing advanced to the Argentinian entities by the company are treated as capital contributions.
Intragroup credit risk is assessed as low as the majority of subsidiaries are 100% owned.
No impact.
Continue to record at amortised costcapital contribution.
Trade accounts receivable.
Amortised cost.
Oil sales are typically invoiced monthly with 2030 day payment terms.
There is no significant history of default.
Gas sales are invoiced monthly on payment terms of 7090 days with no significant history of default.
Where a customer enters a default position its account is moved to a prepayment basis with cargoes paid in full before delivery.
No impact.
Some provision may be required based on facts and circumstances but the impact on the financial statements is not expected to be material if any adjustment is required at all.
Trade accounts payable.
Amortised cost.
Trade accounts payable balances are made on normal credit terms.
No impact.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15
IFRS 15 is effective for accounting periods starting on or after 1 January 2018 and seeks to provide more meaningful information regarding revenue to users of financial statements.
The standard describes a fivestep approach to be taken to the assessment of revenue that requires companies to identify the customer party to each contract understand the performance obligations in the contract determine the transaction price allocate that price to the identifiable performance obligations and recognise revenue when or as a performance obligation is met.
The standard could result in a change in the pattern of revenue recognition for certain types of contract that typically contain multiple performance elements and are delivered over a period of time.
How the standard applies to Phoenix Global Resources plc There is not expected to be any difference to revenue recognition for the group under the new standard.
Consistent with industry practice the group makes sales of crude oil and natural gas which are commodity products.
Contracts define a specific delivery point where physical custody is transferred and title passes.
There is a single performance obligation being physical delivery at a specified point.
The group receives revenue that is calculated by multiplying actual delivery volume by the market price of the specific commodity on the day of delivery.
Conclusion
The group has determined that the implementation of IFRS 15 will have no effect on revenue recognition timing or quantum for oil and gas sales.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 100 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 The IASB published IFRS 16 in January 2016.
The standard is effective for accounting periods starting on or after 1 January 2019 and therefore will be adopted by the group in the interim financial information and the annual financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2019.
The standard seeks to clarify the accounting treatment for leased assets that are accounted for under the current leasing standard as either finance leases or operating leases.
Under the current accounting rules for finance leases leased assets and corresponding lease obligations are capitalised in the statement of financial position and amortised over the life of the lease contract.
Operating
The criteria for classifying a lease as either a finance lease or an operating lease are very specific and involve the application of a number of bright line rules that determine the final treatment.
This specificity can result in the opportunity to specifically design contracts for rental which while substantially similar can result in different classification of the underlying asset.
IFRS 16 seeks to examine the commercial substance of arrangements and on application it is anticipated that many more lease contracts or similar arrangements will result in balance sheet treatment under the new standard.
This will likely result in more leased assets and lease obligations being capitalised in companies statements of financial position.
The company is currently evaluating the impact of the new standard on the group.
The group does not lease significant assets both in quantum or value.
The principal lease agreements that the group is participant to relate to office space office equipment and low value operational items.
As a result the impact of adopting the new standard is not expected to be significant.
Nevertheless the change in the accounting rules for leases could result in a different presentation in the statement of financial position and a different profile of charges in respect of leased assets in the income statement.
New standards amendments and interpretations adopted in 2017 No new standards amendments or interpretations effective for the first time for the financial year beginning on or after 1 January 2017 have had a material impact on the group or parent company.
Additional disclosures have been given where relevant.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting practice requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the balance sheet date and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual outcomes could differ from those estimates.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Critical judgements Determination of functional currency The determination of a companys functional currency can require significant judgement.
There is no concept of a groupwide functional currency but rather functional currency is assessed on an entity by entity basis.
A companys functional currency is defined as the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates.
In this regard the default assumption is that a companys functional currency will be that in which it is registered or that where the majority of its operations are located.
This assumption can be challenged or rebutted where it can be demonstrated that a currency other than that of the country of registration or operations can be shown to have a greater influence over the revenue costs assets and liabilities of a company.
For instance in the oil and gas industry contracts for the sale of production and for the provision of operational services are often priced in US Dollars.
This is because the main international benchmark prices used for pricing crude cargoes such as Brent and WTI are quoted in US Dollars.
With revenues being heavily influenced by the Dollar then service contracts particularly those related to services provided by international service companies are often also denominated in priced by reference to the Dollar.
Notwithstanding the above and the fact that the group operates exclusively in the oil and gas industry the assessment of functional currency is made on an entitybyentity basis by examining the specific circumstances of each entity.
Care must be taken when examining holding companies and intermediate holding companies to determine if their activity is an extension of that of their holding company or subsidiary of if the company operates independently in its own right.
The assessment of functional currency can be complex and requires the application of a number of criteria and indicators proscribed by IAS 21 The effects of changes in foreign exchange rates.
In certain circumstances the evaluation of the criteria in IAS 21 does not result in a clear answer one way or another and hence judgement is applied in determining the functional currency of an entity.
The assessment of functional currency can have a significant effect on both the income statement and the statement of financial position of a company and of the group if which it is a member.
The impact of foreign exchange gains and losses on net income and calculated by reference to the functional currency of each company within the group is presented in the statement of comprehensive income as part of finance income and finance costs.
The functional currency of the company and its subsidiaries in Argentina was determined to be the US Dollar.
The group presents its financial statements in US Dollars.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Critical accounting estimates and judgements continued Determination of joint control Judgement is required to determine when the joint control exists over an arrangement.
Such judgement requires the assessment of the relevant activities of the arrangement and when decisions in relation to those activities require unanimous consent.
The group has determined that the relevant activities for its joint arrangements are those related to the operating and capital decisions of the arrangement.
These will include the approval of the annual capital and operating expenditure work programme and budget for the joint arrangement.
This will also relate to matters such as the approval of chosen service providers for major capital activity as required by the joint operating agreements that govern the joint arrangement.
These considerations are similar to those necessary to determine control over subsidiaries.
Classifying an arrangement requires assessment of the rights and obligations arising from the arrangement and may include the structure of the joint arrangement including whether a legal entity exists the terms of a contractual arrangement the rights and obligations arising from ownership contractual rights and obligations and other facts and circumstances on a casebycase basis.
This assessment often requires significant judgement.
A different conclusion about both joint control and whether an arrangement represents a joint venture or a joint operation may materially affect the accounting for a joint arrangement.
Critical estimates Future oil and gas prices The estimation of future oil and gas prices has a significant impact throughout the financial statements.
Future prices for oil and gas have a direct impact on the estimation of the recoverable value of property plant and equipment and intangible assets associated with oil and gas assets.
Details of the oil and gas prices achieved in the year ended 31 December 2017 are included in the segment information note 6.
Estimation of oil and gas reserve volumes Oil and gas reserves are the quantities of oil and gas that management considers are commercially recoverable in the future from known accumulations within the groups licence areas and under defined economic and operating conditions.
The estimation of reserve volumes is inherently imprecise requires the application of judgement and is subject to future revision.
Because the production of reserves is required to be commercially viable variations in future sales prices cost estimates or actual production volumes can affect the absolute quantity of estimated reserve volumes from one period to the next.
Commercial viability is assessed by reference to the point at which the cash cost to produce a barrel of oil or equivalent is greater than the sales price that can be achieved for that barrel.
This point is generally referred to as the economic limit.
No reserves are recorded in respect of the period after which the economic limit is estimated to occur.
Decreases in sales prices increases in cash operating costs or variations in the expected production profile for wells as compared to the assumptions applied in the estimation of reserve volumes can cause variation from those estimates.
Variations can be positive or negative.
Subsurface conditions and other engineering factors can also affect estimated reserve volumes.
An impairment also exists where revisions to estimated reserve volumes result in a reduction to those estimates for a given field or licence area.
The prospective value of oil and gas reserves is not recorded in the statement of financial position.
Intangible oil and gas assets and associated property plant and equipment included in the statement of financial position relate to the cost of acquisition of those properties together with cumulative exploration or development expenditure.
Oil and gas reserve volumes are estimated by management together with the inhouse reservoir engineer and are subject to periodic independent estimation by external reservoir engineering experts as events or circumstances dictate.
The estimation of reserve volumes primarily influences the depreciation depletion and amortisation charge for the year.
This is included in the analysis of property plant and equipment note 13.1.
Reserve volumes are also used to assess fair value in business combinations below and in calculating whether an impairment charge should be recorded where an impairment indicator exists.
No impairment indicators were identified in relation to the year ended 31 December 2017.
Accounting for business combinations and fair value Business combinations are accounted for at fair value.
The assessment of fair value is subjective and depends on a number of assumptions.
These assumptions include assessment of discount rates taxation rules and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows from assets and liabilities.
In addition the selection of specific valuation methods for individual assets and liabilities requires judgment.
The specific valuation methods applied will be driven by the nature of the asset or liability being assessed.
The consideration given to a seller for the purchase of a business or a company is accounted for at its fair value.
When the consideration given includes elements that are not cash such as shares then the fair value of the consideration given is calculated by reference to the specific elements of the consideration given to the seller.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 102 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED In business combinations fair value may need to be applied to items that are not recorded in financial statements under the historic cost convention.
These items may include certain contingent liabilities contracts that have terms that may be more or less beneficial compared to current practice warranties given by the seller or value that could be gained from inherent characteristics of the business being acquired  such as customer relations or assembled workforce.
Where these items represent benefits they are recorded as intangible assets and separately identified.
Items that could result in payments being made in the future are recorded as long term or short term liabilities.
Goodwill is recognised where the fair value of the purchase consideration given to the seller is more than the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired.
Determining what goodwill relates to requires judgement.
Where the value of goodwill cannot be supported the goodwill is not recognised and a corresponding amount is recorded as an impairment loss in the income statement.
The company was party to a business combination in the year whereby it acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Trefoil Holdings B.
The combination which represented a reverse takeover under IFRS 3 Business Combinations is discussed in note 14.
Provision for asset retirement and decommissioning obligations The group has an obligation to plug and abandon wells at the end of their productive life.
In addition the group is required to remove any surface field infrastructure and equipment and to remediate or recultivate land that has been affected by the groups activities and return it to its natural state.
Provision is made for such obligations at the time at which the obligation is incurred.
This is normally as wells are drilled or infrastructure is put in place.
Provisions are based on cost estimates of the remediation activity that will be needed.
These estimates require judgment.
Inflation is applied to cost estimates and these estimates are then discounted at a rate that reflects the time value of money.
The application of both inflation and discount rates represent significant estimates.
Details of provisions held for asset retirement obligations together with movements recognised in the year are included in the analysis of provisions in note 25.
Accounting policies 5.1 Revenue Revenue represents the proceeds excluding VAT and sales taxes earned from the sale of oil and gas.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that sales proceeds will be received and the revenue can be reliably measured.
Revenue is recognised when the significant risks and rewards of ownership have been passed to the buyer.
This is typically at the point at which the product passes into the customers pipeline truck or refinery.
5.2 Government incentives Certain incentive plans have been implemented by the Argentine government in the last several years and aimed at increasing the domestic production of oil and gas.
There are two principal forms of incentive plan used by the government the distinguishing factor being the manner in which any incentive payment is measured or calculated.
The variation in the method of calculation determines the accounting treatment applied by the company.
Plans that give a fixed sales price per unit that is higher than prevailing market Because these plans result in an additional perunit cash receipt limited by a fixed cap the additional revenue derived from the plans is treated as revenue in the income statement.
Plans that result in additional sales revenue in respect of enhanced production volumes over a predetermined volumetric threshold These plans are focused on increasing production over a threshold level and provide additional marginal income for each additional unit produced.
Because there is not a direct relationship on a total perunit basis between amounts receive and total production volumes amounts under these plans are treated as other income.
5.3 Finance costs and income Finance income comprises interest income on cash invested foreign currency gains and the unwind of discount on any assets held at amortised cost.
Interest income is recognised as it accrues using the effective interest rate method.
Finance expense comprises interest expense on borrowings foreign currency losses and the unwind of discount on any liabilities held at amortised cost which is principally the unwind of the discount related to the asset retirement obligation.
Borrowing costs Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of a qualifying asset are capitalised as a part of that asset.
This reduces the finance charge in the income statement and results in a corresponding increase to the asset cost.
Capitalisation of borrowing costs stops when the asset is substantially ready for its intended use which may be earlier than the time at which it is put into use.
5.4 Employee benefits Shortterm benefits Benefits given to employees that are shortterm in nature are recognised as expense in the statement of comprehensive income as the related service is provided.
The principal short term benefit is salary and associated holiday pay.
A liability is recognised for the amount expected to be paid under shortterm cash bonus plans if there is either a present legal or constructive obligation to pay the amount and the amount can be reliably estimated.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued 5.5 Sharebased payments The group operates a number of equitysettled sharebased compensation plans under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments options of the group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted including any market performance conditions for example an entitys share price excluding the impact of any service and nonmarket performance vesting conditions for example profitability sales growth targets and remaining an employee of the entity over a specified time period and including the impact of any nonvesting conditions for example the requirement for employees to save.
Nonmarket performance and service conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to vest.
The total expense is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
In addition in some circumstances employees may provide services in advance of the grant date and therefore the grant date fair value is estimated for the purposes of recognising the expense during the period between service commencement and the grant date.
At the end of each reporting period the group revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
When the options are exercised the company issues new shares.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium.
The grant by the company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity in the parent entity financial statements.
The social security contributions payable in connection with the grant of the share options is considered an integral part of the grant itself and the charge will be treated as a cashsettled transaction.
5.6 Taxes The total tax charge or credit recognised in the statement of comprehensive income is made up of both current and deferred taxes.
The current tax charge or credit is based on the taxable profit or loss for the year.
Taxable profit or loss is different to the profit or loss reported in the statement of comprehensive income because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable nor deductible.
Deferred tax is the tax that is expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying value of assets and liabilities in the financial statement and the corresponding tax amounts for those assets and liabilities used to calculate taxable profit or loss.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for deductible temporary differences that exist only where it is probable that taxable profits will be generated against which the carrying value of the deferred tax asset can be recovered.
Deductible temporary differences exist where there is a difference in the timing of the recognition of an item of income or expense between the income statement and the calculation of taxable profit or loss.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised using liability method for all taxable temporary differences except in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries associates and interests in joint operations.
Deferred tax liabilities are not recorded for these items where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
A deferred tax asset or liability is not recognised if a temporary difference arises on initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither the accounting profit nor taxable profit or loss.
Current and deferred tax is calculated using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Minimum notional income tax  Argentina Argentinian tax law requires companies to calculate tax on notional presumed income at a rate equal to 1% of a companys assets at the balance sheet date.
The companys tax obligation for each year will be the higher of the notional presumed income tax and the actual calculated tax charge for the period.
Where the notional amount is greater than the calculated amount the excess of taxes paid can be used to offset future income tax in any of the next ten years.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 104 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 5.7 Intangible assets
The group allocates the fair value of the purchase consideration on the acquisition of a subsidiary to the assets and liabilities acquired based on an assessment of fair value at the acquisition date.
Any excess of the purchase consideration the cost of the acquisition is recognised as goodwill.
Where goodwill is recognised it is allocated to cash generating units in a systematic manner reflective of how the group expects to recover the value of the goodwill.
Any goodwill arising is recognised as an asset and is subject to annual review for impairment.
Goodwill is written off where circumstances indicate that the recoverable amount of the underlying CGU including the asset may no longer support the carrying value of the goodwill.
Any such impairment is recognised in the income statement for the period.
Impairment losses related to goodwill cannot be reversed in future periods.
In testing for impairment goodwill arising on business combinations at the date of acquisition is allocated to the group of CGUs representing the lowest level at which it will be monitored.
The groups policy is to monitor goodwill at operating segment level before combining segments for reporting.
The recoverable amount of a CGU or group of CGUs within the segment is based on the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal or value in use.
Value in use is calculated by reference to the expected future cash flows from the CGU after discounting to take account of the time value of money.
Fair value less costs to sell can be based on a similar cash flow measure adjusted for disposal costs or can be estimated by reference to similar comparable reference transactions.
Where cash flows are used they are risk weighted in order to reflect an assessment of future exploration success.
The key assumptions in assessing cash flows are the sensitivity to market fluctuations such as commodity prices and the success of future exploration drilling programmes.
The most likely factor that will result in a material change to the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is the result of future exploration drilling which will ultimately determine the licence areas future economic potential.
5.8 Exploration and appraisal assets
The group follows an accounting policy for exploration and appraisal assets that is based on the successfulefforts accounting method.
Costs incurred prior to obtaining the legal right to explore an area are expensed as incurred in the income statement.
This includes all costs that predate the award of a licence.
Expenditure incurred on the acquisition of a licence interest is initially capitalised on a licencebylicence basis.
Costs are held within intangible assets and are not depreciated until the exploration phase on the licence area is complete or commercial reserves have been discovered.
Exploration and evaluation costs may include the costs of initial licence acquisition geological and geophysical studies  such as seismic studies and direct labour equipment and service costs associated with drilling exploratory wells.
Costs incurred are capitalised by well field or exploration area based on the nature of the cost.
Drilling costs are written off on completion of a well unless the results indicate that hydrocarbon reserves exist and there is a reasonable prospect that these reserves are commercial.
Where the results of exploration drilling indicate the presence of hydrocarbons which are ultimately not considered commercially viable all related costs are written off to the income statement as exploration cost.
On conclusion of a successful evaluation phase where commercial reserves have been established the associated exploration and evaluation costs are tested for impairment and the carrying value adjusted if necessary.
The exploration and evaluation costs are then transferred to the property plant and equipment category development and production assets and are held within a single field cost centre.
Impairment
Capitalised intangible exploration and evaluation costs are reviewed regularly for indicators of impairment and are tested for impairment where these indicators exist.
Indicators of impairment for exploration and appraisal assets may include exploration drilling has not resulted in the discovery of commercial volumes of reserves changes in oil and gas prices or other market conditions that indicate the discoveries may not be commercial the anticipated cost of development indicates that it is unlikely the carrying value of the exploration and evaluation asset will be recovered in full there are no plans to conduct further exploration activities in the area or the exploration licence period has expired or is due to expire.
Where an indicator of impairment has been identified the intangible exploration and evaluation asset is allocated to a development asset within property plant and equipment for the purpose of impairment testing.
This allocation is made because the exploration and evaluation asset has no cash inflows of its own.
If there are no development assets within the CGU the excess of the carrying amount of the exploration and evaluation over its recoverable amount is immediately written off in the income statement.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued 5.9 Property plant and equipment  development and production assets
The costs associated with determining the existence of commercial reserves are capitalised in accordance with the preceding policy and transferred to property plant and equipment as development assets following impairment testing.
All costs incurred after the technical feasibility and commercial viability of producing hydrocarbons have been demonstrated are capitalised within development assets on a fieldbyfield basis.
Subsequent expenditure is only capitalised where it either enhances the economic benefits of the development asset or replaces part of the existing development asset where the remaining cost of the original part is expensed through the income statement.
Costs of borrowing related to the ongoing construction of development and production assets and facilities are capitalised during the construction phase.
Capitalisation of interest ceases once an asset is ready for production.
Depreciation
Capitalised oil and gas assets are not subject to depreciation until commercial production starts.
Depreciation is calculated on a unitofproduction basis in order to write off the cost of an asset as the reserves that it represents are produced and sold.
Any periodic reassessment of reserves will affect the depreciation rate on a prospective basis.
The unitofproduction depreciation rate is calculated on a fieldbyfield basis using proved developed reserves as the denominator and capitalised costs as the numerator.
The numerator includes an estimate of the costs expected to be incurred to bring proved developed notproducing reserves into production.
Infrastructure that is common to a number of fields such as gathering systems treatment plants and pipelines are depreciated on a unitofproduction basis using an aggregate measure of reserves or on a straight line basis depending on the expected pattern of use of the underlying asset.
Impairment
The group assesses development and production assets for impairment where there is an indication that an impairment may exist.
Indicators of impairment may include a significant fall in realised prices or oil and gas price benchmarks an increase in operating costs or unforeseen engineering subsurface problems that cannot be overcome satisfactorily.
An impairment indicator exists where revisions to estimated reserve volumes result in a reduction to those estimates for a given field or licence area.
In addition variations in reserve estimates cause changes to the unitofproduction depreciation rates applied to oil and gas properties.
Depreciation rates for fields or licence areas are calculated using estimated reserve volumes as the denominator with capitalised costs as the numerator.
An impairment review of development and production assets is undertaken on an asset by asset basis typically at the field level or licence and involves comparing the carrying value of an asset with its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of an asset is determined as the higher of its fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
Value in use is determined by reference to expected future net cash flows.
Any impairment loss identified is recorded in the income statement.
The future cash flows are adjusted for risks specific to the cash generating unit and are discounted using a pretax discount rate.
The discount rate is derived from the groups posttax weighted average cost of capital.
The calculation of value in use is most sensitive to the following assumptions production volumes and estimates of recoverable reserves commodity benchmark prices and realised sales prices fixed and variable operating costs required capital expenditure and discount and inflation rates applied.
5.10 Decommissioning The discounted cost of expected decommissioning activity is recorded when an obligation to rectify the environmental impact of the groups oil and gas activity exists.
The obligation can arise from contractual licence arrangements the laws and regulations of the country or province of operation or be constructive based on established practice.
The amount that is recognised as a provision for decommissioning activities is the present value of the estimated future remediation expenditure that is determined by reference to the nature of the asset the groups operational policy in regard to decommissioning local conditions and associated regulatory requirements.
A corresponding decommissioning asset is recorded within property plant and equipment at the same discounted value as the provision.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 106 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED The costs recognised in the income statement in each period comprise two elements depreciation of the decommissioning asset calculated on a unitofproduction basis consistent with the underlying asset to which it relates that is recorded in operating expenses and the unwind of the discount on the decommissioning provision that is recorded as interest expense as time passes.
Any change in the present value of the stimulated future decommissioning expenditure is reflected as an adjustment to the decommissioning provision and related decommissioning asset.
5.11 Other assets Other assets are capitalised on the basis of purchase price or construction cost.
Depreciation on other elements of property plant and equipment is charged on a straight line basis at the following rates that reflect the expected useful life of each asset category Fixtures and fittings
Other equipment 20% to 33% 20% 20% to 33% 5.12 Business combinations and goodwill Acquired businesses are included in the financial statements from the transaction date which is defined as the date at which the Company achieves control over the assets being acquired.
The cost of an acquisition is calculated as the fair value of the consideration given including equity instruments contingent consideration and any liabilities assumed in connection with the transfer of control.
The cost of an acquisition is allocated to the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed on the basis of their relative fair values at the acquisition date.
If the acquisition cost at the time of the acquisition exceeds the fair value of the net assets acquired goodwill is recognised.
Conversely if the fair value of the net assets acquired exceeds the consideration given the difference is recognised as income on acquisition.
Goodwill is allocated to the cash generating units or groups of cash generating units that are expected to benefit from the business combination and is subject to annual impairment testing.
Goodwill may also be recognised as a result of the application of deferred tax accounting to the fair values of assets acquired.
The fair value allocation process often results in an increase to the carrying value of depreciable assets.
Given that the tax basis of such assets does not change the difference between the book base and the tax base of the asset increases resulting in an additional deferred tax liability.
The increased deferred tax liability is recorded in purchase accounting with a corresponding entry to goodwill.
Goodwill arising on the action of deferred taxes is allocated to cash generating units and assessed for impairment accordingly.
5.13 Inventories The groups stocks of crude oil on hand that result from its production operations are carried at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost represents the perunit production costs for each barrel of oil held in inventory.
Net realisable value is measured by reference to the market price for crude oil prevailing in Argentina plus or minus quality and location premium or discount.
Operational inventory and spare parts are carried at the lower of cost or net realisable value where cost represents the weighted average unit cost for inventory items on a line by line basis.
5.14 Investments and other financial assets
The group classifies its financial assets in the following categories financial assets at fair value through profit or loss loans and receivables held to maturity investments and held for trading or available for sale financial assets.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the investments were acquired.
Management determines the classification of its investments at initial recognition and in the case of assets classified as held to maturity reevaluates this designation at the end of each reporting period.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting policies continued
The group may choose to reclassify a nonderivative trading financial asset out of the held for trading category if the financial asset is no longer held for the purpose of selling it in the near term.
Financial assets other than loans and receivables are permitted to be reclassified out of the held for trading category only in rare circumstances arising from a single event that is unusual and highly unlikely to recur in the near term.
In addition the group may choose to reclassify financial assets that would meet the definition of loans and receivables out of the held for trading or available for sale categories if the group has the intention and ability to hold these financial assets for the foreseeable future or until maturity at the date of reclassification.
Reclassifications are made at fair value as of the reclassification date.
Fair value becomes the new cost or amortised cost as applicable and no reversals of fair value gains or losses recorded before reclassification date are subsequently made.
Effective interest rates for financial assets reclassified to loans and receivables and held to maturity categories are determined at the reclassification date.
Further increases in estimates of cash flows adjust effective interest rates prospectively.
Recognition and derecognition Regular way purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the trade date being the date on which the group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
Financial assets are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows from the financial assets have expired or have been transferred and the group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
When securities classified as available for sale are sold the accumulated fair value adjustments recognised in other comprehensive income are reclassified to profit or loss as gains or losses from investment securities.
Measurement
At initial recognition the group measures a financial asset at its fair value plus in the case of a financial asset not at fair value through profit or loss transaction costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition of the financial asset.
Transaction costs of financial assets carried at fair value through profit or loss are expensed in profit or loss.
Loans and receivables and held to maturity investments are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Available for sale financial assets and financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are subsequently carried at fair value.
Gains or losses arising from changes in the fair value are recognised as follows for financial assets at fair value through profit or loss  in profit or loss within other income or other expenses for available for sale financial assets that are monetary securities denominated in a foreign currency  translation differences related to changes in the amortised cost of the security are recognised in profit or loss and other changes in the carrying amount are recognised in other comprehensive income and for other monetary and nonmonetary securities classified as availableforsale  in other comprehensive income.
Dividends on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss and available for sale equity instruments are recognised in profit or loss as part of revenue from continuing operations when the groups right to receive payments is established.
Interest income from financial assets at fair value through profit or loss is included in net gainslosses.
Interest on available for sale securities held to maturity investments and loans and receivables calculated using the effective interest method is recognised in the statement of profit or loss as part of revenue from continuing operations.
Impairment  general The group assesses at the end of each reporting period whether there is objective evidence that a financial asset or group of financial assets is impaired.
A financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired and impairment losses are incurred only if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the asset a loss event and that loss event or events has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.
In the case of equity investments classified as availableforsale a significant or prolonged decline in the fair value of the security below its cost is considered an indicator that the assets are impaired.
Impairment  assets carried at amortised cost For loans and receivables the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows excluding future credit losses that have not been incurred discounted at the financial assets original effective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced and the amount of the loss is recognised in profit or loss.
If a loan or held to maturity investment has a variable interest rate the discount rate for measuring any impairment loss is the current effective interest rate determined under the contract.
As a practical expedient the group may measure impairment on the basis of an instruments fair value using an observable market price.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised such as an improvement in the debtors credit rating the reversal of the previously recognised impairment loss is recognised in profit or loss.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 108 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Impairment  assets classified as available for sale If there is objective evidence of impairment for available for sale financial assets the cumulative loss  measured as the difference between the acquisition cost and the current fair value less any impairment loss on that financial asset previously recognised in profit or loss  is removed from equity and recognised in profit or loss.
Impairment losses on equity instruments that were recognised in profit or loss are not reversed through profit or loss in a subsequent period.
If the fair value of a debt instrument classified as availableforsale increases in a subsequent period and the increase can be objectively related to an event occurring after the impairment loss was recognised in profit or loss the impairment loss is reversed through profit or loss.
5.15 Trade and other receivables Trade receivables and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment is established where there is evidence that the group will not be able to recover some or all of the outstanding payable.
The resulting impairment loss is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Trade and other receivables are classified as current assets if receipt is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent assets.
5.16 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand deposits held with financial institutions that can be called on demand together with other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash.
5.17 Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Trade and other payables are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business from suppliers.
Accounts payable are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Accruals are recognised in respect of goods or services delivered but not yet invoiced.
5.18 Provisions Provision is made for asset retirement obligations and legal claims when the group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount can be reliably estimated.
Provisions are measured at the present value of the expenditures expected to be incurred in settling the obligation using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the obligation.
The increase in the provision as the discount unwinds due to the passage of time is recognised in the income statement as interest expense.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Segment information The groups executive management comprising the chief executive officer the chief financial officer and the chief operating officer has been determined collectively as the chief operating decision maker for the group.
The information reported to the groups executive management for the purposes of resource allocation and assessment of segment performance is focused on the basins in which the group operates.
The strategy of the group is focused on the development of the Vaca Muerta shale opportunity in the Neuquina basin while optimising conventional production from that basin.
In addition the group is active in the Austral basin in south Argentina where its operations with its partner Roch S. areas within the basin.
The group also has production activities in the Cuyana basin.
Segments that are not currently material to the operations or result of the group are aggregated within Corporate  unallocated.
The Neuquina Austral and Cuyana basins have been determined by the group to represent the reportable segments of the business based on the level of activity across these basins and the information provided to the executive management.
The groups executive management primarily uses a measure of adjusted earnings before interest tax and depreciation EBITDAX to assess the performance of the operating segments.
However the chief executive officer also receives information about segment revenue and capital expenditure on a monthly basis.
Neuquina basin
Austral basin
Cuyana basin
Corporate unallocated
Total
US000
Revenue 66331 41608 33860 Profitloss for the year 222801 7716 9146 30432 270095 Add depreciation depletion and amortisation 30399 8645 8791 1462 49297 Add exploration costs written off 931    931 Add impairment 224169  8238  232407 Less finance income  248 948 780 1976 Add finance costs 3635   10091 13726 Less taxation    16635 16635 EBITDAX 36333 681 6935 36294 7655 Add Nonrecurring expenses    32900 32900 Adjusted EBITDAX 36333 681 6935 3394 40555 Oil revenues 66293 16878 bbls sold 1332289 327633 659262  2319184 Realised price USbbl 49.76 51.51 51.36  5046 Gas revenues 38 24730
164844   165063 Realised price USMMbtu 4.69 4.07   4.07 Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment 62037 9312 9574 1882 82805 Intangible exploration and evaluation assets 3148 Total capital expenditure 65185 9574 1882 85953 In August 2017 the company relinquished its interest in the Puesto Pozo Cercado block.
The accumulated capitalised costs associated with Puesto Pozo Cercado of US8238000 have been expensed accordingly.
The impairment of US224169000 recognised in respect of the Neuquina segment relates to goodwill arising on the combination transaction as a function of the closing share price used to calculate the purchase consideration.
The directors determined that the goodwill was not supportable and an impairment charge has been accordingly been recorded.
All of the goodwill impairment is attributable to the Neuquina basin assets as all of the goodwill had been allocated to Neuquina basin assets.
Nonrecurring expenses of US32900000 primarily related to costs incurred in relation to the reverse takeover transaction during the year nonrecurring professional fees and severance payments made to former employees.
The substantial majority of costs incurred related to legal and professional fees associated with the financial and legal diligence and costs related to the preparation of the AIM admission document required for the readmission of the enlarged group to trading on the AIM market.
The nonrecurring transaction expenses also include advisory fees related to structuring and Argentina market advice associated with the transaction.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 110 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 2016
US000
Austral basin
Cuyana basin
Corporate unallocated
Total
US000
Revenue 57560 36500  129264 Profitloss for the year 13460 1162 12871 20590 Add depreciation depletion and amortisation 7701 11980 6965 1808 28454 Add exploration costs written off 151    151 Less finance income    11853 11853 Add finance costs    14217 14217 Add taxation    13291 13291 EBITDAX 21312 19836 3127 48839 Oil revenues 57517 16345 36500 bbls sold 1051933 275987 647004  1974924 Realised price USbbl 54.68 59.22 56.41 Gas revenues 43 18859   18902
Realised price USMMbtu 4.30 3.12   3.13 Capital expenditure Property plant and equipment 27472 1592 1909 19 30992 Intangible exploration and evaluation assets 3470 Total capital expenditure 30942 1592 1909 19 34462 There are no intersegment revenues in either period presented.
All revenues represent sales to external customers and all sales are made in Argentina.
The significant majority of oil and gas sales are made to the Argentinian stateowned oil company YPF.
Total revenue
US000
US000
Crude oil revenue 117031 110362 Gas revenue Total revenue 141799 129264 Cost of sales
US000
Production costs 82806 71425 Depreciation of oil and gas assets 49291 28221 Movements in crude inventory 1290 1869 Total cost of sales 133387 97777 Administrative expenses
US000
Staff costs 8018 2143 Depreciation 6 Professional fees 25813 1505 Other general and administrative expenses 6141 3700 Total administrative expenses 39978 7581 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other operating incomeexpense
US000
Income
Staff seconded to joint operations 839 869
Impaired receivables 5355 Bad debt  698 Prepayment for tax court claim  223 Others net Others 524 274 Total other items of income or expense 5040 326 Auditors remuneration
US000
Fees payable to the companys auditor and its associates for the audit of the parent company and consolidated financial statements 194 Fees payable to the companys auditor and its associates for other services The audit of the companys subsidiaries 191 194 Audit related assurance services 49 Tax compliance services 182 Other taxation services 6 Corporate finance related services 2016 Other services 174 Total auditors remuneration 2812 194 The group has a policy in place for the award of nonaudit work to the auditors which requires audit committee approval refer to the audit committee report on pages 62 to 64.
Staff costs and headcount Staff costs
US000
Wages and salaries 9271 4332 Social security costs 1644 952 Sharebased payments 105 Average headcount
No.
Argentina 97 United Kingdom 3 United States of America 2 Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 112 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 13.
Nonfinancial assets and liabilities 13.1 Property plant and equipment Noncurrent assets
US000
Development and production assets
Assets under construction
Total
US000
At 1 January 2016 Cost 4402 Accumulated depreciation 4123 189219  193342 Net book amount 279 Year ended 31 December 2016 Opening net book amount 279 Additions 18 Disposals  4505 Transfers  21688 Depreciation charge 233 28221  28454 Closing net book amount 64 At 31 December 2016 Cost 4420 Accumulated depreciation and impairment 4356 217440  221796 Net book amount 64 Noncurrent assets
US000
Development and production assets
Assets under construction
Total
US000
At 1 January 2017 Cost 4420 Accumulated amortisation 4356 217440  221796 Net book amount 64 Year ended 31 December 2017 Opening net book amount 64 Acquisition of subsidiaries 153 140613  140766 Transfers from intangible  319  319 Additions 2747 79874 Depreciation charge 252 49045  49297 Impairment charge  8238  8238 Closing net book amount 2712 At 31 December 2017 Cost 7320 Accumulated depreciation and impairment 4608 249811  254419 Net book amount 2712 In August 2017 the company relinquished its interest in the Puesto Pozo Cercado block.
The accumulated capitalised costs associated with Puesto Pozo Cercado of US8238000 have been impaired accordingly.
Additions to property plant and equipment in the year ended 31 December 2017 include US690000 of interest capitalised in respect of qualifying assets 2016 US636000.
The total amount of interest capitalised within property plant and equipment at 31 December 2017 is US2139000 2016 US1449000.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nonfinancial assets and liabilities continued 13.2 Intangible assets Noncurrent assets
US000
Exploration and evaluation assets
Total
US000
At 1 January 2016 Cost  3334 3334 Net book amount  3334 Year ended 31 December 2016 Opening net book amount  3334
Closing net book amount  6804 At 31 December 2016 Cost  6804 Net book amount  6804 Exploration and appraisal assets are primarily the groups licence interests in exploration and appraisal assets located in Argentina.
The exploration and appraisal assets consist of both conventional and unconventional oil and gas properties.
Noncurrent assets
US000
Exploration and evaluation assets
Total
US000
At 1 January 2017 Cost  6804 Net book amount  6804 At 31 December 2017 Opening net book amount  6804 Acquisition of subsidiaries 260007 Additions  3148 Transfer to property plant and equipment  319 Impairment of goodwill 224169  224169 Closing net book amount 35838 At 31 December 2017 Cost 260007 Accumulated amortisation and impairment charges 224169  224169 Net book amount 35838 The increase in exploration and evaluation assets of US161760000 relates to the fair value assessed for the licences acquired and associated exploration upside as part of the combination transaction.
Fair value has been assessed on a comparative transaction basis by reference to dollarsperacre paid in other recent observable market transactions.
All of the exploration and evaluation assets recognised as part of the combination related to licence areas in the Neuquina basin.
Impairment tests for exploration and appraisal assets Exploration and appraisal assets are subject to impairment testing prior to reclassification as tangible fixed assets where commercially viable reserves are confirmed.
Where commercially viable reserves are not encountered at the end of the exploration phase for an area the accumulated exploration costs are written off in the income statement.
Impairment tests for Goodwill Goodwill is monitored by management at the level of the operating segments identified in note 5.
A segment level summary of the goodwill allocation is presented below.
Neuquina basin
Austral basin
Cuyana basin
Other
US000
Corporate unallocated
Total
US000
Chachahuen 15223     15223 Corralera 16780     16780 Mata Mora 3835     3835 35838     35838 Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 114 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED No goodwill was recognised prior to 2017.
All goodwill presented relates to the allocation of technical goodwill arising as a result of accounting for deferred tax on the business combination in the year see note 14.
The carrying value of goodwill has been assessed for impairment at the period end.
The discount rate used in the carrying value assessment was the groups calculated weighted average cost of capital of 14.2%.
Prices used in the assessment were the Energy Information Administrations forecast of Brent crude prices.
Business combination Summary of acquisition On 10 August 2017 the parent entity acquired 100% of the issued share capital of the Trefoil Holdings B. by way of a reverse takeover.
The acquisition has significantly increased the groups licensed acreage position in Argentina and in particular related to the Vaca Muerta shale formation and other unconventional oil and gas prospects present in much of the combined groups acreage in the Neuquina basin.
Details of the purchase consideration the net assets acquired and goodwill are as follows
Ordinary shares issued 385058 Both the assessed fair value of Trefoil Holdings B.
Trefoil and its oil and gas reserves were greater than those of Andes Energia Plc Andes and therefore the transaction represented a reverse takeover under the AIM Rules for Companies.
Because of the reverse nature of the transaction and although Andes was the legal acquirer Trefoil is determined to be the accounting acquirer for the purposes of purchase accounting.
Accordingly the transaction has been accounted for under IFRS 3 Business Combinations.
The purchase consideration is valued by reference to the number of shares held by Andes shareholders at the transaction date multiplied by the Andes share price on that day.
This represents the value given up by Andes shareholders in exchange for an interest in the enlarged group.
The assets and liabilities recognised as a result of the acquisition are as follows
US000
Cash 1062 Trade receivables 22826 Inventory 409 Available for sale financial assets 12812 Property plant and equipment development and production assets 132173 Property plant and equipment facilities 8440 Property plant and equipment fixtures fittings equipment and vehicles 153 Intangible assets exploration and evaluation assets 161760 Trade payables 67683 Borrowings 86574 Contingent liability 4680 Provisions 2141 Deferred tax liability 53506 Net identifiable assets acquired 125051 Add goodwill 260007 Net assets acquired 385058 The provisional fair values recorded in the purchase price allocation were assessed with the assistance of an external professional valuation firm.
The inputs used for the evaluation included asset level cash flow forecasts based on the production revenue capital expenditure and operational expenditure assessed by reference to the information used to compile the competent persons reports prepared as part of the AIM readmission process an assessment of the groups weighted average cost of capital commodity price forecasts based on information published by the Energy Information Administration and comparable transaction values based on a US Dollar per acre value were used to assess the fair value of nonproducing assets and unconventional exploration upside associated with producing assets.
Goodwill arising on the acquisition amounts to US260007000.
Of this amount US224161000 relates to the difference between the fair value of the purchase consideration given and the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Under IFRS 3 the purchase consideration has been calculated by reference to the market price of the shares issued in consideration at the date of completion.
The closing share price on the date of the completion was 0.49share.
The directors have assessed the carrying value of this element of the goodwill and specifically note that prior to and following the combination the group operates in a single country Argentina the groups operations relate in whole to exploration for and the appraisal and development of oil and gas assets both oil and gas are commodity products that trade in an active market that particularly in the case of oil is international and oil and gas assets are valued based on the quantity of oil or gas that it is estimated can be economically recovered.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business combination continued Having taken these factors into consideration the directors have concluded that there is no basis for recognising goodwill related to the difference between the fair value of the consideration given and of the assets and liabilities acquired.
The remaining goodwill of US35838000 arises as a result of the application of deferred tax accounting to the fair values recorded in respect of the Andes assets acquired.
The fair value of property plant and equipment is higher than the book value it was previously recorded at.
This increase in recorded value gives rise to an increase in the difference between the book value and tax value of the assets that is used to calculate deferred tax.
Consequently there is an increase in the deferred tax provision recorded with a corresponding entry to goodwill.
The directors consider that this element of goodwill that is recorded as a result of the accounting for deferred tax is attributable to the enhanced opportunities and benefits to the enlarged group arising from the potential greater scale of the business as Vaca Muerta is developed.
The company incurred costs of US24080000 related to the combination transaction primarily consisting of consulting accountancy legal and capital markets advisory fees.
All such deal related consultancy and advisory fees have been expensed in the income statement and are included within administrative expenses.
Revenue and profit contribution The acquired business contributed revenues of US22600000 and net loss of US275142000 to the group for the period from 10 August to 31 December 2017.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 January 2017 consolidated proforma revenue and net loss for the year ended 31 December 2017 would have been US165854000 and US300344000 respectively.
These amounts have been calculated using the acquired groups results and adjusting them for differences in accounting policy between the group and Andes the additional depreciation and amortisation that would have been charged assuming the fair value adjustments to property plant and equipment and intangible assets had been applied from 1 January 2017 together with the consequential tax effects and the effect of the impairment charge recognised in respect of goodwill arising on the transaction.
The goodwill impairment charge recognised in the income statement in respect of the impairment of goodwill was US224169000.
Finance income and costs
US000
Finance income Interest income 572 Income from shortterm investments 572 Net exchange gains on foreign currency borrowings 832 Exchange differences  8236 Other finance costs  88 Finance income 1976 Finance costs Interest on borrowings 8207 6284 Accretion of discount on asset retirement obligation 142 493 Net exchange losses on foreign currency borrowings  7440 Other finance results 4039 Exchange differences 1338 Finance costs 13726 14217 Net finance income 11750 2364 Capitalised borrowing costs The capitalisation rate used to determine the amount of borrowing costs to be capitalised is the weighted average interest rate applicable to the entitys general borrowings during the year in this case 22.6% for AR denominated borrowings and 7.7% for US denominated borrowings 2016 29.5% and 8.2% respectively.
In the year to 31 December 2017 US690000 2016 US636000 of interest expense in respect of qualifying assets was capitalised as part of additions to property plant and equipment.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 116 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 16.
Income tax expense This note provides an analysis of the groups income tax expense shows what amounts are recognised directly in equity and how the tax expense is affected by nonassessable and nondeductible items.
It also explains significant estimates made in relation to the groups tax position.
Income tax expense
US000
Current tax Current tax on profits for the year 4794 Total current tax expense 4794 Deferred income tax Increasedecrease in deferred tax 21429 Total deferred tax benefitexpense 21429 Income tax benefitexpense 16635 Reconciliation of income tax expense to notional tax charge calculated using corporate tax rate
US000
Lossprofit from continuing operations before income tax expense 286730 17870 Tax at the Argentina tax rate of 35% 2016 35% 100356 6255 Tax effect of amounts which are not deductible taxable in calculating taxable income Goodwill impairment 78459 Effect of currency translation on tax values 11660 5099 Effect of change in tax rate 10084 Expenses not deductible for taxation 1776 1207 Deferred tax assets not recognised 1690 672 Fiscal assessment 525 Other 745 58 Total income tax benefitexpense 16635 13291 The corporate income tax rate in Argentina in 2017 was 35% 2016 35% and applies to profits earned and losses suffered in the year to 31 December 2017.
Under the recent tax reform plan the corporate income tax rate will reduce to 30% for the years ended 31 December 2018 and 2019 and further to 25% for years ended 31 December 2020 and forward.
The reduction in the corporate income tax rate related only to profits reinvested in Argentina.
An additional tax is applied to dividends to revert the aggregate tax rate in respect of the profits used to make the dividend to 35%.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial assets and liabilities Financial assets Assets at
US000
Assets at
US000
Assets at amortised cost
Total
US000
Trade and other receivables   37111 37111 Cash and cash equivalents   23696 23696 60807 60807 Financial assets Assets at
US000
Assets at
US000
Assets at amortised cost
Total
US000
Trade and other receivables   24203 24203 Cash and cash equivalents   5243 5243 29446 29446 Financial liabilities
FVPandL
US000
Derivatives hedging
Liabilities at amortised cost
Total
US000
Trade and other payables   70980 70980 Borrowings   192476 192476 263456 263456 Financial liabilities
FVPandL
US000
Derivatives hedging
Liabilities at amortised cost
Total
US000
Trade and other payables   20479 20479 Borrowings   45034 45034 65513 65513 The company did not use derivative financial instruments in either period presented.
In January 2018 the company entered a swap agreement with Mercuria Energy Trading S. to fix the price of a portion of current oil production.
The swap instrument has a term of 11 months and expires in December 2018.
The groups maximum exposure to various risks associated with the financial instruments is discussed in note 22.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the end of the reporting period is the carrying amount of each class of financial assets mentioned above.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 118 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 18.
Trade and other receivables
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Trade receivables 26930 981 1164 17311 Less provision for impairment 2942 23988 392 Government incentives    2119 Receivables from related parties 241  241 Guarantees 403  403 10  10 Other receivables 9254 2833 1208telFinancial assets at amortised cost 33886 3225 37111 19453 4750 24203 Prepayments to suppliers 689  689 Tax credits 10350 5097 15447 4737  4737 Total trade and other receivables 44925 8322 53247 25410 4750 30160 Trade receivables are amounts due from customers for sales of crude oil and natural gas in the ordinary course of business.
Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and generally have on average 30day terms and are therefore all classified as current.
Due to their short maturities the book value of trade receivables approximates fair value.
Taxation government related and other receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
If collection of amounts is expected in one year or less they are classified as current assets.
Other receivables include confirmed balances related to historic transactions with Integra Capital S. of companies.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established where there is objective evidence that the group will not be able to recover all amounts outstanding on the original terms.
In 2016 US698000 related to an outstanding receivable from a customer that had entered administration proceedings.
The value of the provision established is equivalent to 60% of the outstanding balance from the customer AR18295000.
Cash and cash equivalents
US000
Cash at bank and in hand 23678 1914 Shortterm investments 18 23696 5243 Classification of cash equivalents Term deposits are presented as cash equivalents if they have a maturity of three months or less from the date of acquisition and are repayable with 24 hours notice with no loss of interest.
Trade and other payables
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Trade payables 59091  59091 Social security and other taxes 11375 7168 18543 Royalties 1617  1617 Accrued expenses 7570  7570 Other payables 2702  2702 938 82355 7168 89523 22562 Trade payables are unsecured and are usually paid within 30 days of recognition.
The carrying amounts of trade and other payables are considered to be the same as their fair values due to their shortterm nature.
Social security and other taxes include amounts related to tax plans agreed with the Administratin Federal de Ingresos Pblicos AFIP the Argentinian federal tax authority.
Under tax plan arrangements taxes due are paid in instalments with interest charged on the outstanding principal.
The group historically participated in tax plans on a selective basis and where the level of currency depreciation and the interest rate on outstanding amounts resulted in an acceptable finance cost.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Secured
Bank loans 19694 2502 22196  1101 Total secured borrowings 19694 2502 22196  1101
Bank loans 3802  3802 12219  12219 Loans from related parties 2616 160000 162616 31714  31714 Other loans 3857  3857 Bank overdraft 5  5 Total unsecured borrowings 10280 160000 170280 43933  43933 Total borrowings 29974 162502 192476 43933 Secured liabilities and assets pledged as security Secured liabilities include a total of US5.7 million AR denominated loans that carry interest at a rate of 2227% repayable in August 2018 and August 2020 and accrued interest of US125000.
In addition the group is party to US Dollar denominated secured loans totalling US17200000 with interest rates ranging from 3.06.2%.
Fair value For the majority of the borrowings the fair values are not materially different to their carrying amounts since the interest payable on those borrowings is either close to current market rates or the borrowings are of a shortterm nature.
Material differences are identified only for the following borrowings 2017 2016
US000
Fair value
Carrying amount
Fair value
Bank loans 25998 21593 Other loans 3857 3306 Bank overdraft 5 5 Loans from related parties 162616 162616 31714 192476 187520 The fair values of noncurrent borrowings are based on discounted cash flows using a current borrowing rate.
They are classified as Level 3 fair values in the fair value hierarchy due to the use of unobservable inputs including own credit risk.
Recognised fair value measurements The group uses the following hierarchy for determining and disclosing the fair value of financial instruments by valuation technique Level 1 The fair value of financial instruments traded in active markets such as publicly traded derivatives and trading and availableforsale securities is based on quoted market prices at the end of the reporting period.
The quoted market price used for financial assets held by the group is the current bid price.
These instruments are included in Level 1.
Level 2 The fair value of financial instruments that are not traded in an active market for example overthecounter derivatives is determined using valuation techniques which maximise the use of observable market data and rely as little as possible on entity specific estimates.
If all significant inputs required to fair value an instrument are observable the instrument is included in Level 2.
Level 3 If one or more of the significant inputs is not based on observable market data the instrument is included in Level 3.
This is the case for unlisted equity securities.
The group does not currently hold any financial instruments whose fair value is assessed by reference to Level 1 or Level 2 inputs 2016 Nil.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 120 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 22.
Financial risk management The groups exposure to financial risks and how those risks could affect the groups future financial performance is summarised below.
Risk Exposure arising from Measurement Management Market risk foreign exchange.
Future commercial transactions.
Cash flow forecasting and budgeting.
The majority of the groups cash is held in US Dollars.
The group draws progressively on available facilities as cash is needed to fund development.
Financial assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet that are not denominated in US Dollars.
Sensitivity analysis.
Due to the influence of the US Dollar on the companies within the group the US Dollar has been determined to be the functional currency of the operating subsidiaries and the parent.
This determination also reduces the exposure to forex gains and losses.
Market risk commodity prices.
Future revenue transactions.
Cash flow forecasting and budgeting.
The group considers the use of hedging instruments and enters into hedge arrangements where appropriate in order to protect downside price exposure and particularly to support budgeted capex requirements.
Market risk interest rate.
Long term borrowings held at variable rates.
Sensitivity analysis.
The group has an active treasury management function and places excess cash on hand on overnight or term deposit.
Credit risk.
Cash and cash equivalents and trade receivables.
Aging analysis.
Credit checks and credit ratings.
The group actively monitors outstanding receivables.
Where a customer shows risk of default then no credit is extended and all sales are made on a prepaid basis.
Liquidity risk.
Borrowings and other liabilities.
Rolling cash flow forecasts.
The group maintains an active treasury management function.
Market risk  foreign exchange risk and commodity price risk The groups operations are solely focused on Argentina and wholly relate to the exploration for and the development and production of oil and gas reserves.
The foreign currency that has the most influence on the financial performance of the group is the Argentine
The group is exposed to quoted prices for oil and gas which are both traded commodities the prices of which can also significantly influence financial performance.
Argentina has historically been subject to exchange controls that prevented effective currency management.
The exchange controls were lifted in December 2015.
In addition as part of a policy to encourage the production of oil and gas in a low price environment the Argentina government had previously implemented commodity price controls.
As the international crude benchmark prices recovered during the course of 2017 the government progressively lowered the regulated price for domestic crude to allow domestic prices to float in line with international prices.
The regulated price regime was removed completely in October 2017.
The previous exchange and commodity price controls reduced the ability to manage exchange risk and commodity price risk effectively.
As a result the group did not use derivative financial instruments to manage currency or commodity risk in the year ended 31 December 2017 or in the prior year.
In January 2018 the group entered into a swap agreement over a fixed number of barrels of its production derived from proved developed producing reserves.
The swap agreement covers a period of 11 months from 14 January 2018 and provides a level of certainty regarding 2018 revenue and cash generation to support the accelerated business plan for 2018.
The group is primarily exposed to foreign exchange risk related to bank deposits debtors or creditors that are denominated in Argentine Peso or Pound Sterling.
The groups exposure to foreign exchange risk at the end of the reporting period expressed in US Dollars was as follows Denominated in US000 GBP AR COP Trade and other receivables 2542 34726 Cash and cash equivalents 12570 9969 Trade and other payables 15528 45629 393 Borrowings  8040 416 8974 393 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial risk management continued Sensitivity  exchange rates As shown in the table above the group is primarily exposed to changes in the USAR exchange rate.
The sensitivity of profit and loss to changes in the exchange rates arises mainly from AR denominated financial instruments.
There is no impact on other components of equity as the group is not party to any financial instruments such as hedging instruments where currency gains and losses would be recognised in other comprehensive income 2016 none.
Impact on post tax profit and loss Impact on other components of equity
US000
US000
US000
USAR exchange rate increase by 10% USAR exchange rate decrease by 10% 1 Assumes all other variables held constant Sensitivity  commodity prices The impact of an increase or decrease in commodity prices on the groups revenue is as follows Impact on revenue crude oil prices Impact on revenue natural gas prices
US000
US000
US000
Increase by 10% 11703 11036 2477 1890 Decrease by 10% 11703 11036 2477 1890 1 Assumes all other variables held constant Market risk  cash flow and fair value interest rate risk The groups main interest rate risk arises from long term borrowings with fixed or semi fixed interest rates that expose the group to fair value risk on the underlying borrowing instrument.
The group borrows money in both US Dollar and Argentine Peso.
Argentina has historically been subject to high levels of currency devaluation and as well as high inflation.
The group maintains a portion of its borrowings in Argentine Peso and balances its portfolio of borrowings between fixed Argentine Peso and fixed US Dollar in order to manage its exposure to the combination of inflation currency devaluation and interest rate risk.
The group does not currently use swap instruments or other derivatives to manage its interest rate or fair value risk exposure.
The exposure of the groups borrowings to interest rate changes and the contractual repricing dates of the borrowings held at the end of the reporting period were as follows
US000
US000 % of total loans
Variable rate borrowings 160Sensitivity Profit or loss is sensitive to higherlower interest income from cash and cash equivalents or higherlower interest expense on borrowings resulting from movements in the interest rate.
Impact on post tax profit and loss Impact on other components of equity
US000
US000
US000
USAR interest rate increase by 10% USAR interest rate decrease by 10% 1 Assumes all other variables held constant Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 122 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Credit risk Credit risk arises from cash and cash equivalents deposits with banks and financial institutions.
The group is also exposed to credit risk related to its customers and outstanding receivables with them.
Credit risk on cash and cash equivalents is managed by only maintaining bank accounts or placing funds on deposit with recognised reputable financial institutions with a minimum credit rating of B2.
The group sells substantially all of its oil production to the Argentina stateowned oil company YPF.
Approximately 90% by value of production is sold to YPF with the remainder sold to private companies operating in Argentina.
At 31 December 2017 YPF maintained a credit rating of B2.
There is no recent history of credit loss nonpayment or default by YPF in relation to oil and gas sales.
The credit rating would indicate that a credit risk loss should be recorded in respect of sales to YPF however given the recent payment history related to such sales the calculated amount of the potential 12 month credit risk loss is not material.
The group undertakes credit and other checks before accepting new customers.
Where there are concerns about creditworthiness of a counterparty the group requires that the full amountsubstantially all of any sale be paid in full before delivery.
The credit quality of financial assets that are neither past due or impaired can be assessed by reference to external credit ratings where available or to historical information about default rates.
US000
US000
Trade receivables  counterparty without external credit rating Group 1 Group 2 16999 7457 Group 3 16999 7457 Cash at bank and shortterm deposits Moodys Aaa 1053 853 Aa3 12570 Aa2 23 Baa3 1049 Ba3 1599 4209 B2 7171 4 Other 187 133 23696 5243 Group 1  new customers less than six months Group 2  existing customers more than six months with no past default Group 3  existing customers with past default.
All defaults were fully recovered Past due but not impaired At 31 December 2017 trade receivables of US1079000 2016 US1154000 were past due but not impaired.
These relate to a number of independent customers from whom there is no recent history of default.
The aging analysis of these trade receivables is as follows
US000
Up to 3 months  688 3 to 6 months Over 6 months 1079 466 1079 1154 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial risk management continued Liquidity risk Liquidity risk relates to the groups ability to meet its obligations as they fall due.
The group generates cash from its operations.
Management monitors investment plans and in particular those in relation to exploration expenditure that may not be cash generative in the short term against available cash and cash equivalents forecast cash from operations and maturity dates of financial liabilities before final sanction and deployment of cash to a project.
Undrawn borrowing capacity where available is also taken into account.
The following table shows the groups financial liabilities by relevant maturity groupings based on their contractual maturities.
The amounts included in the analysis are the contractual undiscounted cash flows.
31 December 2017 Less than 1 year
Between
1 and 2 years
Between
2 and 5 years
Over 5 years
Total contracted cash flows
Carrying amount
Trade payables 82355    82355 82355 Other payables 558 3732 8016 558 12864 7168 Borrowings 42099 179608   221707 192476 125012 183340 8016 558 316926 281999 31 December 2016 Less than 1 year
Between
1 and 2 years
Between
2 and 5 years
Over 5 years
Total contracted cash flows
Carrying amount
Trade payables 22562    22562 22562 Borrowings 44684 1182   45866 45034 67246 1182   68428 67596 Deferred tax balances Deferred tax assets
US000
Tax losses 2837 Provisions 8051 Others 8118 1352 Total deferred tax assets 19006 1352 Argentina tax law does not contain the concept of tax groups and therefore deferred tax assets and liabilities cannot be offset between and among companies registered in Argentina and falling under the control of the same shareholder.
Outside of Argentina the group does not have sufficient concentration of subsidiaries in a single tax jurisdiction to warrant seeking tax group status to allow the offset of assets and liabilities.
The company did not recognise deferred income tax assets of US1030000 in respect of tax losses amounting to US4120000 as there is insufficient evidence that the potential assets will be recovered.
Assessed tax losses amounting to US2837000 will expire between 2023 to 2025.
Under the recent Argentina tax reform corporate income tax will reduce from 35% to 30% and 25% for the fiscal years ended 31 December 2018 and 2019.
The rate will further reduce to 25% for fiscal years ended 31 December 2020 and onward.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated at the rate of 25% or 30% taking into consideration the expected time of recovery.
The reductions in the corporate income tax rate relate only to profits that are reinvested in Argentina.
Where dividends are paid the corporate income tax rates reverts to 35% in respect of the amount of net profit being used to support the dividend.
This calculation is done on a firstinfirstout basis by reference to accumulated net income within retained earnings.
Movements
Tax losses
Provisions
US000
Inventories
US000
Other
US000
Total
US000
At 1 January 2016 8572  987 226 9785 Chargedcredited to profit and loss 8572  365 226 8433 At 31 December 2016   1352  1352
Tax losses
Provisions
US000
Inventories
US000
Other
US000
Total
US000
At 1 January 2017   1352  1352 Chargedcredited to profit and loss 331 2663 1352 1511 3153 Acquisition of subsidiary 2506 5388  6607 14501 At 31 December 2017 2837 8051  8118 19006 Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 124 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED The timeframe for expected recovery or settlement of deferred tax assets is as follows
US000
No more than 12 months after the reporting period 15197 More than 12 months after the reporting period 3809 Deferred tax liabilities The balance comprises temporary differences attributable to
US000
Property plant and equipment and intangible assets 85802 35572 Inventories 1108 Others 2181 3788 Total deferred tax liabilities 89091 39360
Property plant and equipment and intangible assets
Inventories
US000
Other
US000
Total
US000
At 1 January 2016 35901  4417 40318 Chargedcredited to profit and loss 329 At 31 December 2016 35572 3788 39360
Property plant and equipment and intangible assets
Inventories
US000
Other
US000
Total
US000
At 1 January 2017 35572  3788 39360 Chargedcredited to profit and loss 16248 1108 3136 18276 Acquisition of subsidiaries 66478  1529 68007 At 31 December 2017 85802 1108 2181 89091 The above presentation of deferred tax assets and liabilities is prepared showing the aggregate of the gross asset and liability position on a company by company basis.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities presented in the balance sheet reflect the offset of deferred tax assets and liabilities where permissable.
The deferred tax assets and liabilities after legal offset are shown in the table below.
US000
US000
Deferred income tax assets 11629 Deferred tax liabilities 81714 39360 Net deferred income tax liability 70085 38008 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current assets
US000
Crude oil 2614 Spare parts and equipment 11761 Total 14375 The costs of individual items of inventory are determined using weighted average costs.
Crude oil inventory is recorded using the perbarrel weighted average cost of production for the period.
Weighted average cost is determined by dividing the total production costs for the period by the volume of barrels produced in the period.
Inventories recognised as expense in the period relate to the change in crude inventory periodonperiod reflecting the timing of the actual sale of the crude as opposed to being expensed based on production volumes in the period.
For certain fields inventory is accumulated in storage pending tanker collection.
Depending on the timing of collection crude produced in one period can be sold in the following period resulting in inventory at the period end.
Provisions
2017 2016
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Decommissioning and site restoration 367 12535 12902 7834 7834 Legal claims 4680 4680 385  385 Total 367 17215 17582 385 7834 8219 Decommissioning and site restoration The group has an obligation to remove its oil and gas production equipment from a field at the end of its useful life.
The group is required to securely plug wells that will no longer be used in order to make them environmentally and physically safe.
In addition all land must be returned to its natural state at the cessation of production operations.
A provision is established representing the present value of the estimated future cost of this obligation with a corresponding depreciable decommissioning asset recorded in property plant and equipment.
The key assumptions applied in calculating the decommissioning provision relate to the extent of the physical decommissioning activity required the cost of performing that activity and the timing of when that activity is due to take place.
The estimate of the quantum of the provision is most sensitive the extent of the activity required which may change over time due to legislation.
In addition the estimate of the provision is sensitive timing of the decommissioning activity which determined by economically productive life of the related asset.
Provision for legal claims As part of the accounting for the business combination during the year provisions have been established for certain legal contingencies.
The claims mainly relate to disputes arising related to payments for services rendered and the nature of the service rendered.
It is uncertain at this time when or if any cases will come to court and whether any action by a third party would be successful.
Because the population of cases is small and the value of each claim is low it was not considered appropriate to risk adjust the provision or apply probability weighting.
Movements in provisions Movements in each class of provisions during the financial year are set out below Legal claims
Decommissioning and site restoration
Total
US000
At 1 January 2017 385 7834 8219 Acquisition of subsidiaries 4680 2141 6821 Chargedcredited to profit or loss Additional provisions recognised  2785 2785 Unwinding of discount  142 142 Amounts used during the year 385  385 At 31 December 2017 4680 12902 17582 Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 126 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 26.
Commitments
At 31 December the group had the following capital commitments
US000
Chachahuen 9764 Chaares Herrados 60840 86240 Colombia 15000 Laguna el Loro 6600 Santa Cruz Sur area 8562 10500 Tierra del Fuego  402 Total 100766 97142 1 2016 commitments include amounts in respect of the Puesto Pozo Cercado concession that was relinquished in August 2017.
The group had the following future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases for each of the following periods
US000
Not later than one year 349 58 Later than one year and not later than five years 927 Later than five years 19 Total 1295 58 Operating lease commitments relate primarily to rented office space none of which is sublet by the group.
There are no contingent payments associated with operating leases that the group is party to.
The group does not have any significant contingencies.
Related party transactions Significant shareholder The immediate parent of the company is Upstream Capital Partners VI Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of Mercuria Energy Group Limited.
Mercuria Energy Group Holdings is the ultimate beneficial owner of the group and company through its holding of 79.8% of the issued share capital but 100% of the voting rights of Mercuria Energy Group Limited.
The remaining 20.2% of the issued share capital of Mercuria Energy Group Limited is held by participants of the Mercuria employee share option plan.
No voting rights are held by participants of the Mercuria employee share option plan.
A relationship agreement is in place between the company and Mercuria Energy Group Limited.
The relationship agreement has been put in place to protect the rights of minority shareholders and limits the control that Mercuria Energy Group can exercise over the group primarily through restricting the number of Mercuria appointed directors on the board.
By maintaining a minority of Mercuria appointed directors on the board those directors cannot carry a majority vote individually or in concert.
The relationship agreement also requires directors nominated by Mercuria to recuse themselves from certain board decisions.
Transactions with owners In advance of the combination transaction a subsidiary of the major shareholder converted a loan it has advanced to one of the groups subsidiaries to equity.
The forgiveness of the loan is recognised directly in equity within retained earnings in the amount of US31713000.
Subsidiaries
Interests in subsidiaries are set out in note 4 to the company financial statements.
Loan from Mercuria Energy Trading S.
As part of the business combination in the year described in note 14 Mercuria Energy Trading S. working capital facility to the group of the amount of US160000000.
Mercuria Energy Trading SA is a 100% owned subsidiary of Mercuria Energy Group Limited.
Analysis of amounts advanced and interest paid are shown in the table below
US000
Loan from Mercuria Energy Trading SA Beginning of the year Loans advanced 160000 Acquisition of subsidiaries 21238 Loan repayments made 20000 Interest charged 4373 Interest paid 3050 End of year 162561 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Related party transactions continued Loan from Mercuria Energy Asset Management B.
Analysis of amounts advanced and interest paid are shown in the table below
US000
Loan from Mercuria Energy Asset Management B.
Beginning of the year Acquisition of subsidiaries 21305 Loan repayments made 15000 Interest paid 6305 End of year Key management compensation
US000
Shortterm employee benefits 1081 406 Total key management compensation 1081 406 Detailed remuneration disclosures are provided in the remuneration report on pages 65 to 80.
Sharebased payments The principal share based payment in the period related to the transaction consideration for the reverse takeover that was settled in shares.
There were no share based payments in respect of share option plans or other share incentives for management or employees in 2017 2016 nil.
Lossearnings per share Basic and diluted earningsloss per share
US
From continuing operations attributable to the ordinary equity holder of the company 0.19 0.01 Total basic earningsloss per share attributable to ordinary equity holders of the company 0.19 0.01 Basic and diluted earningsloss per share
US000
Lossprofit attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the company used in calculating basic earnings per share From continuing operations 270095 4579 270095 4579 There were no dilutive instruments in issue at the end of either period and no discontinued operations in either period.
Weighted average number of shares used as the denominator
US000
Weighted average number of shares used as the denominator in calculating basic earnings per share Adjustments for calculation of diluted earnings per share At 1 January 605505 605505 At 31 December 2537178 605505 Weighted average number of shares used as the denominator in calculating diluted earnings per share 1405794 605505 Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 128 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 30.
Cash generated from operations
US000
Profit for the year before taxation 286730 17870 Finance costs 8207 6284 Finance income 572 2281 Other finance results 4018 Accretion of discount on asset retirement obligation 142 493 Net unrealised exchange gainslosses 506 783 Income on short term investments 572 Impaired receivables 5355 698 Share based payments 105 Impairment of goodwill 232407 Depreciation and amortisation 49297 28454 Disposal of property plant and equipment  170 Change in operating assets and liabilities including net effects from business combination Decreaseincrease in inventories 4696 301 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivable 7122 7418 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 6825 604 Increasedecrease in provisions 1872 1816 Cash generated from operations 9042 42576 Changes in liabilities arising from financing activities Noncash changes
US000
Cash flows
Interest
US000
Acquired
US000
Interest
US000
Transactions with owners
Capitalised interest
Foreign exchange
December
US000
Current liabilities Borrowings 43933 34315  44005 8207 31714 690 832 29974 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 1101 123047 4215 42569     162502 Total borrowings 45034 88732 4215 86574 8207 31714 690 832 192476 Post balance sheet events Oil price swap On 22 January 2018 the company entered a swap agreement with Mercuria Energy Trading S.
Brent crude at a price of US65.97bbl.
The swap agreement is effective from 15 January 2018 to 14 December 2018 and relates to 1.2 million barrels of oil production in Argentina.
The swap was entered in order to give certainty of cashflow to support the 2018 capital expenditure programme.
New convertible revolving credit facility On completion of the combination transaction Mercuria Energy Trading S.
US160.0 million.
On 15 February 2018 Mercuria agreed to convert US100.0 million of the facility into ordinary shares of the company at a conversion price of 0.37 per share.
The remaining US60.0 million of the bridging and working capital facility was restructured into a new convertible revolving credit facility of US160.0 million providing additional funds of US100.0 million to support the 2018 capital expenditure programme.
The new convertible revolving credit facility has an interest rate of three months LIBOR 4% through maturity at end of December 2021.
Renegotiation of Mata Mora and Corralera memorandum of understanding In April 2018 the company renegotiated the memorandum of understanding with Gas y Petrleo del Neuqun GyP that previously governed the companys interest in the Mata Mora and Corralera exploration concessions.
Following the renegotiation the companys interest in the retained areas of Mata Mora and Corralera increased from 27% to 90% and the company assumes operatorship.
As part of the renegotiation Integra Oil and Gas S. company is in discussion with Integra Oil and Gas S. to agree an appropriate level of compensation.
Details of the Mata Mora and Corralera blocks are included in the operating review on pages 24  31.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017
US000
US000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 4.2 217 Investments in subsidiaries 4.1 973368 234134 Total noncurrent assets 973585 234134 Current assets Trade and other receivables 6 103188 26925 Available for sale financial assets 5  110 Restricted cash  5442 Cash and cash equivalents 12570 1438 Total current assets 115758 33915 Total assets 1089343 268049 Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 7 15400 23270 Borrowings 8 160000 Total noncurrent liabilities 175400 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 7 15556 1420 Borrowings 8 3931 10064 Total current liabilities 19487 11484 Total liabilities 194887 75458 Net assets 894456 192591 Equity 10 Called up share capital 329877 98414 Share premium account  52467 Other reserves 325196 16585 Retained earnings 239383 25125 Total equity 894456 192591 The above company statement of financial position should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
The financial statements on pages 130 to 137 were approved by the board of directors and authorised for issue on 4 June 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 130 COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AT 31 DECEMBER 2017 Capital and reserves Called up share capital
Share premium account
Retained earnings
Other
US000
Total equity
At 1 January 2016 98414 52467 38439 56904 246224 Loss for the year   13609  13609 Translation differences    40319 40319 Total comprehensive loss for the year   13609 40319 53928 Fair value of share based payments   295  295 At 31 December 2016 98414 52467 25125 16585 192591 Loss for the year   532330  532330 Translation differences    11090 11090 Total comprehensive loss for the year   532330 11090 521240 Effect of changes in functional currency 19699 9162 23351 52212 Issue of ordinary shares 2359 7244   9603 Acquisition of subsidiary 248803   960928 1209731 Transfer from merger reserve   463189 463189 Issue of warrants    7570 7570 Capital reduction  50549 310549 260000 Distribution of IOX shares   4051  4051 Fair value of share based payments   252  252 At 31 December 2017 329877  239383 325196 894456 Other reserves
US000
Warrant reserve
Translation reserve
Deferred consideration
Total other reserves
At 1 January 2016 89886 2105 39560 4473 56904 Translation differences   40319  40319 Total comprehensive loss for the year   40319  40319 At 31 December 2016 89886 2105 79879 4473 16585 Profit for the year Translation differences   11090  11090 Total comprehensive profit for the year   11090  11090 Effect of changes in functional currency 15648 370 68815 585 52212 Acquisition of subsidiary 964816   3888 960928 Reserves transfer 463189    463189 Issue of warrants 7570    7570 Capital reduction 260000    260000 At 31 December 2017 323435 1735 26  325196 The above statement of changes in the companys equity should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
1 Restated STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 131 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017
US000
US000
Cash flows from operating activities 10 Cash used ingenerated from operations 102500 22 Net cash used ingenerated from operating activities 102500 22 Cash flows from investing activities Payments for intangible assets  119 Payments for property plant and equipment 217 Purchase of investments Net cash outflow from investing activities Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issues of shares and other equity instruments 9603 Investment in subsidiaries  157 Proceeds from borrowings 176054 Interest paid 16241 1084 Interest received  9 Repayment of borrowings 55829 10476 Net cash inflow from financing activities 113587 2993 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 10870 3106 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial year 1438 6218 Effects of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 262 1674 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 12570 1438 The above statement of cash flows for the company should be read in conjunction with the accompanying notes.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 132 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2017 1.
Basis of preparation The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
The company applies consistent accounting policies as applied by the group.
To the extent that an accounting policy is relevant to both group and company financial statements refer to the group financial statements for disclosure of the accounting policy.
Material policies that apply to the company only are included as appropriate.
The company has used the exemption granted under s.408 of the Companies Act 2006 and accordingly has not presented its income statement.
The loss attributable to the company for the year ended 31 December 2017 was US532.3 million 2016 loss US13.6 million.
Critical accounting estimates and judgments Critical judgements Carrying value of investments in subsidiaries The company assesses its investments in subsidiaries for impairment where an indicator that the investment may be impaired exists.
Indicators may include poorer operating performance than budgeted a decrease in the oil and gas reserves booked by operating subsidiaries or a decrease in the NPV10 value of assets assessed under the Petroleum Resource Management System PRMS issued by the Society of petroleum engineers.
The companys investment in Trefoil Holdings B.
31 December 2017.
The acquisition was effected through the issue of shares and the preimpairment carrying value of the investment was calculated by reference to the number of shares issued and the closing price on the date of the transaction 0.49.
The impairment evaluation was performed by comparing the carrying of the investment to the fair value of the underlying assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the combination transaction.
For consolidation accounting the combination represented a reverse takeover and therefore the fair value exercise and resultant purchase price allocation included the group financial statements was performed by reference to assets and liabilities of the former Andes Energia plc.
The corresponding fair value of the Trefoil assets and liabilities used in the impairment test for the investment at in the company financial statements was calculated using the assessed Andes fair values and applying the share exchange ratio set in the combination.
This fair value was then compared to the carrying value of the investment in Trefoil and an impairment charge of US474336000 was recorded.
Determination of functional currency The determination of a companys function currency can require significant judgement.
Functional currency is assessed on an entity by entity basis.
A companys function currency is defined as the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates.
In this regard the default assumption is that a companys functional currency will be that in which it is registered or that where the majority of its operations are located.
This assumption can be challenged or rebutted where it can be demonstrated that a currency other than that of the country of registration or operations can be shown to have a greater influence over the revenue costs assets and liabilities of a company.
Following the combination transaction that took place during the year whereby the company acquired 100% of the share capital of Trefoil Holdings B. the functional currency of the group was reassessed.
As part of the transaction the company entered a bridging and working capital facility agreement with Mercuria Energy Trading S.
This facility provided US160.0 million of funding to the company which it in turn had used to fund the operations of its subsidiaries in Argentina.
The company transfers cash for operations in US Dollar.
This predominance of the US Dollar in relation to the financing of the company means that it is now the movements in the US Dollar exchange rate that most affect the net assets and net income of the company.
Accordingly the functional currency of the company has been determined to be the US Dollar since the date of completion of the transaction previously GBP.
As a result it has been determined that the functional currency of the company has changed from GBP to US Dollar as of 10 August 2017 being the date of completion of the combination transaction.
The financial statements were retranslated to US Dollar using the spot rate on the date of the change.
The impact of the change in functional currency on the reserves of the company is shown in the statement of changes in equity.
Refer also note 4 in the group financial statements.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 133 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3.
Significant accounting policies New accounting standards Three new accounting standards have been issued but are not effective for these financial statements.
A summary of the standards is presented below together with the status of managements assessment of their impact on the companys financial reporting Standard Effective date Management assessment of impact IFRS 9 Financial instruments 1 January 2018 Currently under evaluation IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers 1 January 2018 Not applicable the company has no revenue IFRS 16 Leases 1 January 2019 Currently under evaluation Property plant and equipment All of the companys property plant and equipment relates to leasehold improvements fixtures and fittings and office equipment.
Depreciation is charged on a straight line basis at rates that reflect the expected useful life of each asset category at rates of 20%30% per annum.
Investments in subsidiaries Investments in unquoted subsidiaries are carried at cost unless an indicator of impairment exists in which case the recoverable value of the investment is assessed by reference to the cashflows it is expected to generate or the fair value of the assets it holds and an impairment loss is recorded as appropriate.
Impairment losses are reversed to the extent that the condition giving rise to the impairment reverses in a subsequent period.
The company has no investments in subsidiaries that are quoted on an active market.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment is established where there is evidence that the group will not be able to recover some or all of the outstanding payable.
The resulting impairment loss is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Trade and other receivables are classified as current assets if receipt is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent assets.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash on hand deposits held with financial institutions that can be called on demand together with other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Trade and other payables are obligations to pay for goods or services that have been acquired in the ordinary course of business from suppliers.
Accounts payable are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year or less.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Accruals are recognised in respect of goods or services delivered but not yet invoiced.
Noncurrent assets 4.1 Investments in subsidiaries Noncurrent assets
US000
At 1 January 234134 Investment in subsidiaries 166 Effect of change in functional currency 13331 Acquisition of subsidiary 1217301 5289 Revaluation of investment on distribution 2157 Distribution to shareholders 4051 Foreign exchange movements 42 47053 Impairment of investment 26523 Impairment of acquired subsidiaries 463129 At 31 December 2017 973368 234134 On 18 December 2017 and pursuant to the commitments made in the AIM admission document the company distributed its investment in Interoil Exploration and Production ASA to the companys shareholders by way of a dividend in specie.
The dividend was made to shareholders on record as of 8 August 2017.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 134 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED At 31 December 2017 Phoenix Global Resources plc had investments in the following subsidiaries Principal activity Country of incorporation Proportion of issued shares controlled by the Group PGR Operating LLC Service company USA 100% AEN Energy Holdings S.
Dormant Cayman Is.
100% AEN Energy Cayman Islands Ltd Dormant Cayman Is.
100% Andes Energy LLC Dormant USA 100% AEN Netherlands Cooperatief U.
Intermediate holding companyservices Netherlands 100% Trefoil Holdings B.
Intermediate holding company Netherlands 100% San Enrique Pertrolera B.
Intermediate holding company Netherlands 100% AEN Latina S.
Dormant Spain 100% Upstream Latino America S.
Intermediate holding company Spain 99.96% Trefoil Switzerland S.
Intermediate holding company Switzerland 100% Trefoil Limited Intermediate holding company Bermuda 100% Trefoil GmbH Intermediate holding company Austria 100% Petrolera El Trebol S.
Oil and gas operations Argentina 100% Andes Energia Argentina S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% MSO Andes Energia S.
Intermediate holding companyservices Argentina 100% Andes Oil S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Andes Oil and Gas S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Grecoil y Cia.
S.
Oil and gas operations Argentina 100% AEN Energy Mendoza S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% AEN Energy Argentina S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Patagonia Oil and Gas S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Andes Hidrocarburos S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Kilwer S.
Oil and gas operations Argentina 100% Ketsal S.
Oil and gas operations Argentina 100% CHPPC Andes S.
Oil and gas operations Argentina 100% Integra Investment S.
Intermediate holding company Argentina 100% Andes Interoil Limited Intermediate holding company UK 100% Andes Energia Limited Dormant UK 100% Patagonia Oil and Gas Limited Dormant UK 100% Patagonia Energy Limited Dormant UK 100% 4.2 Property plant and equipment The property plant and equipment balance of US217000 relates entirely to fixtures and fittings purchased during the year.
Financial assets and liabilities Available for sale financial assets Current assets
US000
Unlisted equity securities  110 Trade and other receivables
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Trade receivables 2943 Less provision for impairment 2943  2943 Loans to subsidiaries 100519 Other receivables 2483  2483 24199  24199 Financial assets at amortised cost 103002  103002 26895  26895 Prepayments to suppliers 186  186 30  30 Total trade and other receivables 103188  103188 Loans to subsidiaries have no fixed repayment terms and do not attract interest.
Trade and other payables
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Trade payables 12147 Social security and other taxes 1629 1629  37 37 Other payables 1780  1780 570 1370 1940 Loans from subsidiaries  15400 15400 21863 21863 15556 15400 30956 1420 23270 24690 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Current
US000
Noncurrent
US000
Total
US000
Bonds payable     25962 25962
2561 160000 162561 8064 14742 22806 Other borrowings 1370 1370 2000  2000 3931 160000 163931 10064 40704 50768 Related party balances Related party balances relate to loans received from the major shareholder and loans advanced to subsidiaries.
US000
US000
Related party loans receivable Amounts advanced to subsidiaries 100519 Total related party receivables 100519 Related party loans payable Shareholder loan 160000 Interest accrued on shareholder loan 2561 Total related party payables 162561 The shareholder loan relates to a bridging and working capital facility provided to the company buy Mercuria Energy Trading S.
The loan bore interest on a LIBOR basis with the interest charge increasing by 100 basis points on certain predetermined dates.
A portion of the loan was converted to equity in 2018 with the reminder refinanced into a new convertible revolving credit facility.
The amounts advanced to subsidiaries consist of amounts advanced for working capital purposes that have no fixed repayment dates and no interest burden.
The balance also includes two interest bearing loans to subsidiaries.
The primary interest bearing loan relates to a US27301000 facility advanced to Petrolera el Trebol that carries an interest rate of 7.0%.
Cash generated from operations
US000
Profit for the year before taxation 532330 13609 Impairment of restricted cash 6491 Impairment of investments 489652 Revaluation of investment on change of control 2157 Net unrealised exchange gainslosses 5 1336 Decreaseincrease in restricted cash 1049 16 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivable 75232 622 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 4927 394 Finance costs 14631 19711 Finance income 7680 7499 Share based payments 252 295 Cash used in operations 102500 22 Called up share capital The companys share capital consists one class of ordinary share.
Each ordinary share carries an equal voting right and right to a dividend.
2017 2016 Allotted called up and fully paid No.
000 US000 No.
Ordinary shares of 10 pence 2537178 Movements in ordinary shares 2017 2016
000 US000 No.
At 1 January 605505 98414 605505 98414 Effect of change in functional currency  19699 Acquisition of subsidiary 1913873 248804 Issue of ordinary shares 17800 At 31 December 2537178 329878 605505 98414 On 10 August 2017 the company issued 1899106385 ordinary shares with nominal value of 10p per share as consideration for 100% of the issued share capital of Trefoil Holdings B.
Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 136 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Also on 10 August 2017 a further 14766666 shares were issued to related to deferred consideration from previous acquisition transactions.
Warrants
Details of warrants granted are as follows 1 January 2017
Grant
No.
Lapsed
No.
31 December 2017
Exercise price June 2012  September 2017 1011000 3584455 4595455  45 1011000 3584455 4595455  54 2696000 9558545 12254545  70 January 2013  January 2018 16175998 57351266  73527264 54 August 2013  August 2020 2300000 8154545  10454545 40 December 2014  December 2017 7500000 26590909 25936364 8154545 43 February 2015  February 2018 3000000   3000000 0 4000000   4000000 34 August 2015  August 2019 6584960 17968084 2448257 22104787 26 December 2015  December 2017 7000000 24818182 31818182  60 Total 51278958 151610441 81648258 121241141 1 Priced by reference to Interoil share price The weighted average remaining contractual life of the warrants is 0.6 years.
None of the warrants described above are accounted for as sharebased payments.
The number of warrants that are not treated as sharebased payments that were outstanding during the year together with their associated weighted average exercise price WAEP are as follows 2017 2016
000 WAEP p No.
000 WAEP p At 1 January 51278958 44.9 51278958 44.9 Granted 151610440 49.8
Lapsed 81648257 53.9 At 31 December Outstanding 121241141 51278958 Exercisable 121241141 51278958 Warrants  sharebased payments Details of warrants that are accounted for as sharebased payments are as follows 1 January 2017
Grant
No.
Lapsed
No.
31 December 2017
Exercise price June 2012  June 2019 4461880 15819393  20281273 54 July 2012  July 2017 1500000 5318182 6818182  54 November 2013  November 2020 2000000 7090909  9090909 40 Total 7961880 28228484 6818182 29372182 The weighted average remaining contractual life of the warrants that are treated as sharebased payments is 0.6 years.
The number of warrants that are treated as sharebased payments that were outstanding during the year together with their associated weighted average exercise price WAEP are as follows 2017 2016
000 WAEP p No.
000 WAEP p At 1 January 7961880 50.5 7961880 50.5 Granted 28228424 40.4
Lapsed 6818122 54.0 At 31 December Outstanding 29372182 7961880 Exercisable 29372182 7961880 The fair value of the warrants accounted for as sharebased payments was calculated using the BlackScholes model.
The estimated fair value of options accounted for as sharebased payments and the model inputs used to calculate those fair values are as follows STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Called up share capital continued Date of grant Number
Share price at date of agreement
Expected volatility %
Years
Risk free rate %
November 2013 2000000 10 22.50 40 53 5.83 1.80 1 January Grant Lapsed 31 December Exercise price p Exercise date Nicols Mallo Huergo 606600   606600 54 2019 German Rantfl 606600   606600 54 2019 Juan Carlos Esteban 674000   674000 54 2019 Nigel Duxbury 269600   269600 54 2019 David Jackson 1500000  1500000  54 2017 Carolina Landi 134800   134800 54 2019 Alejandro Jotayan 2000000   2000000 40 2020 Senior management 552680   552680 54 2019 Directors 4291600 Senior management 552680 Total 4844280 Financial risk management The groups exposure to financial risks and how those risks could affect the groups future financial performance is summarised below.
Risk Exposure arising from Measurement Management Market risk foreign exchange Future commercial transactions Cashflow forecasting and budgeting The majority of the companys cash is held in US Dollars.
The group draws progressively on available facilities as cash is needed to fund operating subsidiaries Financial assets and liabilities recognised in the balance sheet that are not denominated in US dollars Sensitivity analysis Due to the influence of the US Dollar on the companies within the group the US Dollar has been determined to be the functional currency of the company.
This determination also reduces the exposure to forex gains and losses Market risk  interest rate Long term borrowings held at variable rates Sensitivity analysis The company has an treasury management function and monitors interest rate announcements Liquidity risk Borrowings and other liabilities Rolling cash flow forecasts The group maintains an active treasury management function Phoenix Global Resources plc FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 138 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Market risk  cash flow and fair value interest rate risk The companys main interest rate risk arises from long term borrowings with floating interest rates that expose the group to interest rate risk.
The companys functional currency is the US Dollar and it only holds dollar denominated debt and therefore is not exposed to exchange rate risk.
The group does not currently use swap instruments or other derivatives to manage its interest rate risk exposure.
The exposure of the groups borrowings to interest rate changes at the end of the reporting period were as follows
US000
US000 % of total loans
Variable rate borrowings 160000 100 9158 100 160000 100 9158 100 Impact on post tax profit and loss Impact on other components of equity
US000
US000
US000
Interest rate increase by 10% 1600 90 Interest rate decrease by 10% 1600 90 Commitments and contingencies The company had the following future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases for each of the following periods
US000
Not later than one year 67 Later than one year and not later than five years 357 Later than five years Total 424 Operating lease commitments relate primarily to rented office space none of which is sublet by the company.
There are no contingent payments associated with operating leases that the group is party to.
The group does not have any significant contingencies.
Post balance sheet events Oil price swap On 22 January 2018 the company entered a swap agreement with Mercuria Energy Trading S.
Brent crude at a price of US65.97bbl.
The swap agreement is effective from 15 January 2018 to 14 December 2018 and relates to 1.2 million barrels of oil production in Argentina.
The swap was entered in order to give certainty of cashflow to support the 2018 capital expenditure programme.
New convertible revolving credit facility On completion of the combination transaction Mercuria Energy Trading S.
US160.0 million.
On 15 February 2018 Mercuria agreed to convert US100.0 million of the facility into ordinary shares of the company at a conversion price of 0.37 per share.
The remaining US60.0 million of the bridging and working capital facility was restructured into a new convertible revolving credit facility of US160.0 million providing additional funds of US100.0 million to support the 2018 capital expenditure programme.
STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 139 Phoenix Global Resources plc 140 Other information IN THIS SECTION 142 Glossary 143 Registered offices 144 Officers and advisers STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 141 NOC National oil company IOC International oil company
Thousand cubic metres MMbtu Million British thermal units MMscf Million standard cubic feet Tcf Trillion cubic feet bbl Barrel boe Barrel of oil equivalent Bn Billion MM Million LNG Liquified natural gas WI Working interest 1P Proved reserves 2P Proved plus probable reserves 3P Proved plus probable plus possible reserves Phoenix Global Resources plc OTHER INFORMATION 142 GLOSSARY The registered offices of the groups subsidiaries are as follows Company Registered address PGR Operating LLC 20 Greenway Plaza Suite 1075 Houston Texas 770462011 USA AEN Energy Holdings S.
PO Box 309 Ugland House Grand Cayman KY11104 Cayman Islands AEN Energy Cayman Islands Ltd PO Box 309 Ugland House Grand Cayman KY11104 Cayman Islands AEN Netherlands Cooperatief U.
Prins Bernhardplein 200 1097JB Amsterdam Netherlands Trefoil Holdings B.
Herculesplien 108 3584AA Utrecht Netherlands San Enrique Pertrolera B.
Herculesplien 108 3584AA Utrecht Netherlands AEN Latina S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Upstream Latino America S.
Valezquez 61 1 Izquierda Madrid 28 Spain Trefoil Switzerland S.
Rue Du Rhne 50 1204 Geneva Switzerland Trefoil Limited Clarendon House 2 Church Street Hamilton HM 11 Bermuda Trefoil GmbH Schubertring 6 1010 Vienna Austria Petrolera El Trebol S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Andes Energia Argentina S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina MSO Andes Energia S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Andes Oil S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Andes Oil and Gas S.
Maipu 1252 Piso 6 Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Grecoil y Cia.
S.
Tiburcio Benegas 843 Ciudad de Mendoza Mendoza Argentina AEN Energy Mendoza S.
Tiburcio Benegas 843 Ciudad de Mendoza Mendoza Argentina AEN Energy Argentina S.
Tiburcio Benegas 843 Ciudad de Mendoza Mendoza Argentina Patagonia Oil and Gas S.
Maipu 1252 Piso 6 Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Andes Hidrocarburos S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Kilwer S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Ketsal S.
Tiburcio Benegas 843 Ciudad de Mendoza Mendoza Argentina CHPPC Andes S.
Suipacha 1111 Floor 18th Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Integra Investment S.
Maipu 1252 Piso 6 Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina Andes Interoil Limited 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP Andes Energia Limited 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP Patagonia Oil and Gas Limited 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP Patagonia Energy Limited 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OTHER INFORMATION Annual Report and Accounts 2017 143 REGISTERED OFFICES Directors Sir Michael Rake Nonexecutive chairman
Anuj Sharma Chief executive officer
Philip Wolfe Chief financial officer John Bentley Nonexecutive director independent Garrett Soden Nonexecutive director independent Javier Alvarez Nonexecutive director independent David Jackson Nonexecutive director independent Nicols Mallo Huergo Nonexecutive director Matthieu Milandri Nonexecutive director Guillaume Vermersch Nonexecutive director Nigel Duxbury Company secretary Registered address and corporate office 6th Floor Kings House 10 Haymarket London SW1Y 4BP Company number Nominated adviser and joint broker Stockdale Securities Limited 100 Wood Street London EC2V 7AN Joint broker Panmure Gordon One New Change London EC4M 9AF Financial PR
107 Cheapside London EC2V 6DN Independent auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP Exchange House Primrose Street London EC2A 2EG
Share Registrars The Courtyard 17 West Street
Surrey GU9 7DR
Buenos Aires Torre Alem Plaza 3rd Floor
Leandro N.
Alem 855 Buenos Aires 6023
Mendoza
Roca 234 Mendoza City 5500
Houston
20 Greenway Plaza Suite 1075
Texas 770462011
Phoenix Global Resources plc OTHER INFORMATION 144 OFFICERS AND ADVISERS Both the paper manufacturer and printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council
