Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Making friends and families happy  T en Entertainment Group operates with a simple profitable proven business model.
Nick Basing Chairman Contents Strategic report Highlights 2017 3 At a glance 4 Chairmans statement 6 Chief Executives statement 8 Operating review 10 Market overview 14 Business model 16 Strategy 18 Key performance indicators KPIs 20 Risk management 23 Principal risks and uncertainties 24 Financial review 26 Corporate social responsibility 34 Corporate governance Board of Directors 36 Chairmans introduction 38 Board governance 39 Board governance and key Board roles 40 Board effectiveness 42 Nomination Committee report 43 Audit Committee report 44 Directors remuneration report 47 Directors report 56 Statement of Directors responsibilities 61 Financial statements Independent auditors report 63 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 69 Consolidated and Company statements of financial position 70 Consolidated and Company statements of cash flows 71 Consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity 72 Statement of accounting policies 73 Notes to the financial statements 80
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc In addition to approximately a thousand bowling lanes across our estate we also offer a broad selection of family entertainment options including amusement machines tabletennis pool tables soft play and laser games plus we have a great food and drink offering that customers can enjoy while they play.
Ten in Ten Broad family entertainment offering 42 bowling sites Fully integrated technology platform
Clear focus on return on investment Effective site optimisation
Tenpinisation model 12% CAGR revenue increase from FY13 to FY17
Strong employee engagement Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Operational IPO completed with no operational disruption Three site acquisitions successfully completed Refurbishments completed at six sites Transformative Pins and Strings technology extended to five further sites Net Promoter Score improved from 49% to 66% Games played per stop up 39% to 259 Accreditation from Great Place to Work
Reported total sales up 5.5% to 71.0m
Likeforlike sales growth of 3.6% Group adjusted EBITDA up 14% to 19.0m FY16 PF Adjusted profit before tax up 18% to 13.0m FY16 PF Reported profit after tax up 43% to 5.2m FY16 3.6m.
IPO exceptional costs of 3.1m Final dividend per share of 7.0p recommended fullyear dividend of 10.0p Highlights 2017 Against proforma results which represent comparison to the 52 weeks ended 1 January 2017.
More information on the reasons for the inclusion of this proforma comparison can be found on page 26.
Revenue
71.0mtel 2016 65.2 Adjusted EBITDA 2015 10.1 2017 19.0 2016 17.6 2016 16.6 Adjusted EBITDA margin 26.8%tel 2016 25.5 52week 53week 53week 52week 53week 52week Strategic report  3 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc At a glance Our mission is to make friends and families happy to entertain and enthral profitably.
We are a leading UK operator of bowling and family entertainment centres.
As well as tenpin bowling we offer a broad selection of family entertainment options including amusement machines tabletennis pool tables soft play and laser games.
We also have a great food and drink offering that customers can enjoy while they play without the need to step away from their lanes thanks to our iServe technology.
We have 42 sites across the country with an average of 24 lanes per site.
In 2017 we welcomed around 5.1 million customers through our doors.
We put our customers at the heart of everything we do and our 1100 employees all strive to ensure our customers have a fantastic customer experience every time they visit us.
Our focus is on providing a fantastic family experience Venue Support centre Blackburn Tenpin  Acquired in March 2017 Tenpinisation process and refurbishment are both complete Eastbourne Tenpin  Acquired in February 2017 Tenpinisation process and refurbishment are both complete Rochdale Tenpin  Acquired in June 2017 Tenpinisation process is complete refurbishment to be completed in 2018 Warrington Tenpin  Acquired in February 2018 Chichester Tenpin  Acquired in February 2018 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 4  Strategic report 66% NET PROMOTER SCORE
MILLION VISITORS SITES ACROSS THE UK per year SITE ACQUISITION
30% ROI ON ACQUISITIONS Strategic report  5 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Ten Entertainment Group is focused on delivering family entertainment in a growing sector of the leisure market.
Our mission is to make families and friends happy to entertain and enthral profitably.
The way that people and families interact has changed rapidly in recent times and we are able to bring families and friends together to play and to have fun in a very modern way through the Tenpin brand.
Our growth strategy is designed to support and strengthen our business model and is focused on three simple routes incremental organic growth growth through acquisition and ongoing investment into both our estate and into our support platform.
This is because firstly many more marginal gains exist across our operations secondly because value has been proven in acquiring single units converting them to The Tenpin Way and of course accruing scale benefits and lastly because sustainability of profit growth derived from the lifeblood of a steady drip feed of capital to maintain modernity and relevance to our consumers and attract highquality operating talent.
The logic is entirely evident.
We have made very good progress with this strategy during recent years.
Our selfmanaged growth strategy is clearly defined and is driven by the three routes but we are also determined to see our available market grow as consumers gain enthusiasm for spending time and their income on more experiences and less traditional product purchases.
Ten Entertainment Group operates with a simple profitable proven business model and with a proposition that is entirely customer driven underpinned by a strong culture formed and protected by our colleagues.
2017 was a year of significant progress for the Group with the successful listing on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
During April 2017 we welcomed our new shareholders to benefit from our robust deleveraged but growing business.
Ten Entertainment Group plc has performed well during FY17 good likeforlike sales growth again the successful completion of a further three acquisitions and refurbishments at six of our centres.
Following the successful pilot of a business transformation project Pins and Strings we are now extending this technology into ten more of our locations in 2018 and in time across each of our venues.
The combination of these achievements has resulted in strong EBITDA growth of 14% during the year and therefore we can confidently propose a payment of a maiden fullyear dividend.
I am pleased to report Group adjusted earnings per share of 16.2p.
A key aspect of our sustained and most recent performance is our highly experienced and motivated leadership team together with a very special culture which is focused on delivering consistently great experiences for our customers.
One way we can see this is the most crucial measure our impressive sectorleading Net Promoter Score of 66% up from 49% in 2016.
We know it is a crucial correlate to sales growth and therefore core underlying profit growth.
I believe operating teams across the Group served by the senior leadership team and support group has the right skillset to execute the Groups strategy deliver significant further growth and drive strong returns for shareholders.
On behalf of the Board I would like to personally thank all of our teams and colleagues across the Group for their commitment and dedication to the Group during 2017.
They are a remarkable group of people and we are privileged to enjoy their efforts and enjoyment in working for Tenpin.
Chairmans statement
The business is well positioned for future growth Nick Basing
Our growth strategy is designed to support and strengthen our business model and is focused on three simple routes incremental organic growth growth through acquisition and ongoing investment into both our estate and our support platform.
FULLYEAR DIVIDEND year ended 31 December 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 6  Strategic report We put our customers at the heart of everything we do At Ten Entertainment Group our people are focused on making each customers visit a memorable one and our culture supports our teams to provide those consistently great customer experiences.
This has resulted in our Net Promoter Score increasing 17 percentage points to 66% in 2017.
The Group believes that engaged employees leads to high customer satisfaction and we are proud to have been accredited as a Great Place to Work.
We have also maintained our Investors in People Gold standard since 2014.
These awards are reflected by our own colleagues with 90% saying they would recommend Tenpin as a great place to work.
We provide our people with bespoke training modules to ensure they have the skills required to provide great service with both a management development programme and an area management programme available to colleagues.
We also introduced our apprenticeship programme Tenpins Got Talent this year.
Exceptional customer service 66% NET PROMOTER SCORE To develop and protect our business further we apply good corporate governance through a strong and independently minded Board which has been appointed to assist the Group achieve its aspirations and deliver its potential.
It meets on a regular basis and all have already made substantial progress.
Our strong balance sheet is currently delevered specifically to protect against any downside risk on future covenants and give us scope for assurance and flexibility to sensibly use free cash for dividends or acquisitions.
The balance sheet also provides us with good access to capital to take advantage of current and future potential to deliver longterm value to our shareholders.
The Board are recommending a final dividend of 7.0p per share resulting in a fullyear dividend of 10.0p per share.
The business is in strong shape with much potential remaining and has a simple and proven low risk but high growth strategy that will enable Ten Entertainment to continue to prosper further delight its customers more and deliver consistent and stronger returns for shareholders.
I strongly believe our business is well positioned in a growing sector of the wider leisure market and can continue to provide our customers with great value familyoriented entertainment differentiated to many leisure propositions.
This ought to be a compelling case for many shareholders seeking security of income returns coupled with longerterm prospects of capital upside.
Nick Basing
21 March 2018 This ought to be a compelling case for many shareholders seeking security of income returns coupled with longer term prospects of capital upside.
Strategic report  7 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc  We believe that the Groups commitment to people and their development in turn results in exceptional customer service.
We are pleased with the Groups performance during FY17 achieving the Boards expectations delivering total sales growth of 8.9% adjusted EBITDA growth of 14% and adjusted earnings per share of Reported profit after tax grew by 43%.
Putting families and friends at the heart of our strategy has been instrumental in driving our sustainable growth model.
Our strategy of organic growth growth through acquisition and growth through ongoing investment in our estate have all combined to support our growth during FY17.
Revenue grew by 8.9% to 71.0m when compared to the proforma 52week sales for FY16 proforma sales reflect comparison to the 52 weeks between week 253 of FY16 to adjust for the impact of the 53rd week in FY16 explained further on page 26.
This growth was driven by an encouraging combination of both likeforlike sales growth of 3.6% driven by a combination of spend per head and footfall and growth from the addition of new sites of 5.3%.
Three site acquisitions were completed during the year in line with our estate growth target range of two to four acquisitions per year.
On a 52week vs.
53week reported basis revenue grew by 5.5%.
Likeforlike sales growth was driven by our continuing focus on good value family entertainment improving our customer service standards and Net Promoter Score and our ongoing investment into the estate.
The refurbishments completed at the end of FY16 at five of the sites acquired in FY15 supported strong likeforlike growth in these sites in what was their second year under the Tenpin brand.
This is supportive of our unique Tenpinisation strategy our proven process of converting acquisitions to the T enpin model whereby on acquisition sites go through a sevenstep integration plan introducing new company controls and IT and embedding operational systems to create multichannel connectivity maximise yield and review for further capital investment all supported by our skilled people.
Over and above this we know there is further opportunity and potential for us to enhance our sales by better use of digital marketing.
We have increased the size of our contactable database by 25% during the year and recruited a new digital marketing Director to drive engagement with both our existing and potential new customers.
Group adjusted EBITDA on the same proforma basis grew by 14.4% to 19.0m FY16 PF 16.6m with growth driven by a combination of the likeforlike sales growth and sales growth from increasing the number of sites in the estate together with good underlying cost control from our selfhelp programmes.
These selfhelp programmes included the implementation of a new payroll management system late in FY16 and improved rents at four sites as a result of negotiated lease regears both of which combined to drive underlying operating cost reductions of around 1%.
On a 52week vs.
53week reported basis EBITDA grew by 8.0%.
As planned we made good further progress with our acquisition programme during FY17 completing the acquisitions of three sites in Blackburn Eastbourne and Rochdale.
Tenpinisation has been completed at all three sites.
Both Blackburn and Eastbourne were also refurbished during the year with Rochdale planned for refurbishment during
The sites have transitioned well to the Tenpin model and overall are performing in line with our original expectations.
We remain confident in the pipeline of acquisition opportunities as we look ahead and during FY18 we expect to grow the estate further in line with previous guidance of two to four sites per year.
We have made good early progress with this objective having completed the acquisition of two sites in Warrington and Chichester in February.
Chief Executives statement Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
Putting families and friends at the heart of our strategy has been instrumental in driving our sustainable growth model Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 8  Strategic report These sites have started their Tenpinisation programme and will undergo significant refurbishments during FY18.
During the second half of FY17 we completed refurbishments of existing estate sites in line with our plans at Derby Swansea and Leamington Spa together with a refurbishment at Ipswich acquired in FY16.
In total across both the existing estate and acquired sites six sites benefitted from Tenpinisation and refurbishment investment during FY17 at a total cost of 1.3m.
During FY18 we will continue to invest in our sites including a planned refurbishment and extension of our site in Fountain Park and selective returnfocused investment in refurbishments at a small number of further sites in the existing estate.
Finally on investment expenditure and in line with our previous guidance we completed the installation of the innovative Pins and Strings technology at a further five sites Croydon Parrs Wood Northampton Glasgow and Derby during the second half of FY17 at a total cost of Pins and Strings is an innovative new generation bowling machine that requires less maintenance is simpler to operate and provides improved reliability for customers demonstrated by improvements in the key games played per stop metric.
We are encouraged with the early results at these sites and evidence confirms that Pins and Strings has the potential to both improve the cost efficiency of our sites and also improve the overall customer experience.
As a result of the successful trial we now plan to roll out Pins and Strings across the estate over time and expect to introduce the technology to around a further ten sites during FY18.
Securing the future of our estate continues to be a key priority.
During FY17 we completed lease regears both extending the leases and improving the terms at Derby Colchester and Stafford reduced the rent at Maidenhead and also successfully renewed an expiring lease at our site in Swansea.
We will continue to look for opportunities to both improve rental terms and secure the future of our estate during FY18.
I stated in our interim results in September that I was pleased with how our teams throughout the business performed during a very busy period which also included the completion of a successful IPO process and I am delighted with how they continued to perform during a busy second half allowing us to deliver results in line with our strategy.
This hard work together with the Groups focus on people achieved deserved recognition from the Great Place to Work awards and enabled the Group to maintain the prestigious Investors in People Gold standard.
We believe that the Groups commitment to people and their development in turn results in exceptional customer service thereby delivering an exceptional experience.
As a result we achieved significant improvements in our Net Promoter Score during the year moving from 49% in FY16 to 66% in FY17.
I would like to thank all our colleagues for their support in providing our customers with a great experience.
Outlook
We have plans in place to continue to drive growth in line with our strategy during the current financial year and expect to perform in line with the Boards expectations.
We continue to believe that there is further potential for growth in the experiential leisure market and the Group is well positioned to benefit from this trend.
Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
21 March 2018 We have acquired three sites this year and plan to acquire two to four per year for the medium term Growth through acquisition of existing bowling sites is a key part of our strategy and we are pleased to have acquired three sites this year which is good progress on our strategy to add between two and four sites to our portfolio per year.
We look for sites in good locations that are typically underinvested and that we feel can be improved by our Tenpinisation process which aligns the sites with the Tenpin brand and processes.
There is a good identified pipeline of sites that match our criteria and we are confident we can continue to deliver on our strategy.
Acquisition performance
SITES PER YEAR Blackburn Eastbourne
Strategic report  9 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Operating review In April 2017 as part of its IPO process the Group outlined its strategy to the market.
The strategy has been designed to deliver sustainable growth in three key areas organic growth growth through investment in refurbishment and technology and site acquisition and Tenpinisation.
Organic growth Likeforlike sales growth in the period was 3.6%.
Encouragingly this growth was driven by a combination of both increased footfall and higher spend per head per visit.
Spend per head grew by 0.6% in the year to 14.21 FY16 PF 14.12 with footfall growing by 3.0%.
Likeforlike sales growth was underpinned by our continued focus on offering our customers great value family entertainment through our wellestablished deals and promotions our ongoing focus on customer service to improve Net Promoter Scores and an improved reliability of our lanes as measured by games played per stop.
In addition our investment into refurbishments at both acquired sites and sites within the existing estate are delivering good returns and higher sales.
There was growth across all four of our sales segments bowling food beverage and other amusements with bowling revenue growing at the strongest rate as we improved both the quality and reliability of our offer.
Games played per stop is our key measure of reliability and this metric improved by 39% to 259 FY16 186 during the year underpinning the growth in bowling revenue.
During FY18 we will develop our online presence primarily through focusing on visibility and conversion of our booking sites and by improving our CRM programme to engage more frequently and more personally with customers.
The newly created and recently recruited role of Digital Marketing Director will be instrumental in developing and focusing our plans in this area.
Our CRM database is an important tool in this process and our contactable database has grown by 25% since FY16.
Our online revenue represented 22% of our sales in FY17 and we see an opportunity to leverage this to further grow sales.
We will also continue to look for opportunities to leverage our integrated technology platforms drive ancillary revenue spend and improve the overall customer experience.
The Group completed the planned disposal and closure of its underperforming site in Chelmsford during FY17 with the site closing on 19 July 2017.
This site had a detrimental impact on trading with sales declines of 37% year on year contributing a reduction of 0.4% to the Groups overall likeforlike sales.
There are currently no further plans to exit any other sites in the estate.
Inward investment During FY17 we completed the refurbishment of six further sites within the estate three from the existing estate Derby Leamington Spa and Swansea and three from acquisition sites Blackburn Ipswich and Eastbourne.
These refurbishments continue to improve the overall quality of both our estate and the customer experience and are on track to perform in line with our expectations for return on investment.
A planned refurbishment and annex extension at Fountain Park in 2017 was delayed by planning and legal work and is now expected to happen during the second half of FY18.
We also completed the rebranding of a further eight sites to the new Tenpin branding and logo during FY17.
A total of 37 sites in the estate have now been completed with plans in place for the remaining sites dependent upon planning being granted by the relevant local authority.
This underpins the strength of our single brand with the new brand logo designed to reflect that we put the customer at the heart of everything we do.
In addition during the second half of FY17 a further five sites were converted to Pins and Strings extending the trial following the successful introduction into Feltham at the end of FY16.
Pins and Strings is an innovative new generation bowling machine that requires less maintenance is simpler to operate and provides improved reliability for customers demonstrated by improvements in the key games played per stop metric.
The initial signs from the trial have been encouraging in particular we have seen an impact from improved reliability of the lanes with games played per stop averaging over 1000 in the trial sites compared to 259 for the estate overall.
This improvement in reliability has enabled us to improve lane utilisation at peak times leading to improved revenue and higher levels of Net Promoter Scores NPS with the trial sites reporting NPS in excess of 70%.
We believe this technology has the potential to transform the operation of the business.
Installation costs during the trial have been broadly in line with our expectations at c.
200k per site we therefore anticipate a further capital cost of c.
7.2m in addition to the c.
1.0m spent to date to fully roll this out to the current estate of 42 sites.
We are encouraged by the performance of this new technology and the benefits are also broadly in line with our original expectations through the combination of both cost reductions and improved revenue from better reliability.
Delivering sustainable growth in three key areas Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 10  Strategic report  We also completed the rebranding of a further eight sites to the new T enpin branding and logo during FY17.
A total of 37 sites in the estate have now been completed.
Cardiff Tenpin Strategic report  11 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc  The Group believes that engaged colleagues provide better customer experiences.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 12  Strategic report Inward investment continued We therefore expect the returns on investment to be broadly in line with our expectations.
The Group has a strong relationship with its main bowling equipment supplier Qubica AMF and we are currently working with them to develop an accelerated manufacturing and rollout plan to introduce Pins and Strings across the estate.
At this point we anticipate introducing Pins and Strings on a phased basis to around a further 10 sites during FY18.
We also plan to invest at two to three sites within the existing estate during FY18 including the delayed refurbishment and addition of an annex extension to include four additional lanes at Fountain Park originally planned for FY17 together with selective refurbishments at two or three further sites.
The Group will continue to identify selective opportunities to invest in the quality of its sites through both refurbishment and ongoing maintenance programmes.
Site acquisitions and Tenpinisation Net new space contributed 5.3% of the total proforma sales growth of 8.9% proforma compared to weeks 253 of FY16 during the year.
The Group continued Tenpinisation at Worcester and Ipswich during the year which were both acquired during the second half of FY16.
Site Tenpinisation including rebranding was completed at Worcester in January 2017.
Investment in refurbishment work at Ipswich including rebranding was completed during August 2017.
Good progress with the strategy to add between two and four sites per year was made during FY17 with the completion of three site acquisitions at good locations in Blackburn Eastbourne and Rochdale.
These three sites were acquired for a total cost of 2.9m including fees.
The Group believes that following Tenpinisation these sites will deliver a return on investment in line with our expectations of around 30%.
A major refurbishment was completed at Blackburn during the first half and Eastbourne was refurbished in the second half.
All three sites are performing in line with the Boards expectations.
We plan to refurbish our acquired sites at Worcester and Rochdale during FY18.
The Group remains confident that there is an attractive pipeline of acquisitions available and will continue to seek to identify the right opportunities to continue to grow the estate.
The Group has made progress in FY18 by adding the acquisition of a further two sites at Warrington and Chichester at a total cost of 2.7m including fees.
These sites are well located but underinvested.
The
Group will significantly invest into branding and refurbishment at both sites during the first half of FY18 bringing these sites to the wellinvested standard of a Tenpin site whilst introducing the rest of the systems processes and controls that have now been proven as part of our Tenpinisation process.
Further opportunities to acquire sites will continue to be explored during FY18.
People and culture People and culture remains an important focus recognised with accreditation from the Great Place to Work 2017 best workplaces achieved during the first half of the financial year.
This is a significant achievement for the Group and complements its Investors in People Gold status.
The Group believes that engaged colleagues provide better customer experiences and it measures how customers value their experience using Net Promoter Scores.
Net Promoter Score for FY17 was 66% FY16 49%.
This strong improvement is driven by the Groups continued focus on its colleagues which in turn helps make each customers visit a memorable one.
The Group has also successfully recruited two important roles to its senior management team during the second half of the year.
The roles of Digital Marketing Director and Operations Director will both support our ambitious plans for growth during FY18.
Strategic report  13 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc The Group operates in the tenpin bowling subsector of the broader UK leisure market which is estimated to be worth approximately 80bn annually.
Within that market approximately 10bn relates to family entertainment including cinema theatre live entertainment and visitor attractions including amusement parks and other activities.
Tenpin bowling which has been estimated to have grown by 20% in the last three years represented approximately 285m at the end of 2016 which is therefore around 3% of the wider family entertainment market.
Growth in the bowling market is thought to have outgrown many other leisure sectors over the past three years.
This bowling market is expected to see estimated overall growth of 23% between 2016 and 2021.
Significant investment from leading operators such as Tenpin together with market consolidation has helped this revival.
From 2013 to 2017 revenue at Tenpin has grown at a compound annual growth rate of 11.7%.
A consumer survey carried out indicated that only 32% of UK adults participated in tenpin bowling over the 12 months to March 2017.
The Directors believe that there is a significant opportunity to continue to grow participation and engagement levels by targeting infrequent bowlers through the Groups enhanced Customer Relationship Management CRM programme and maintaining a broader entertainment offering to attract a wider demographic group to the sites.
Competitive landscape There are approximately 320 tenpin bowling sites currently operating in the UK and the market remains relatively fragmented.
The ownership of these sites is broken down between Major Multiples including the Group Hollywood Bowl MFA Bowl Big Apple and Namco Funscape which operate between five and 58 sites Smaller Multiples operating fewer than five sites and Independents operating only one site.
Market overview A significant opportunity The Group operates in the tenpin bowling subsector of the broader UK leisure market which is estimated to be worth approximately 80bn annually.
The Smaller Multiples and Independents in aggregate operate approximately 170 sites.
Due to the structure of the market the Group believes that there are further opportunities for it to acquire additional sites either individually from Independents or small groups of sites that other Smaller Multiples or Major Multiples may be seeking to divest through portfolio rationalisation.
The Group has identified a pipeline of approximately 60 sites which may be suitable for acquisition taking into account a range of criteria including the local demographic competition recent trading history type of location e. and accessibility.
Feltham
The first of Tenpins sites to trial Pins and Strings Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 14  Strategic report  The Group has evolved the traditional tenpin bowling model by providing a broader family entertainment offering.
Tenpins market position and customers The Directors believe that the Group has evolved the traditional tenpin bowling model by providing a broader family entertainment offering.
The typical revenue mix of UK tenpin bowling operators over the last decade has been 57% bowling and 43% other revenue principally food and beverage and amusement machines whereas the Groups revenue mix for FY17 was bowling 47% amusement machines and entertainment activities 26% beverages 18% and food 9%.
The Directors believe that the focus on broadening the entertainment offering is one of the reasons why the Group has outperformed the wider market and has increased its market share and that a broader family entertainment offering makes the Group more appealing to a wider customer base and encourages customers to spend more time and money at the sites.
Other key factors include site refurbishments improved booking processes including simpler online booking and pricing strategies that deliver value for money and maximise footfall.
The Directors also believe that Tenpins approach to site selection for acquisitions and its subsequent Tenpinisation approach have contributed to a strong competitive position.
The majority of the Groups sites are located on retailleisure parks along with cinemas and casual dining restaurants.
These sites are also in most cases very accessible and the Directors believe that colocation of the sites with other complementary leisure activities can help drive incremental footfall.
Tenpin bowling can also represent a lower cost accessible family entertainment activity compared to a number of other activities such as the cinema or a meal at a casual dining venue.
Outlook
Overall growth in the tenpin bowling market looks set to continue in the period to at least 2021 supported by the expectation of further market consolidation and investment from the leading players.
Whilst the bowling market is subject to changes in trends in consumer leisure spend which in turn may be impacted by slower wage growth and higher cost inflation it is anticipated that the potential for growth in the sector is underpinned by the ongoing investment in refurbishments and technology and therefore associated improvement in consumer perception encouraging increased visitor frequency and higher levels of spend per head.
Main brands and operators Tenpin Ltd 42 sites Other operators Independents 170 sites Hollywood 58 sites MFA 29 sites Namco 8 sites Big Apple 8 sites Strategic report  15 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Business model We love to make friends and families happy we entertain and enthral profitably Engaged colleagues Single modern brand Nationwide locations Family entertainment offering Technology and innovation Yield management
Tenpin
Framework
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 16  Strategic report Nationwide locations We currently have 42 bowling centres located across England Scotland and Wales.
Our centres operate with c.24 lanes and on average have a footprint of around 30000 square feet.
Our centres are principally situated at prime locations on retail or leisure parks and are typically colocated with family leisure brands such as cinemas and casual dining restaurants.
We invest in our sites to ensure they are well maintained and remain modern and relevant to our customers.
We continually look for opportunities to grow the size of our estate in attractive locations principally through acquisition of centres from other operators.
Family entertainment offering We offer our customers a broad range of familyfocused entertainment centred around a growing trend of competitive socialising.
Our product offering comprises bowling family amusements pool tabletennis soft play and Sector 7 laser games.
These products are also complemented by a tailored food and beverage offer.
Our products are designed to offer our customers multiple reasons to visit and to increase both their dwell time and average spend per visit when they do.
We continually evaluate new opportunities to improve and expand our familyoriented product range.
Technology and innovation Tenpin operates from a fully integrated technology platform.
Our scoring system and our booking system are interconnected allowing us to offer realtime lane availability through all of our booking channels online via our contact centre or in each of our bowling centres.
This improves both our lane utilisation and the customer experience.
We operate laneside food and beverage ordering through our iServe technology which allows our customers to experience our range of food and beverage products without interrupting their bowling game.
We are always looking for innovations to transform our business such as the Pins and Strings technology which we introduced into a number of sites during 2017 improving both the efficiency of our operating model and the reliability of our bowling equipment which in turn enhances the customer experience.
Yield management We operate a differentiated pricing model focused on maximising footfall yield and dwell times whilst ensuring we offer our customers excellent value for money.
We look to utilise our capacity efficiently at both peak and offpeak times through our wellestablished tariff deals and promotions model.
Our promotions model offers customers real value for money at offpeak times across four out of seven days per week with offers such as Tenpin Tuesday offering 50% off bowling and selected food and beverages.
Our fullprice tariff coupled with our realtime lane management system allows us to maximise revenue at peak occupancy periods.
Engaged colleagues Our ability to deliver our business model is underpinned by our c.1100 dedicated colleagues who serve our customers every day and we are committed to their ongoing training and development.
We are focused on developing a great employee culture which has been independently recognised by attaining Investors in People Gold standard since 2014 and accreditation as a Great Place to Work.
In addition our business is led by an established and experienced management team both at the bowling centres and at the support centre.
Single modern brand All of our family entertainment centres operate under the Tenpin brand.
The Tenpin logo is a contemporary and modern design well recognised by our customers.
Our logo features iconography synonymous with bowling balls and pins and the heart at the centre represents our mission to put the customer at the heart of everything we do.
Strategic report  17 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Strategy Longterm value for stakeholders through investmentled growth Ten Entertainment Group is a leading UK operator of bowling and family entertainment centres.
We operate with a scale advantage against the majority of the bowling sector derived from a wellinvested infrastructure.
Our strategy has been developed with the intention of creating longterm value for our stakeholders through investmentled growth.
The Group is supported by a strong balance sheet and generates funds through its activities which allows us to both continue to invest in growth and offer an attractive dividend yield to our shareholders.
Ten Entertainment Groups vision is to deliver a fun and exciting customer experience for every customer.
The Tenpin brand offers excellent customer service and value for money family entertainment.
We continually invest in training and technologyled innovation to enhance the efficiency quality and value of our offering while increasing the frequency of customer visits in a happy vibrant and safe environment.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 18  Strategic report Organic growth We will continue to increase likeforlike sales through increased capacity management using the unique Lane Arrangement System LAS which increases lane slots and maximises revenue per available lane maximising pricing and retail strategy through tariffs deals and promotions and simplified operations to increase average spend per head and increase revenue during noncore sessions offer products and services that encourage repeat visits increased dwell times and higher spend per head from our customers attracting new customers through the development of our CRM capabilities and maximising our cost efficiency through increasing scale and improved operational efficiency.
Inward capital investment in existing estate We will continue to look for opportunities to invest in our estate targeting three to four site refurbishments annually to maintain a modern and relevant offer for our customers.
Our bowling centres typically operate on a six to seven year refurbishment cycle.
Returns on investment are expected to track the historical average of 49% for the current refurbishment cycle.
Growth through the acquisition of undermanaged sites There is significant opportunity to continue to grow the scale of the business in the medium term through the acquisition of bowling centres.
We plan to acquire two to four existing bowling sites each year from other operators and improve their operations by converting them into Tenpin centres as per the current Tenpinisation rebranding strategy.
Culture people and systems We love to make friends and families happy we entertain and enthral profitably.
We believe that engaged colleagues lead to higher levels of customer satisfaction which we measure through our Net Promoter Score.
We achieve this through our people by focusing on their continued training and development providing an effective and safe environment to work in and rewarding them for their hard work and continued loyalty.
Returns for our shareholders We believe our business model and our strategy will drive strong operating margins and high returns on capital with strong cash generation from mature sites.
Embedded growth within our business model and strategy is supported by a welldeveloped pipeline of acquisition sites.
This all supports our dividend policy to distribute approximately 60% of adjusted profit after tax to ultimately provide investors with good levels of returns on their investment.
Shareholder returns
Inward capital investment in existing estate Growth through the acquisition of undermanaged sites Strategic report  19 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Key performance indicators KPIs Likeforlike sales % This is a very important measure of growth in the business and this period the Groups main operating company T enpin Limited reported a 3.6% 2016 2.8% fullyear increase in likeforlike sales.
Proforma fullyear sales increased by 8.9% from 65.2m for the 52week period ended 1 January 2017 to 71.0m for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 which was made up of 3.6% likeforlike growth and 5.3% net new space growth from the three sites acquired during the year.
52week period ended 31 December 2017 Proforma 52week period ended 1 January 2017 Gross profit % The conversion of sales to gross margin is reviewed across our sites by looking at the conversion of bowling bar food amusements and machine sales into gross margin.
The total trading gross profit achieved for the period was 88.6% 2016 88.0%.
Income from machines continued to be a key strategic focus during the period for Tenpin Limited as income from machines contributed 20.1% 2016 20.0% of total sales for Tenpin Limited.
Bowling remains the largest contributor to sales contributing 47.5% 2016 46.7% of sales.
Net debt m The Groups net debt is 4.7m 2016 7.8m being bank borrowings of 6.0m 2016 12.9m plus finance leases of 4.3m 2016 5.1m less cash and cash equivalents of 5.6m 2016 10.2m.
The decrease in borrowings arose as part of the IPO when existing bank facilities were repaid and a new agreement entered into with the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Though net debt has decreased by 3.1m the payment of 3.1m in IPO costs as disclosed in note 6 to the financial statements impacted on this metric.
Adjusted basic earnings per share As calculated per note 9 in the financial statements the Group reports an adjusted earnings per share which accounts for the underlying earnings of the business and excludes exceptional oneoff costs such as the IPO costs incurred during the year.
The adjusted earnings per share for the year is 16.2p 2016 14.8p.
Financial KPIs The Groups solid performance and results during the period can be seen across many metrics and KPIs that are reviewed by the Group to understand our operational and financial performance.
Adjusted EBITDA m The Groups underlying operational performance is measured using this metric calculated as operating profit before depreciation amortisation exceptional items and other income.
Adjusted EBITDA for the period of 19.0m 2016 17.6m was up by 1.4m due to 0.7m of contribution from the three sites acquired during the year and 0.7m from increased sales strong gross profit and good operating cost control in the core estate.
52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Proforma 52week period ended 1 January 2017 52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Proforma 52week period ended 1 January 2017 52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Proforma 52week period ended 1 January 2017 52week period ended 31 December 2017 Proforma 52week period ended 1 January 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 20  Strategic report Games played per stop GPS GPS looks at the number of games played that are not interrupted by a breakdown.
This improved by 73 to 259 2016 186 for the period which has been driven an increased focus on this key metric and by the introduction of a more reliable technology in Pins and Strings across an additional five sites during the year.
This is an important statistic that reflects the quality of service provided by the business as well as determining the impact of the benefit of rolling out the Pins and Strings project at sites.
52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Nonfinancial KPIs The Group also reviews the following key nonfinancial KPIs Net Promoter Score NPS % The NPS for the period was up to 66% 2016 49% and is a measure of our customer service and the loyalty and engagement of the Groups customers.
It has increased from prior year due to the continued focus on the customers journey in our sites and thus increasing satisfaction.
Factors such as improving games played per stop and hence the customer experience are fundamental to this.
Continued training of our staff rewarding our colleagues for great service and memorable mentions from customers continually reviewing our food and drinks offer and evolving our gaming machines estate with changing trends and tastes continue to see a positive impact on NPS.
52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Web and digital metrics Increased focus has been put on the Groups web and mobile traffic and digital social engagement.
Our website visits are 3710354 2016 3275169 which is 13% up on last year.
Collecting more data on our customers gives us a stronger platform for our CRM and with our partners we have been better able to focus our marketing campaigns and digital media to drive repeat business and we have seen a 28% growth with repeat bookers totalling 50698 up from 39703 in 2016.
Our total contactable database grew by 25% during the year to 1.1m contacts.
53week period ended 1 January 2017 52week period ended 31 December 2017 Website visits 52week period ended 31 December 2017 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Website repeat booking % Strategic report  21 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc  With an excellent proposition that is designed to take advantage of the growth of customer demand for experiential activities Ten Entertainment Group has much potential.
Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 22  Strategic report Risk management The Group recognises that the effective management of risk is key in achieving its strategic objectives.
Ultimate responsibility for the Groups risk management framework sits with our Board.
During this first year as a listed business the Group has focused on introducing a risk management process to identify evaluate and monitor the risks it faces.
Each risk has been assessed to determine the likelihood of occurrence together with the potential impact on the Group.
Board
Executive management Department leaders
Evaluate risk impact and likelihood Identify mitigation approach Update risk register
Strategic report  23 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Principal risks and uncertainties The business faces a number of risks on an ongoing basis.
The Board has undertaken a robust assessment of what it believes are the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model its performance delivery of its strategy or its ongoing viability.
The following table summarises these principal risks their possible impact and how they are managed or mitigated.
The risks in this table have been assessed on a multiplier effect basis according to our current view of the likelihood of occurrence the potential severity being the financial impact and the controls available to mitigate the risk.
The environment in which we operate is constantly evolving new risks may arise and the potential likelihood and impact of known risks may change.
These risks therefore represent a snapshot of what the Board believes are the principal risks and are not an exhaustive list of all risks the Group faces.
The full annual review process captures changes in these risks and also changes in the direction of travel of any given risk.
The Board has considered the risk posed by Brexit and has noted that there is the possibility of risk associated with potential labour cost increases and consumer uncertainty.
The Board considers our exposure to labour cost pressures to be mitigated by our broad national presence and limited Central London exposure.
The Board also believes that as a lowfrequency and lowticket activity bowling is less exposed to a change in consumer sentiment than many other discretionary spend items.
Therefore at the moment the Board does not consider Brexit to be a principal risk to the business model but will continue to monitor and evaluate the situation.
The Board regularly monitors changes to the regulatory environment in which the Group operates.
This includes monitoring and evaluating potential impacts from changes to regulation of competition gambling licensing health and safety and General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
The Group has robust processes controls and Board oversight of the management of regulatory risk in place including continuous training of colleagues site compliance audits and use of independent expert advisers where appropriate.
The Board does not currently consider any individual area of regulation change to constitute a material risk to the business but through its risk management process regularly reviews and evaluates the impact any changes in legislation may have.
Risk management approach Risks and uncertainties Deterioration of assets over time Ageing of the estate Loss of key personnel Impact on sales costs and customer experience The Group operates sites that have high footfall and high usage in particular at peak times.
There is a risk that without the right level of ongoing investment the quality of the customer experience declines impacting the customer experience and likelihood of return visits.
The Group generates cash from its operating activities and ensures enough cash is prioritised for an ongoing maintenance and refurbishment programme.
The Group has a management development programme in place to provide a pipeline of future centre managers familiar with the Tenpin business model.
Operational
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 24  Strategic report Risks and uncertainties Risk management approach Change in economic conditions Increases in interest ratesinflation Changes in consumer disposable income Impact on sales and ability to deliver our growth plans TEGs Tenpin bowling business is based exclusively in the UK and so is exposed to UK economic conditions and consumer confidence.
As a leisure activity bowling may be affected by the general level of consumer spending on leisure.
The Board believes that as a relatively lowfrequency and lowticket activity bowling should withstand an economic downturn.
The Group continually reviews its product offer its value proposition and the quality of its estate to improve the customer experience.
Economic climate Risk management approach Risks and uncertainties Risk of cyberattackterrorism Failure or unavailability of operational andor IT infrastructure GDPR risk Impact on sales costs and reputation A major incident could impact the Groups ability to keep trading.
It manages this risk by maintaining and testing business continuity plans and establishing remote IT disaster recovery capabilities.
There has been an increase in the level of highprofile cyberattacks.
Cybersecurity is of great importance to the Group given the level of customer data it holds.
The Group adopts a multifaceted approach to protection and regularly reviews the level of monitoring and threat protection systems that are in place.
Business interruption Risk management approach Risks and uncertainties Sudden failure of key supplier Impact on sales costs and customer experience The Group has a number of key suppliers that provide its bowling equipment its gaming machines and its food and beverage products.
Sudden failure of these suppliers could impact the Groups ability to offer its customers the level of experience they expect.
Regular meetings are held between the Chief Commercial Officer and the Groups key suppliers to discuss both operational issues and future growth plans.
The Group works with marketleading suppliers in these fields.
The Group maintains Service Level Agreements SLAs with its food and beverage suppliers and whilst failure may lead to shortterm disruption alternative suppliers could be introduced at short notice.
Major supplier failure Strategic report  25 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Financial summary 52 weeks to 31 December
52 weeks to 1 January 53 weeks to 1 January Revenue 71040 65218 67319 Cost of sales 8119 7502 7738 Gross margin 62921 57716 59581 Total operating costs 37218 35709 36477 Centrally allocated overheads 2583 2254 2316 Support office 4108 3131 3183 Group adjusted EBITDA 19012 16622 17605 Depreciation and amortisation 5247 4345 4426 Net interest 775 1290 1315 Group adjusted profit before tax 12990 10987 11864 Exceptional items 4986 1902 1902 Lossprofit on disposal of assets 356 58 58 Amortisation of acquisition intangibles 607 1307 1307 Shareholder loan note interest 1152 3836 3909 Adjustments in respect of onerous lease and impairment provisions 1403 272 272 Gain on derecognition of finance leases  904 904 Profit before tax 7292 4632 5436 Taxation 2111 1629 1805 Of which taxation attributable to Group adjusted profit 2457 2068 2276 Profit after tax 5181 3003 3631 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share 8.0p 4.6p 5.6p Adjusted basic earnings per share 16.2p 13.7p 14.8p Fullyear dividend 10.0p FY16 53rd week impact FY16 reported figures as disclosed in the prospectus issued on 12 April 2017 included a 53rd week in order to allow the yearend date for 2016 to remain close to the end of December.
In order to provide a more useful comparative to understand the underlying trading performance proforma PF sales EBITDA and profit numbers for the 52week period to 1 January 2017 representing weeks 253 of FY16 have been provided.
These proforma numbers exclude FY16 week 1 we 3 January 2016 which is most comparable to FY16 week 53 we 1 January 2017.
These weeks include the key Christmas holiday trading period in each year and are significant trading weeks for the Group.
Balance sheet and cash flow performance are reported unadjusted versus the yearend date.
Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer
Financial review
Good track record of profitable growth These are nonIFRS measures used by the Group in understanding its underlying earnings.
Group adjusted EBITDA consists of earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation costs exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets adjustments to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
Group adjusted profit before tax is defined as profit before exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets amortisation of acquisition intangibles shareholder loan note interest adjustments to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
Adjusted basic earnings per share represents earnings per share based on adjusted profit after tax.
Likeforlike sales are a measure of growth of sales adjusted for new or divested sites over a comparable trading period.
Cost of sales and operating expenses are presented on the basis as analysed by management.
Cost of sales in the financial summary are determined by management as consisting of the direct bar food vending amusements and gaming machine related costs.
Statutory costs of sales reflected in the Statement of comprehensive income also include the staff and call centre costs incurred by the sites.
Operating expenses are split into more detail in the financial summary to obtain statutory operating profit with overheads support office amortisation depreciation and exceptional costs reflected separately.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 26  Strategic report  Our investmentled strategy focuses on profitable growth.
Proven returns from acquisitions and refurbishment coupled with organic sales growth and good cost control supported our 14% growth in EBITDA during FY17.
52 weeks to 31 December
52 weeks to 1 January 53 weeks to 1 January Revenue 71040 65218 67319 Group adjusted EBITDA 19012 16622 17605 Group adjusted profit before tax 12990 10987 11864 Profit after tax 5181 3003 3631
52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Number of bowling centres 40 38 Likeforlike sales growth 3.6% 2.8% Net new space sales growth 5.3% 22.8% 53rd week impact  1.5% Total sales growth 8.9% 27.1% 1 Proforma growth measured against the 52 weeks to 1 January 2017 weeks 253 of FY16.
Total sales were up 5.5% at 71.0m FY16 67.3m on a reported basis.
Proforma sales for the comparable period were up 8.9% FY16 PF 65.2m.
Likeforlike sales were up 3.6%.
Net new space contributed 5.3% in the period on a proforma basis.
The drivers of this overall sales performance have been analysed as part of the preceding operating review.
Gross margin The reported gross margin rate was up 10 basis points year on year at 88.6% FY16 PF 88.5%.
The gross margin rate combined with the growth in reported sales resulted in gross margin being up 9.0% to 62.9m FY16 PF 57.7m.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis gross margin increased by 5.6% FY16 59.6m.
Operating costs 52 weeks to 31 December
52 weeks to 1 January 53 weeks to 1 January Site labour incl.
Rent 11191 11100 11318 Other property costs 6975 6677 6809 Other operating costs 5157 4871 4962 Total operating costs 37218 35709 36477 Total operating costs increased by 4.2% to 37.2m FY16 PF 35.7m principally driven by costs associated with the net additional sites opened during the period together with the fullyear effect of the sites acquired in the previous financial year.
Underlying operating costs excluding net new space were down 0.8% driven principally by a reduction in underlying rent costs as a result of the rent regears achieved at four sites together with good labour cost control supported by the implementation of the Fourth Hospitality payroll management system in December 2016.
These cost efficiencies more than offset underlying cost inflation.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis costs increased by 2.0%.
Central administration costs Centrally allocated overheads were up 15% at 2.6m FY16 PF 2.3m mostly driven by increased levels of expense in marketing IT and training to support the business growth plans.
Support office costs were up 31% at 4.1m FY16 PF 3.1m principally driven by cost inflation recruitment costs for the previously discussed senior management roles and the impact of additional PLC related expenses.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis central overheads increased by 12% and support office costs by 29%.
Strategic report  27 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA is up 14.4% at 19.0m FY16 PF 16.6m.
The growth in EBITDA on a proforma basis is driven by a combination of the growth from likeforlike sales and good operational cost control within the core estate together with the benefit of the additional sites within the estate.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis EBITDA grew by 8.0% FY16 17.6m.
Adjusted EBITDA is considered by management to be a key performance metric for the business as this is calculated excluding nonrecurring costs to provide a measure that is more reflective of the underlying performance of the Group.
Depreciation
Depreciation increased by 21% to 5.2m FY16 PF 4.3m in the year principally as a result of the growth in the overall size of the estate combined with the investment in refurbishments at five of the six FY15 acquisition sites late in FY16 together with investment in refurbishment at a further six sites during FY17.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis depreciation increased by 19%.
Finance costs 52 weeks to 31 December
52 weeks to 1 January 53 weeks to 1 January Interest on bank debt 260 558 569 Amortisation of bank financing costs 112 250 255 Finance lease interest charges 218 327 333 Other finance costs 185 155 158 Net interest excluding shareholder loan note interest 775 1290 1315 Net interest excluding shareholder loan note interest decreased by 40% to 0.8m FY16 PF 1.3m principally driven by the refinancing of bank debt at both a lower level and on more favourable terms together with a reduction in finance lease charges as a result of the derecognition of two finance leases at the end of FY16.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis net interest decreased by 41%.
Group adjusted profit before tax Group adjusted profit before tax was 13.0m FY16 PF 11.0m driven by the movements outlined above.
Exceptional items Exceptional items recorded in the period were 5.0m FY16 1.9m.
This includes a charge of 3.1m for costs relating directly to the IPO.
Other exceptional items of 1.9m were driven by the writeoff of capitalised loan arrangement fees in relation to existing term loans repaid on completion of the IPO 0.7m legal costs in association with the bank refinancing 0.1m legal costs associated with site acquisitions 0.3m other propertyrelated fees and costs principally relating to lease regears and renewals 0.5m and other professional fees and oneoff costs 0.2m.
Disposal of assets The loss on disposal of assets of 0.4m FY16 gain of 0.1m is largely driven by the removal of bowling equipment leading to a loss on disposal of 0.3m in relation to the replacement of the traditional pinsetters with Pins and Strings machines in the five trial sites.
Amortisation of acquisition intangibles The amortisation of acquisition intangibles was a charge of 0.6m FY16 1.3m.
Shareholder loan note interest Shareholder loan note interest charges decreased by 70% to 1.2m FY16 PF 3.8m representing the interest payable against the balance of loan notes FY16 42.4m up until 10 April 2017.
The shareholder loan notes were converted to equity as part of the IPO process there will therefore be no further interest charge incurred in future years in relation to these loan notes.
On a 53week FY16 reported basis interest charges decreased by 71%.
Adjustments in respect of onerous lease and impairment provisions The adjustment in respect of onerous lease and impairment provisions is a credit of 1.4m FY16 charge of 0.3m.
The credit principally reflects improved performance together with rent reductions achieved and the exit of an underperforming site in Chelmsford.
Gain on derecognition of finance leases The gain on derecognition of finance leases was nil FY16 credit of 0.9m.
Taxation
Taxation attributable to Group adjusted profit before tax was 2.5m FY16 PF 2.1m representing an effective tax rate of 18.9% FY16 PF 18.8%.
Taxation attributable to items outside of Group adjusted profit was a credit of 0.3m FY16 PF 0.4m.
The total tax charge for the year was 2.1m FY16 PF 1.6m.
Financial review continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 28  Strategic report Profit after tax Profit after tax grew by 73% to 5.2m FY16 PF 3.0m.
Group adjusted profit after tax increased by 18% to 10.6m FY16 PF On a 53week FY16 reported basis profit after tax increased by 43%.
Number of shares and earnings per share The number of shares for the purpose of calculating basic earnings per share was 65m.
This represents the average number of issued ordinary shares.
The earnings per share was Adjusted basic earnings per share grew by 18% to 16.2p FY16 PF 13.7p.
FY16 earnings per share has been restated to reflect the new Group capital structure.
Dividends
The Board decided with its interim results in September to announce a dividend for FY17 based on the fullyear earnings for the Group and not pro rata since Admission in April as previously stated reflecting its confidence in the Groups ability to deliver its longterm plans.
It is therefore recommending a final dividend of 7.0p.
This takes the fullyear dividend to 10.0p per share.
The final dividend subject to approval by shareholders at the AGM will be paid on 5 July 2018.
The exdividend date is 24 May 2018 and the record date is 25 May 2018.
Balance sheet As at 31 December 1 January 2017 Movement
Goodwill and other intangible assets 26661 25742 919 Property plant and equipment 34891 34720 171 Inventories 1356 1339 17 Trade and other receivables 3521 3346 175 Cash and cash equivalents 5571 10185 4614 72000 75332 3332
Finance lease liabilities 4245 5149 904 Bank borrowings 5845 12120 6275 Trade and other payables and provisions 6758 9632 2874 Shareholder loan notes 5 42435 42435 Other liabilities 1959 1953 6 18807 71289 52482 Net assets 53193 4043 49150 Net assets as at 31 December 2017 were 53.2m an increase of 49.2m versus the balance sheet date at 1 January 2017 FY16 4.0m equivalent to 81.8 pence per share.
The increase in net assets is primarily a result of the conversion of the loan notes to equity as part of the IPO transaction.
Other movements include an increase of 0.9m in goodwill and other intangible assets to 26.7m driven by the addition of goodwill arising on the acquisition of new sites.
Analysis of the movement in cash and cash equivalents and bank borrowings is provided within the cash flow statement on page 30.
In addition there was a decrease in trade and other payables and provisions principally driven by the reduction in onerous lease and impairment provisions together with a lower level of capital accruals and other smaller provision movements.
Net debt analysis As at 31 December 1 January 2017 Movement Closing cash and cash equivalents 5571 10185 4614 Bank loans 6000 12906 6906 Bank net debt 429 2721 2292 Shareholder loan notes  42435 42435 Finance leases 4245 5149 904 Statutory net debt 4674 50305 45631 Strategic report  29 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Net debt analysis continued Bank net debt prefinance leases decreased by 84% to 0.4m FY16 2.7m driven by the movements in cash analysed in the following cash flow statement.
The cash outflow during the year was also impacted by the level of exceptional items principally driven by the Groups IPO costs.
Cash flow 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January 2017 Movement Cash flows from operating activities Group adjusted EBITDA 19012 17605 1407 Movement in net working capital 1441 949 492 Net cash from operating activities 17571 16656 915 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of sites by Tenpin Limited 2594 2322 272 Purchase of property plant and equipment and software 3624 3030 594 Net cash used in investing activities 6218 5352 866 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary shares 1 4 3 Finance lease capital repayments 2312 1471 841 Net repayment of bank borrowings 6906 3594 3312 Finance costs paid 621 977 356 Net cash used in financing activities 9838 6038 3800 Tax paid 1861  1861 Preexceptional cash decreaseincrease 346 5266 5612 Exceptional items 4268 1902 2366 Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 4614 3364 7980 Opening cash and cash equivalents 10185 6821 3364 Closing cash and cash equivalents 5571 10185 4614 Cash flows from operating activities were 17.6m FY16 16.7m.
The increase in Group adjusted EBITDA was partially offset by a small movement in working capital in the year.
Acquisition investment was an outflow of 2.6m FY16 2.3m utilised to purchase three new sites Blackburn Eastbourne and Rochdale.
Net capital expenditure on property plant and equipment and software was an outflow of 3.6m in the period FY16 3.0m driven by Tenpinisation and refurbishment capital costs of 1.3m investment of 1.0m in Pins and Strings machines at the five additional sites discussed earlier and an ongoing level of maintenance capital across the estate.
The net movement in borrowings was an outflow of 6.9m FY16 3.6m representing the repayment of existing term loan facilities of 12.9m partially offset by the drawdown of the replacement revolving credit facility to the amount of 6.0m.
Finance costs paid were 0.6m FY16 1.0m with the reduction driven by the movement in the cash element of the finance costs previously discussed.
Tax paid was 1.9m FY16 nil with no tax payment being due in FY16 due to the utilisation of remaining historical trading losses within Tenpin Limited.
Exceptional items result in a cash outflow of 4.3m FY16 1.9m as analysed on page 28 but were principally in relation to the costs associated with the Groups IPO during the first half of the financial year.
The net movement in cash and cash equivalents was an outflow of 4.6m FY16 inflow of 3.4m.
Financial review continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 30  Strategic report Financing arrangements The Group finances its operations through a combination of cash property leases finance leases and access to committed bank facilities where necessary.
On completion of its IPO the Group agreed a new threeyear 15m committed secured borrowing facility which as at 31 December 2017 the Group had drawn down 6.0m.
The Group has additional liabilities through its obligations to pay rents under a combination of both operating and finance leases finance leases FY17 one site FY16 two sites.
The rental charge for the period amounted to 11.2m FY16 PF 11.1m with the increase principally a result of the additional sites compared to the same period last year.
In addition the Group has further liabilities through its finance lease arrangement with Namco for its gaming machines.
The finance lease capital repayments were an outflow of 2.3m during FY17 FY16 1.5m.
Total property lease commitments were 142.7m at 31 December 2017 FY16 127.4m with the increase driven by the net two additional sites together with the increase in average lease length from 11.3 years to 13.0 years principally driven by the lease regears and renewals previously discussed.
The total finance lease commitments as at 31 December 2017 amounted to 4.2m FY16 5.1m.
Share price The Groups opening share price on entry to the market on 12 April 2017 was 165p.
The price has ranged from a low of 148p to a high of 271p.
On 29 December 2017 the closing price was 248p giving a market capitalisation of 161m.
Accounting standards and use of nonGAAP measures The Group has prepared its consolidated financial statements based on International Financial Reporting Standards for the 52 weeks ended 31 December 2017.
The basis for preparation is outlined in the second paragraph to the financial statements on page 73.
The Group uses certain measures that it believes provide additional useful information on its underlying performance.
These measures are applied consistently but as they are not defined under GAAP they may not be directly comparable with other companies adjusted measures.
The nonGAAP measures are outlined in note 2 to the financial statements on page 81.
Principal risks and uncertainties The Groups principal risks and uncertainties are set out on pages 24 and 25.
Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer 21 March 2018 Strategic report  31 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code the Directors have assessed the Groups prospects and viability over a threeyear period to 28 December 2020.
This threeyear assessment period was selected as it corresponds with the Boards strategic planning horizon as well as the time period over which senior management is remunerated via its share performance scheme.
Future assessments of the Groups prospects are subject to uncertainty that increases with time and cannot be guaranteed or predicted with certainty.
In making this assessment the Directors took account of the Groups current financial performance including EBITDA operating profit and adjusted profit after tax its strong financial position and cash flows including net debt and available cash the availability of its banking facilities and complying with the agreed covenants its business model and strategy in particular new site acquisitions and inward capex and risks and uncertainties.
These were extended as part of the Groups threeyear plan forecasts and appropriate stresstesting was undertaken to consider the potential impact of a combination of principal risks and uncertainties materialising together such as declines in yearonyear sales inflationary increases across all variable cost lines as well as above expected increases in fixed costs such as property rents.
This was then looked at in isolation as well as in combination with certain strategies not being implemented around sales growth initiatives and site acquisitions in the pipeline not being made.
Based on this assessment the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will continue in operation and meet all its liabilities as they fall due during the threeyear period up to 28 December 2020.
Going concern On 12 April 2017 the Groups shares were admitted to trading on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange and it entered into a new 15m threeyear revolving credit facility see note 3 to the financial statements for details of the Group reorganisation.
There were no primary funds raised for the Group at the IPO and all proceeds were distributed to existing shareholders.
The Directors believe that the IPO has benefitted the Group by providing a stronger capital structure enabling it to continue its acquisition growth strategy while making it more attractive as a tenant to landlords access to a wider range of capital raising options beyond the banking facilities already in place which could be used for acquisition opportunities removal of the private equity PIK loan notes which reduced overall earnings as they attracted higher rates of interest than normal bank facilities and repayment of prior bank facilities and renegotiation of new banking facilities with a lower rate of interest which reduces interest payments increases earnings and allows further investment of cash.
The Group is in a strong financial position to continue its operations for the next 12 months.
For these reasons the Directors have adopted the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
The Directors have made this assessment after consideration of budgeted cash flows and related assumptions and in accordance with the FRCs Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
The viability statement was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer 21 March 2018 Longterm viability statement Financial review continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 32  Strategic report  There is further potential for growth in the experiential leisure market and the Group is well positioned to benefit from this trend.
Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
Strategic report  33 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc The Groups corporate social responsibility policy covers four main areas Charity and work within the community The sites each have their own nominated charity and give charitably in the form of events and fundraising.
The Group also has a nominated charity which as at the date of these financial statements is Rays of Sunshine.
The Group encourages employees to give back to the community by allowing employees to be able to work fully paid for one day a year for a charitable organisation.
This encouragement has also led to VIP days for terminally ill children and participation in national fundraising campaigns such as Children in Need and Macmillan events.
Social
Bowling is a fun familyoriented activity that encourages people to be active and promotes enjoyable social time together.
Our sites provide drink and food as part of the experience and we understand the focus on diet and wellbeing.
We are passionate about our food and strive to always provide the best quality food to our customers and we are focused on making progressive changes going forward to meet changing customer expectations.
We have introduced a low fat low salt burger as well as a new cooking oil which has reduced oil usage by 25% annually.
We continue to work with our suppliers to reduce the amount of sugar and salt in the products we use and ensure all our products are from sustainable sources and that we have a range of healthier options available.
We communicate regularly with regulatory bodies local councils and our suppliers to ensure that we have an appropriate mix of gaming machines in terms of content and quality and age appropriateness.
Environmental
The Group is committed to operating its business in such a way as to minimise the impact on the environment as a result of its activities and will always aim to meet and where practicable improve upon relevant environmental legislative requirements and codes of practice.
In addition the Group continues to demonstrate environmental care in which it operates by carrying out professional surveys in order to identify where reasonable steps can be taken to reduce energy usage promoting the purchase and use of materials within the business in a manner that minimises potential adverse environmental effects and developing waste minimisation initiatives in order to recycle reuse and reduce waste.
Greenhouse gas emissions Greenhouse gas GHG emissions for FY17 have been measured under the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in 2013.
The GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standards revised edition data has been provided through analysis of our utility invoices.
Scope 1 emissions 417.9 tCO2e Scope 2 emissions 4895.2 tCO2e Total scope 1 and 2 emissions 5313.1 tCO2e Intensity ratio tCO2e per centre 133.7 Corporate social responsibility The Directors believe that corporate social responsibility is important to help establish trust and goodwill amongst employees and customers.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 34  Strategic report With the introduction of Pins and Strings across our sites we expect our greenhouse gas emissions to decline.
Employee engagement and wellbeing The Group has policies in place which demonstrate its commitment to a high level of integrity and standards and the welfare of its employees.
This includes a Health and Wellbeing Strategy for the Groups employees and providing a comprehensive but flexible benefits and reward scheme for all employees.
Achievements for 2017 include a celebration of success with our colleagues through the Winning Way lunches a Tenpin fiveaside football tournament a company awards event and Christmas parties the Groups focus on our people was recognised by the Great Place to Work awards as a top 35 best workplace implementation of a new development programme for both site apprenticeships and management teams retention of Gold Investors in People standard and runners up at Investors in People awards launch of The Voice an employee forum for feedback on all areas of the business launch of Learning Lanes to complement our training and development strategy and launch of additional products to complement our reward and recognition strategy.
The Group strives to provide a happy and safe environment for colleagues and is always seeking to understand what improvements can be made in colleagues experiences at work.
The People team helps the Group keep focused on worklife balance initiatives and provides opportunities for colleagues to connect and network with each other.
All colleagues are provided with an excellent benefits package which includes access to the Groups reward scheme Tenpin Treats the use of which is continuing to increase as employees understand the benefits of the scheme.
The Group runs a regular engagement survey with colleagues to measure team member satisfaction and to give colleagues an opportunity to feed back what works well and what can be improved upon.
Results of the survey are encouraging with completion levels at 92% on the last survey conducted in September 2017 and 90% of respondents saying they would recommend Tenpin as a great place to work.
The Groups policy on diversity is that no individual should be discriminated against on the grounds of race colour ethnicity religious belief political affiliation gender age or disability and this extends to Board appointments.
The Board recognises the benefits of diversity including gender diversity on the Board although it believes that all appointments should be made on merit whilst ensuring that there is an appropriate balance of skills and experience within the Board.
The Board currently consists of 12.5% one female and 87.5% seven male Board members while the total Group headcount consists of 622 female and 512 male employees.
The Group is passionate about fairness equality and inclusion and is committed to reducing the gender pay gap.
The Modern Slavery Act which came into force in October 2015 requires the Group to publish an annual slavery and human trafficking statement.
The latest statement can be found on the Ten Entertainment Group plc website.
Neither the Group nor any of its subsidiaries permit condone or otherwise accept any form of human trafficking or slavery in its business and the Group is committed to doing what it can to combat these practices.
The Strategic report was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
21 March 2018 Strategic report  35 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Our leadership team Appointed to the Board Alan was appointed as Chief Executive Officer of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Alan has 29 years experience in the leisure and restaurant sectors which include Paramount The Restaurant Group and My Kinda Town.
Alan has board level experience in operational roles at Paramount and the Group and was appointed Managing Director of the Group in September 2015 following five years of being the Operations Director of the Groups bowling operations.
Alan has over eight years experience working directly in the bowling industry.
Appointed to the Board Mark was appointed as Chief Financial Officer of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Mark began his career in industry training with the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants.
He held a variety of roles at Lloyds TSB MercedesBenz Tesco and Home Retail Group.
Prior to joining the Group Mark was finance Director for Argos and during his time at Home Retail Group Mark held roles as Director of group finance and Director of investor relations.
He was appointed as Chief Financial Officer of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Appointed to the Board Graham was appointed as Chief Commercial Officer of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Graham has over 26 years experience in the bowling industry following his roles at Granada Allied Georgica and Essenden Limited.
He was appointed to his current position as Chief Commercial Officer of the Group in 2013 following his nineyear period as Operations Director of the Groups bowling business.
He is also a member of the executive committee of the UK Bowling Industry Association.
Appointed to the Board Nick was appointed as Chairman of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Nick is a highly experienced industry figure with a successful track record of over 30 years of operational experience in the leisure industry.
Nick was responsible for the operational turnaround and subsequent growth both organically and via acquisition beginning with Paramount plc and subsequently Paramount Holdings Paramount including Chez Gerard Bertorelli and Caffe Uno where he was chief executive officer for over six years.
Prior to Paramount he held a number of senior management positions with leading companies such as Rank First Leisure Unilever and Granada.
Nick was awarded UK Retailers Retailer of the Year in 2006.
He was appointed to the board of Essenden Limited as chief executive officer on 18 August 2009.
He is also a nonexecutive Director of Goals Soccer Centres plc and Chairman of Goals City US Limited and has served as a nonexecutive Director on the board of the following companies Brakes Brothers Holdings Ltd Elegant Hotels Group plc and The All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club
Nick was appointed as Chairman of the Company on 15 March 2017.
A R N The Directors of Ten Entertainment Group plc during the period and up to the date of signing the financial statements were as follows Nick Basing
Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer Graham Blackwell Chief Commercial Officer 36  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Board of Directors Appointed to the Board David was appointed Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Remuneration Committee of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications David was appointed to the board of Dominos Pizza Group plc as a nonexecutive Director in November 2013 before being appointed as its chief executive officer in 2014.
David was previously the chief executive officer of Halfords Group plc and has held senior roles within Walmart and Tesco.
David was also a nonexecutive Director of the multichannel consultancy Practicology Limited.
A R N Appointed to the Board Rob was appointed NonExecutive Director and Chair of the Audit Committee of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Rob has over 25 years of finance strategy and digital leadership experience in some of the worlds largest retail businesses including ASDAWalMart and Amazon.
Robs executive experience includes being UK finance Director for ASDA Walmart and Amazon and his most recent role as vice president for the consumables division at Amazon UK.
Rob spent his early career at Bass plc where he qualified as an accountant having graduated in Mathematics from Durham University.
Rob is currently a nonexecutive Director of Jisc a provider of digital infrastructure to universities in the UK.
A R N Appointed to the Board Christopher was appointed as a NonExecutive Director of the Company on 15 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Christopher is a Director and the sole shareholder of Harwood Capital Management Limited which is a designated corporate member and the controller of Harwood.
Harwood Capital Management Group was formed in 2011 by Christopher on his acquisition of Harwood from J O Hambro Capital Management Group Limited.
He is also the chief executive officer and Director of NASCIT a UK listed investment trust and a Director and investment manager of Oryx.
He has a long and successful investing track record and is a nonexecutive Director of a number of both public and private companies.
Prior to joining J O Hambro Capital Management Group Limited which he cofounded in 1993 he worked from 1975 to 1993 for Samuel Montagu Limited Montagu Investment Management Limited and its successor company Invesco MIM latterly as head of North American investments and head of North American venture capital.
A R N Appointed to the Board Julie was appointed NonExecutive Director of the Company on 22 March 2017.
Committee membership Experience skills and qualifications Julie has 20 years experience in senior executive roles with the Walt Disney Company including most recently as executive vice president of Disney Stores Worldwide which carried responsibility for over 330 stores across North America Europe and Japan.
Julie has led multiple strategic business development and organisation transformation change initiatives for Disney with a focus on retail brand development and digital transformation.
A R N Audit Committee Remuneration Committee Nomination Committee Chairman A R N Committee key David Wild NonExecutive Director Rob McWilliam NonExecutive Director Christopher Mills NonExecutive Director Julie Sneddon NonExecutive Director Corporate governance  37 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Governance supports success of Company strategy Dear Shareholders I am pleased to introduce our first Corporate Governance report on behalf of the Board.
The Board is committed to ensuring that the Group operates with high standards of corporate governance and intends to comply with the requirements of the Code as it applies to smaller companies i. those below the FTSE 350.
We believe that it is important that the governance structure supports the success of the Companys strategy after listing in April 2017 and ensures the creation and preservation of shareholder value as well as benefiting other stakeholders.
As part of the IPO our key focus was to ensure that the Board had constituted appropriate Committees and adopted relevant terms of reference policies and procedures to support the development of a robust governance structure.
After the IPO we have continued to work on ensuring compliance with the Code and other obligations of a company listed on the London Stock Exchanges Main Market.
As you will see from our Corporate Governance report due to the fact that the Company only listed in April 2017 it has not been practicable to fully comply with all provisions and our report highlights these areas and how we expect to address these in the coming year.
The Board plays a vital role in developing and maintaining the Groups culture and values by setting the tone from the top and determining the behaviours expected by the Board and ensuring that ethical standards are maintained.
In so doing the Board aims to strike the right balance between entrepreneurial leadership and the prudent and effective management of risk both of which are essential to maintaining a sustainable business and creating value for shareholders.
We have appointed highcalibre NonExecutive Directors who all bring experience relevant to our sector firstclass backgrounds and the right skills to support our status as a listed company.
David Wild Julie Sneddon and Rob McWilliam all joined the Board in the lead up to the IPO and have already started to make significant contributions to the Board and its various Committees.
Our corporate governance framework continues to evolve and improve and the following report sets out how the Board has complied with the principles of good governance during the year.
Nick Basing
21 March 2018 Corporate governance UK Corporate Governance Code  compliance The Company adopted the Code on 12 April 2017 on Admission of its shares to the UKLAs Official List and listing on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
Prior to that date it was not a premium listed company and was therefore not required to comply with the principles and provisions of the Code.
Since 12 April 2017 and including the period between Admission and the end of the financial year Nick Basing
FTSE 350 and has complied with all relevant provisions of the Code except as indicated below Provision explanation A.3.1  The Chairman was not independent on appointment however he provides a wealth of experience in the industry to the Group and following on from the IPO he provides strong continuity to the transition from a private company to a listed company.
The Board also includes three independent Directors to provide balance to the governance of the Group.
B.6.1  The Board has not carried out a performance evaluation as this is the first year of incorporation but one will be carried out in FY18.
A.4.2 and B.6.3  The NonExecutive Directors have not formally evaluated the Chairmans performance as this is the first year of incorporation but an evaluation will be carried out in FY18.
C.3.1 and D.2.1  The Audit and Remuneration Committees were not comprised only of independent NonExecutive Directors.
The
Company Chairman is a member of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees but is not an independent NonExecutive Director.
This is currently expected to continue indefinitely but will form part of the Board effectiveness evaluation in
All three of the independent Directors are members of each Committee and the Committees are chaired by an independent Director.
38  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Chairmans introduction Governance structure The Companys governance structure is designed such that the Board focuses on providing experienced leadership to the Group sets the Groups strategy monitors performance and ensures that appropriate financial and human resources are in place for the Company to meet its objectives.
The Board is also responsible for taking the lead in setting and embedding the Companys culture value and standards and for ensuring that appropriate systems procedures and controls are in place to support the effective assessment and management of risk and the safeguarding of shareholder interests.
The Board operates in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association and has established Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees to assist it in discharging its responsibilities.
Each
Committee has its own written terms of reference available on the Companys website which have been reviewed since the IPO and will be reviewed annually.
Certain matters are specifically reserved for decision by the Board and documented in a written schedule which will also be reviewed annually.
The schedule of matters reserved for the Board includes Strategy and management Leadership of the Company setting values and standards Developing approving and overseeing the strategic aims and objectives Oversight of Group operations and performance Structure and capital Major changes to corporate structure including acquisitions and disposals Major changes to capital structure including approval of Group treasury policy and arrangements Financial reporting and controls Approval of annual and halfyear financial statements Approval of dividend policy including recommendation of final dividend Approval of significant changes in accounting policy Internal controls Ensuring maintenance of sound internal control and risk management systems and assessing their effectiveness Approving Group risk appetite statements Board membership Changes to the structure size and composition of the Board Ensuring adequate succession planning
Determining the policy for the Executive Directors Determining NonExecutive Director fees Introduction of new share plans or changes to existing plans to be put to shareholders Corporate governance Review of the Groups overall governance arrangements Determining the independence of Directors Considering the views of shareholders Authorising any conflicts of interest
Approval and monitoring of the Share Dealing Code Approval of political donations Corporate governance  39 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Board governance Board membership The Board currently comprises the
Chairman the Chief Executive Officer the
Chief Financial Officer the Chief Commercial Officer a Senior Independent Director and three NonExecutive Directors.
The names and biographical details of the serving Directors and the offices held by them can be found on pages 36 to 37.
We believe that the Board is of sufficient size that the requirements of the business and good governance can be met and normal succession challenges managed but is not so large as to be unwieldy.
Chairman
The role of the Chairman is providing leadership to and ensuring the effectiveness of the Board ensuring that agendas emphasise strategic rather than routine issues and that the Directors receive accurate and clear information well ahead of the time when a decision is required promoting a culture of openness and constructive debate and facilitating an effective contribution by the NonExecutive Directors arranging informal meetings of the Directors including meetings of the NonExecutive Directors ensuring effective communication by the Group with its shareholders arranging for the Chairs of the Committees to be available to answer questions at the AGM and for all Directors to attend and taking the lead in providing a properly constructed full formal and tailored induction programme and ongoing development for new Directors.
Chief Executive Officer
The role of the Chief Executive Officer is leading the development of the Groups strategic direction and objectives identifying and executing acquisitions and disposals and leading geographic diversification initiatives reviewing the Groups organisational structure and recommending changes as appropriate identifying and executing new business opportunities overseeing risk management and internal control managing the Groups risk profile including the health and safety performance of the Group implementing the decisions of the Board and its Committees building and maintaining an effective Group leadership team and ensuring the Chairman and the Board are alerted to forthcoming complex contentious or sensitive issues affecting the Group.
Senior Independent Director SID The role of the SID is meeting regularly with the independent NonExecutive Directors providing a sounding board for the Chairman and acting as an intermediary for other Directors being available to shareholders if they have concerns which contact through the normal channels of Chairman or Chief Executive Officer has failed to address or would be inappropriate and holding annual meetings with NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman present.
NonExecutive Directors The role of a NonExecutive Director is providing creative contribution to the Board by way of constructive criticism bringing independence impartiality experience specialist knowledge and a different perspective to the Board providing guidance on matters of concern and strategy overseeing risk management and internal control protecting shareholder and stakeholder interests constructively challenging the Executive Directors and monitoring Executive performance supporting the Executive team in shaping and delivering the strategic goals of the business optimising shareholder return and protection of shareholder assets and ensuring the Board is able to work together effectively and make maximum use of its time.
Board independence The Board has considered the independence of the current Directors as below
Nick Basing Chairman
Alan Hand Chief Executive Officer
Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer Graham Blackwell Chief Commercial Officer Christopher Mills
David Wild SID Julie Sneddon Rob McWilliam The Company complies with provision B.1.2 of the Code as it applies to smaller companies as it has two independent NonExecutive Directors on the Board.
The Board reviews the independence of its NonExecutive Directors annually.
In assessing the independence of each Director the Board considers whether each is independent in character and judgement and whether there are relationships or circumstances which are likely to affect or could appear to affect the Directors judgement.
40  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Board governance and key Board roles The Company does not comply with provision A.3.1 of the Code which requires that the Chairman should on appointment meet the independence criteria set out in provision B.1.1 of the Code.
This is because the Chairman holds shares in the Company.
Nevertheless the Board considers that the fact of the Chairmans shareholding in the Company including its relative size does not influence his independence of character and judgement within the meaning of Code provision B.1.1 and it does not influence him or the Board in the proper discharge of their duties and the operation of the business of the Group.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities for the integrity of the financial statements reviewing the internal control environment and risk management systems managing the relationship with the external auditors and monitoring the effectiveness and objectivity of the external and internal auditors.
Rob McWilliam is the Chair of this Committee which also includes David Wild Nick Basing Christopher Mills and Julie
The Audit Committee will normally meet not fewer than three times a year at the appropriate reporting and audit cycle.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee oversees the recruitment of the Directors and senior management and advises on matters relating to the Boards membership and Committee appointments including reviewing succession plans.
The Nomination Committee also regularly reviews and monitors the overall skills and experience of the Board.
Julie Sneddon is the Chair of this Committee which also includes David Wild Nick Basing Christopher Mills and Rob McWilliam.
The Nomination Committee will meet at least twice annually.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee determines the terms and conditions of employment remuneration and rewards of the Executive Directors the Chairman and the leadership teams.
The Remuneration Committee aims to offer an appropriate balance of fixed and performancerelated immediate and deferred remuneration but without overpaying or creating the risk of rewards for failure.
David Wild is the Chair of this Committee which also includes Rob McWilliam Julie Sneddon Nick Basing and Christopher Mills.
The Remuneration Committee will meet at least twice annually.
Board meetings and process Since Admission the Board met on five occasions between April and the financial yearend in December 2017 with key matters discussed including reviewing and approving new acquisitions reviewing and approving lease decisions considering and approving significant capital projects the Groups strategic plan the Groups annual budget the Groups interim results the Group risk register the functioning of the internal control environment and reviewing the terms of reference of its Committees.
Where Board members were unable to attend meetings they were provided with the Board documents and members provided their input in advance of the meeting.
Following the meetings they were updated on decisions taken.
The Board has met on a further two occasions to date in FY18 with key matters discussed including the approval of the 2017 Annual Report and financial statements.
All Directors were present at both meetings.
FY17 Committee meeting attendance
Main
Board
Audit
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nick Basing 45 22 00 22 Alan Hand 55 22 00 22 Mark Willis 55 22 00 22 Graham Blackwell 55 22 00 22 David Wild SID 45 12 00 22 Rob McWilliam 55 22 00 22 Christopher Mills 55 22 00 22 Julie Sneddon 55 22 00 22 The Board intends to meet formally at least six times a year with ad hoc meetings called as and when circumstances require it to meet at short notice.
The Board has approved an annual calendar of agenda items with relevant matters scheduled for consideration at the appropriate point in the regulatory and financial cycle.
In addition the Board will meet at least once a year to discuss strategy including a full strategic review of the business operations and the development of the Groups strategic plan.
All Directors are expected to attend all meetings of the Board and any Committees of which they are members and to devote sufficient time to fulfil their duties as Directors.
Each NonExecutive Director has committed to the Company that they are able to allocate sufficient time to the Company to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
Any additional appointments they are contemplating taking on are discussed with the Chairman in advance including the likely time commitment and whether these could in any way constitute a conflict of interest.
These matters are formally reviewed by the Board on an annual basis.
As stated in the Articles of Association at every AGM of the Company onethird of the Directors or if their number is not three or a multiple of three the number nearest to onethird shall retire from office.
As the 2018 AGM will be the Companys first AGM since the IPO all of the Directors retire and offer themselves for reelection.
Corporate governance  41 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc The Directors received an induction briefing from the Companys legal adviser Bircham Dyson Bell LLP on their duties and responsibilities as Directors of a publicly quoted company as part of the listing process.
The Chairman with the support of the Company Secretary will ensure that a full formal and tailored induction programme will be developed for any new Directors joining the Board and that the development and ongoing training needs of individual Directors and the Board as a whole are reviewed and agreed at least annually.
The Company Secretary will ensure that the Board is briefed on forthcoming legal and regulatory developments as well as developments in corporate governance best practice.
The Board will focus on the following key areas to ensure its effectiveness Recruitment A formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new Directors to the Board overseen by the Nomination
For each appointment the Board will develop an objective brief summarising the role and the skills and experience required and use an appropriate executive search firm with proven expertise in the relevant field.
Before confirming an appointment the Board will check whether the preferred individual can commit to the time expected by the appointment.
Tools and training All Directors will have a tailored formal induction process on joining the Board including the opportunity to meet major shareholders.
The aim is to ensure that they understand the Company and its business model strategy the drivers of value in the business and the key risks and that they understand the legal and regulatory environment in which the Company operates.
Directors are expected to update and refresh their skills and knowledge on an ongoing basis and to continue to build their familiarity with the Company and its business throughout their tenure.
The Company will provide the necessary resources for developing and updating its Directors knowledge and capabilities.
All Directors have access to the services of the Company Secretary and the opportunity to seek independent professional advice at the Companys expense where they judge it necessary to discharge their responsibilities as Directors or as members of Board Committees.
If Directors have concerns which cannot be resolved about the running of the Company or a proposed action they can require that their concerns are recorded in the Board minutes or provide a written statement to the Chairman for circulation to the Board.
The Board is supplied with information in a form and of a quality appropriate to enable it to discharge its duties effectively.
This is provided in good time ahead of all meetings and decisions and NonExecutive Directors are encouraged to seek clarification from management whenever they feel appropriate.
Conflicts of interest Directors have a statutory duty to avoid actual or potential conflicts of interest.
Any Director who becomes aware that he or she is in a situation which does or could create a conflict of interest or has an interest in an existing or proposed transaction in which the Company also has an interest is required to notify the Board in writing as soon as possible.
The interests of new Directors are reviewed during the recruitment process and authorised if appropriate by the Board at the time of their appointment.
No Director had a material interest in any contract of significance in relation to the Companys business at any time during the year or to the date of this report.
Relationship with shareholders We maintain a dialogue with shareholders throughout the year as part of an ongoing investor relations programme.
The Chairman
the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief
Financial Officer all variously and routinely engage with analysts institutional and retail shareholders and potential investors.
Our aim is to ensure that there are strong relationships through which we can understand those parties views on material issues.
Feedback is provided to the Board particularly where there are issues or concerns and the Companys brokers also provide independent feedback from investors.
All brokers notes are circulated to the entire Board in order that the Board maintains an understanding of market perceptions of the
The NonExecutive Directors are available to discuss any matter shareholders might wish to raise.
The AGM is treated as an opportunity to communicate with all shareholders.
The Chairs of all Board Committees attend the AGM and are available to answer questions.
An explanatory circular containing the notice of meeting is sent to shareholders at least 20 working days beforehand with separate votes being offered on each substantive issue.
To encourage shareholders to participate in the AGM process the Company will offer electronic proxy voting through both our registrars website and for CREST members the CREST service.
Voting will be conducted by way of a poll and the results will be announced through the Regulatory News Service and made available on the Companys website.
42  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Board effectiveness Annual statement by the Nomination Committee Chair As Chair of the Nomination Committee I am pleased to present the report of the Board covering the policy and practice for the Company for the first time as a listed entity.
The Nomination Committee will be responsible for assisting the Board in the formal selection and appointment of
It will consider potential candidates and will recommend appointments of new Directors to the Board and will also be responsible for periodically reviewing the Boards structure and identifying potential candidates to be appointed as Directors or Committee members as the need may arise.
The appointments will be based on merit and against objective criteria including the time available to and the commitment which will be required of the potential
It will also be responsible for carrying out an annual performance evaluation of the Board its Committees and individual Directors.
The Nomination Committee is responsible for evaluating the balance of skills knowledge and experience and the size structure and composition of the Board and Committees of the Board retirements and appointments of additional and replacement Directors and Committee members and will make appropriate recommendations to the Board with regard to any changes necessary on such matters.
In addition the Nomination Committee will make recommendations to the Board as regards succession planning for both Executive Directors and NonExecutive
The Nomination Committee will take into account the challenges and opportunities facing the Group and what skills and expertise will therefore be needed on the Board in the future.
Meetings
It is intended that the Nomination Committee will meet at least twice per year and as otherwise required to meet is duties.
The composition of the Board was assessed and the terms of reference were established as part of the IPO process.
The Committee did not meet in the period between the IPO and 31 December 2017.
The Committee will meet in 2018 and will focus on succession planning a review of the Committees terms of reference and the Groups Diversity Policy.
We will also review the composition of the Board and its Committees to satisfy that we have a good balance of skills and experience on the Board to support the Companys future development.
Julie Sneddon Nomination Committee Chair
Julie Sneddon Committee members David Wild Nick Basing Christopher Mills Rob McWilliam Performance evaluation As the Nomination Committee has only been established for a short time a formal performance evaluation has not been conducted.
It is intended that a performance evaluation will be conducted in 2018 and reported on in the Companys 2018 Annual Report.
Diversity
The Companys policy on diversity is that no individual should be discriminated against on the grounds of race colour ethnicity religious belief political affiliation gender age or disability and this extends to Board appointments.
The Board recognises the benefits of diversity including gender diversity on the Board and across the Company although it believes that all appointments should be made on merit whilst ensuring that there is an appropriate balance of skills and experience within the Board.
The Board currently consists of 12.5% one female and 87.5% seven male Board members.
Julie Sneddon Nomination Committee Chair 21 March 2018 Board composition Female 12.5% Male 87.5% Corporate governance  43 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Nomination Committee report Annual statement by the Audit Committee Chair I am pleased to present this report covering the role of the Audit Committee and the issues reviewed by the Company since becoming a listed entity.
The Committees primary purpose is to assist the Board with the discharge of its responsibilities in relation to internal and external audits and controls including reviewing the Groups annual financial statements considering the scope of the annual audit and the extent of the nonaudit work undertaken by external auditors advising on the appointment of external auditors and reviewing the effectiveness of the internal control systems in place within the Group.
The Committee has met twice between the IPO in April and the end of the 2017 financial year.
In this the first year as a listed company the primary focus of the Committee was on establishing the Committees terms of reference reviewing the Companys whistleblowing policy reviewing the risk management process reviewing the incident management process reviewing the Companys first set of financial statements at its interim results in September establishing a process for internal audit and considering the potential impact of future changes in accounting standards.
The below is a summary of the key issues reviewed by the Committee during the period Significant accounting issues The Audit Committees review of the halfyear financial statements focused on the following areas of significance reviewing the appropriate use of alternative performance measures including adjusted financial results to exclude oneoff IPO expenses to communicate the Companys performance to its shareholders.
An explanation of the alternative performance measures employed can be found in note 2 the preparation of the consolidated financial statements as a continuation of the existing Indoor Bowling Equity Limited business and to account for its acquisition by insertion of the holding company Ten Entertainment Group plc using the principles of predecessor accounting along with the accounting treatment and disclosure of the transaction costs incurred as part of the IPO process and reviewing the impairment assessments of the values of property plant and equipment and goodwill for the Group at the end of the period and the factors considered in determining the cash flows and the rate used to discount those cash flows.
Further detail of the impairment assessments can be found in notes 11 and 13.
The Audit Committee following confirmations from management and the external auditors satisfied itself as to the reasonableness and consistency of these assumptions when compared to prior years.
New accounting standards The new accounting standard for leasing IFRS 16 which will be effective for the year ending in December 2019 will have no net cash flow impact but could significantly change the composition of the consolidated balance sheet and phasing of the charges in the income statement.
In view of the nature of the majority of the Groups leases being longterm leases with landlords the Audit Committee is advised that the impact is anticipated to be material.
The Company has yet to determine whether to adopt the new standard on a full retrospective or modified retrospective basis and the Audit Committee will report next year on the expected method of adoption together with the anticipated impact of the standard on the financial statements.
The new accounting standard for statutory revenue recognition IFRS 15 effective 1 January 2018 is not expected to have a significant impact on the Groups revenues.
The majority of the Groups statutory revenues are derived from sales to customers and the new standard is not expected to impact the recording of these.
The new financial instruments standard IFRS 9 will be applicable from 1 January 2018.
An assessment of the impact of this standard is in progress but initial estimates are that the overall impact is not expected to be material.
Risk management
The Groups systems of risk management and internal control were reviewed extensively as part of the preIPO process and again as a part of the annual risk review process and it was concluded that the systems currently in place are satisfactory and work effectively.
Rob McWilliam Audit Committee Chair
Rob McWilliam Committee members David Wild Nick Basing Christopher Mills Julie Sneddon Number of meetings held in the year 44  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Audit Committee report As a newly listed company we recognise the importance of ensuring these systems are robust and effective and we expect to work with the finance and IT teams to ensure they are kept under review and developed where necessary during the coming financial year.
The Board has overall responsibility for setting the Groups risk appetite and ensuring that there is an effective risk management framework to maintain appropriate levels of risk.
The Board has however delegated responsibility for review of the risk management methodology and effectiveness of internal control to the Audit Committee.
The Groups system of internal control comprises entitywide highlevel controls controls over business processes and centrelevel controls.
Policies and procedures including clearly defined levels of delegated authority have been communicated across the Group.
Internal
These policies are designed to ensure the accuracy and reliability of financial reporting and govern the preparation of the financial statements.
The Board is ultimately responsible for the Groups system of internal controls and risk management and discharges its duties in this area by holding regular Board meetings to consider the matters reserved for its consideration receiving regular management reports which provide an assessment of key risks and controls scheduling annual Board reviews of strategy ensuring there is a clear organisational structure with defined responsibilities and levels of authority ensuring there are documented policies and procedures in place and reviewing regular reports containing detailed information regarding financial performance rolling forecasts actual and forecast covenant compliance and financial and nonfinancial KPIs.
The process by which the Audit Committee has monitored and reviewed the effectiveness of the system of internal controls and risk management during the year has included reviews of the Groups risk register reviewing the system of financial and accounting controls and considering the view of the external auditors in relation to the effectiveness of such controls and reporting to the Board on the risk and control culture within the Group.
The Audit Committee has not identified nor been made aware of any significant failings or weaknesses in the risk management and internal control systems and is satisfied that the systems are effective.
The Committee will continue to challenge management to further improve risk identification evaluation and management processes across the Group.
Going concern and viability statement On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee reviewed the Groups projected cash flows facilities and covenants as well as reviewing the assumptions underlying the viability statement and concluded that it could recommend to the Board that it should be able to make the relevant statements.
Incident management The Company operates an incident management policy at site level recording incidents relating to health and safety accidents criminal activity food standards pest control and others.
The Chief Financial Officer reviews these incidents and escalates any significant incidents to the Audit Committee as necessary.
Whistleblowing
The Company has established procedures for employees to raise concerns in confidence relating to matters of financial reporting financial control or other matters.
The whistleblowing policy is applicable for all employees who are made aware of the policy on joining the Company and are reminded of its availability through online portals and posters.
A whistleblowing hotline is operated by an independent outsourced specialist who provides direct escalation of incidents through the HR department and up to the Chair of the Audit Committee.
No incidents were reported during FY17.
Corporate governance  45 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Internal auditors The Group expects to use BDO UK LLP BDO to perform at least two internal audit reviews per year.
The audit results are discussed with the Chief Financial Officer and presented to the Audit Committee who will annually review the effectiveness of the internal audit function.
BDO were appointed to this role during FY17 and commenced work on their first audit during the financial year.
In addition the Group supports the internal audit reviews with a loss prevention and process audit role with each site visited to perform process audits at least once per annum.
External auditors The Audit Committee has reviewed the independence objectivity and effectiveness of the external auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC and considers that PwC continue to possess the skills and experience required to fulfil their duties effectively and efficiently.
As this is the first year after the IPO no audit tender was carried out and the Committee will assess the performance of the auditors each year in considering whether it is appropriate to carry out a tender before a compulsory tender is required.
The Audit Committees review of the effectiveness of PwC as the external auditors is based on discussions with the senior finance team the robustness of the audit the quality of reporting to the Audit Committee and reports published by the FRC.
PwC have confirmed that in their professional judgement they are independent within the meaning of regulatory and professional requirements and the objectivity of the audit engagement partner and audit staff is not impaired.
The Audit Committee has held meetings with the external auditors without management and there is regular dialogue with the audit partner.
PwC provided certain nonaudit services in respect of the IPO including providing an opinion on the Companys historical financial information.
PwC were engaged due to their knowledge and understanding of the business prior to the IPO.
In order to maintain their independence and objectivity PwC undertook their standard independence procedures in relation to each of these assignments and staff not engaged on the audit were used for the provision of the nonaudit services.
As a result given the work on the IPO the fees paid to PwC in respect of nonaudit services during the year totalled 260187 which was in excess of the audit fee.
Fair balanced understandable and comprehensive reporting The Audit Committee has provided advice to the Board on whether the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
Each Director was also asked to provide this confirmation.
When doing so both the Committee and the individual Directors were provided with a set of questions designed to test the quality of reporting and asked to satisfy themselves that the levels of disclosure were appropriate.
Annual evaluation We have made good progress since the IPO in strengthening our governance and control infrastructure and will continue to work with the management team and the Board to ensure our processes operate effectively to support the delivery of the Groups strategy.
The Committee as a whole has competence that is relevant to the sector in which the Group operates and the Chair of the Committee has the relevant financial experience to run the Audit Committee.
Rob McWilliam Audit Committee Chair 21 March 2018 46  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Audit Committee report continued Annual statement by the Remuneration Committee Chair As Chair of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present the report of the Board covering the policy and practice for the Company for the first time as a listed entity.
This report has been prepared in accordance with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the UKLA Listing Rules and the Code.
In this report we explain the pay which has resulted for Executive Directors the fees paid to the NonExecutive Directors and we set out our approach for remuneration for FY18.
This report is split into three parts the annual statement by the Chair of the Remuneration Committee a summary of the Directors remuneration policy as introduced upon Admission and the annual report on remuneration which sets out payments made to the Directors and details the link between Company performance and remuneration for 2017.
Remuneration policy The remuneration policy was prepared at the time of the IPO and appropriate arrangements were set up to support the Company as a publicly listed entity.
The following were considered in determining the new policy transitioning from a private equity backed business to a listed company linking the remuneration policy of Executive Directors to the performance of the Company to encourage a highperformance culture including an annual bonus measure based upon the Groups financial performance over the year and specific objective measures for each Director and the launch of the new LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP with the first grants made during May 2017.
Awards will vest at the end of three years subject to satisfaction of performance conditions measuring EPS and TSR in the final year of the performance period in equal measure.
The Remuneration Committee is focused on ensuring that its policy aligns stakeholders and the business strategy enables the Company both to retain and attract executives in a competitive market and set challenging targets that are fair to all concerned.
The Committees key activities during FY17 since the IPO have been focused on the formulation of the Company remuneration policy as a listed company the agreement of the Remuneration Committees terms of reference the agreement of the Chairmans fee and the NonExecutive Director fees formulation of the Companys new LTIP and introduction of a bonus plan in respect of this financial year.
David Wild
Committee Chair
David Wild Committee members Rob McWilliam Nick Basing Julie Sneddon Christopher Mills Number of meetings held in the year Corporate governance  47 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration report FY17 remuneration performance The annual bonus plan for Executive Directors was based on target performance of Group adjusted EBITDA which the Committee considers to be an important measure of business performance and consistent with how the Board measures performance.
Bonus targets for Group adjusted EBITDA were not achieved based on the performance conditions set for FY17.
Despite a successful year both operationally and financially stretching targets were set for the first year of transition from a private to public company recognising the level of equity that was awarded to the Executive Directors on completion of the IPO.
As the earliest vesting date for awards made under the LTIP is FY19 no LTIP awards vested during the year.
The Committee is satisfied that the remuneration outcomes for the Executive Directors for FY17 are fully justified considering both the business and individual performance during the year and are in the best interests of both the Company and its shareholders.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank shareholders for their support for the Company and I look forward to meeting you at the Annual General Meeting on 9 May 2018.
In the meantime I am always happy to hear from shareholders and I can be contacted via the Company Secretary should you have any questions on either this report or more generally in relation to our remuneration policy.
David Wild Remuneration Committee Chair 21 March 2018 48  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration report continued Directors remuneration policy The Directors remuneration policy will be put to a shareholder vote on 9 May 2018 and will apply for a period of three years from the date of approval.
Policy summary The Remuneration Committee determines the policy for the Executive Directors and the Chairman for the current and future years.
The Committee considers that a successful policy needs to be sufficiently flexible to take account of changes in both the business environment and remuneration best practice.
The policy is designed to provide remuneration packages that will align the interests of the Executive Directors and senior management with those of shareholders provide competitive remuneration that will both motivate and retain the Groups current key employees and attract highquality individuals to join the Group encourage and support a highperformance culture reward delivery of the Groups business plan and key strategic goals and set appropriate performance conditions in line with the agreed risk profile of the business.
Whilst the Committee does not consult directly with employees on Executive Directors remuneration the Committee does receive updates regarding remuneration for employees across the Group.
This is considered when determining the remuneration for the Directors.
Consistent with the remuneration strategy the Remuneration Committee agreed a postAdmission remuneration policy for the Executive Directors and senior managers whereby salaries will be set at competitive but not excessive levels compared to peers and other companies of an equivalent size and complexity and are commensurate to the individuals performance and responsibility performancerelated pay based on stretching targets forms a significant part of remuneration packages and offers the potential for competitive levels of total pay if targets are delivered and there is an appropriate balance between short and longerterm performance targets linked to delivery of the Groups strategic plan.
The Remuneration Committee will oversee the implementation of this policy and will seek to ensure that the Executive Directors are fairly rewarded for the Groups performance over both the short and long term.
The Remuneration Committee is very aware that the policy must be capable of being operated to take account of the Groups evolution following Admission and to reflect the fact that its pay arrangements need to transition over time from ones that are reflective of a nonlisted private equity backed entity in which senior executives have material stakes to a more standard listed public limited company structure.
The remuneration framework intended to deliver this policy postAdmission for Executive Directors and senior managers is a combination of base salary benefits and an annual incentive award as described below.
Base salary Base salaries will be reviewed as appropriate following Admission but not typically more frequently than annually.
In reviewing base salaries and overall levels of remuneration more generally the Remuneration Committee will consider the performance of the Group and the individual the individual Executive Directors experience and changes in responsibilities or scope of the role as well as pay practices in relevant comparator companies of a broadly similar size and complexity with due account taken of both market capitalisation and turnover.
Base salaries for the Executive Directors from Admission were 275000 for Alan Hand 175000 for Mark Willis and 160000 for Graham Blackwell.
Benefits
The Executive Directors are entitled to receive benefits which include but are not limited to family private health cover death in service life assurance and travel expenses for any businessrelated travel.
Pension
The Executive Directors receive pension contributions of 5% of salary per annum.
Bonus plan The Executive Directors are able to participate in the Companys discretionary Executive and Management Bonus Scheme for FY17.
Targets under the bonus scheme are based on the achievement of EBITDA in excess of target expectation for the financial year with a sliding scale for the increasing levels of performance.
The maximum percentage of annual salary that Executive Directors can receive is 100% for achieving the highest targets under the bonus scheme.
From FY18 the bonus scheme will also include an element Corporate governance  49 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration policy continued Bonus plan continued of performance measurement in relation to each Executive Directors personal performance.
70% of the maximum bonus will remain based on EBITDA in excess of target expectation with the remaining 30% dependent on achieving personal objectives as agreed with the Committee.
The personal performance element only becomes attainable on achieving the minimum EBITDA target.
Longterm incentive plans The Board approved and adopted performance share plans on 12 April 2017 conditional upon Admission.
Executive
Directors and selected employees of the Group may be invited to participate in the share plans at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
The LTIP is designed to incentivise the Executive Directors to maximise returns to shareholders through a combination of EPS growth and TSR performance conditions.
Awards are granted annually in the form of nilcost options vesting at the end of a threeyear performance period subject to the Executive Directors continued employment at the date of vesting and the satisfaction of the performance conditions.
The maximum award is 200% of base salary for the award granted in the first year postAdmission reducing to 150% of salary in subsequent years.
Service agreements Each of the Executive Directors has entered into a service agreement with the Company which is effective upon Admission.
The policy is that each Executive Directors service agreement should be of indefinite duration subject to termination by the Company or the individual on six months notice.
The service agreements of all Executive Directors comply with that policy.
The contracts contain a payment in lieu of notice clause which is limited to base salary only and there is no loss of office payment due.
Recruitment remuneration policy New Executive Director and senior manager hires including those promoted internally will be offered remuneration packages in line with the Groups remuneration policy in force at the time.
In addition to the above elements of remuneration the Remuneration Committee may in exceptional circumstances consider it appropriate to grant an award under a different structure in order to facilitate the buyout of outstanding awards held by an individual on recruitment.
Any buyout award would be limited to what the Remuneration Committee considers to be a fair estimate of the value of awards foregone when leaving the former employer and will be structured to the extent possible to take into account other key terms such as a scheduled vesting and performance targets of the awards which are being replaced.
For external and internal appointments the Remuneration Committee may agree that the Group will meet certain relocation expenses as it considers appropriate.
Chairman and NonExecutive Director letters of appointment The Chairman and the other NonExecutive Directors fees have been set at a level to reflect the amount of time and level of involvement required in order to carry out their duties as members of the Board and its Committees and to attract and retain NonExecutive Directors of the highest calibre with relevant commercial and other experience.
Fee levels are set by reference to nonexecutive Director fees at companies of similar size and complexity.
The fee paid to the Chairman is determined by the Remuneration Committee while the fees for other NonExecutive Directors are determined by the Board as a whole.
The Chairman from Admission receives an annual fee of 135000 David Wild Rob McWilliam Christopher Mills and Julie Sneddon all receive an annual fee of 50000.
The Chairman and the other NonExecutive Directors are not eligible to participate in any of the Groups incentive arrangements following Admission and do not receive pension contributions.
50  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration report continued Annual report on remuneration Statement of consideration of shareholder views The 2017 Annual General Meeting will be the first occasion on which the Company will seek the support of shareholders for matters relating to the remuneration of Executive Directors.
The Remuneration Committee will ensure that it considers all of the feedback which it receives from shareholders during this process.
Single total figure of remuneration The table below sets out the single total figure of remuneration and breakdown for each Director in respect of FY17.
Nick Basing is the only Director of the Company who received remuneration and who was a Director of Indoor Bowling Equity Limited prior to its acquisition and as such his remuneration is not prorated from the date of the IPO being 12 April 2017.
The other Directors remuneration is prorated from the date of the IPO but their full annual remuneration has been reflected separately.
Director
Salaryfees
Bonus
Benefits
Pension
Audited
52week period to 31 December
Alan Hand 195342  2598 7814 205754 275000 Mark Willis 125417 15000 4108 5017 149542 175000 Graham Blackwell 114309  52  114361 160000 Nick Basing 168947  4792  173739 135000 Christopher Mills 36092    36092 50000 David Wild 36092    36092 50000 Julie Sneddon 36092    36092 50000 Rob McWilliam 36092    36092 50000 Total 748383 15000 11550 12831 787764 945000 Performance scenarios The graphs below set out performance scenarios for each Executive Director for the years 2018 and 2019.
Chief Executive Officer
Fixed
Shortterm incentives annual bonus 49% 49% 51% 51% 33% 33% 67% 67% 100% 100% Maximum 2019 Maximum 2018 Target 2019 Target 2018 Threshold 2019 Threshold 2018 0 100.000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 Corporate governance  51 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual report on remuneration continued Performance scenarios continued Chief Financial Officer 49% 51% 49% 51% 32% 68% 32% 68% 100% 100%
Shortterm incentives annual bonus Maximum 2019 Maximum 2018 Target 2019 Target 2018 Threshold 2019 Threshold 2018 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000 350000 400000 450000 Chief Commercial Officer 50% 50% 50% 50% 33% 67% 33% 67% 100% 100% 0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000 350000 400000 Maximum 2019 Maximum 2018 Target 2019 Target 2018 Threshold 2019 Threshold 2018
Shortterm incentives annual bonus The above charts provide an illustration of the proportion of total remuneration made up of each component of the remuneration policy and the value of each component.
The assumptions noted for target performance and maximum in the graphs above are provided for illustration purposes only.
Three scenarios have been illustrated for each Executive Director Threshold performance  consists of fixed remuneration no annual bonus and no vesting of LTIP awards.
Ontarget  Fixed remuneration 50 per cent annual bonus payout 50% of salary and no vesting of LTIP awards.
Maximum  Fixed remuneration 100 per cent annual bonus payout 100% of salary and no vesting of LTIP awards.
The fixed remuneration element is based on base salary effective for the year ended 30 December 2018 as set out on page 54 plus the pension and benefits paid in the year ended 31 December 2017 as set out in the table of Directors remuneration on page 51.
52  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration report continued Annual Bonus Plan The incentive for FY17 was in the form of a bonus based on performance against a target to increase the Groups adjusted EBITDA.
The Executive Directors had a bonus opportunity of up to 100% of salary in respect of FY17.
Actual Group adjusted EBITDA of 19.0m did not result in a bonus payment for the Executive Directors.
Mark Willis was granted a oneoff discretionary bonus of 15000 upon joining the Company payable after six months employment.
Performance Share Plan PSP In accordance with the PSP announced on 22 May 2017 the vesting of awards is conditional upon the achievement of two performance conditions which will be measured following the announcement of results for the year to 31 December 2019 FY19.
The first performance condition applying to the awards will be based on earnings per share of the Company EPS and will apply to 50% of the total number of share awards granted.
The second performance condition will be based on Total Shareholder Return TSR of the Company over the period from the date of grant to the announcement of results for FY19 relative to a comparator group of companies and will apply to the remaining 50%.
In accordance with IFRS 2 Share Based Payments the value of the awards is measured at fair value at the date of the grant.
The fair value is written off on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on managements estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
LTIP awards granted in 2017 The following awards were granted to the Executive Directors on 22 May 2017.
The share price at grant date was 1.68 and at the minimum performance level 12.5% of the schemes interest would be receivable.
Director Position Number of share awards granted Alan Hand Chief Executive Officer 333333 Mark Willis Chief Financial Officer 212121 Graham Blackwell Chief Commercial Officer 193939 Total as at 31 December 2017 739393 Comparison of overall performance It should be noted that the Company listed on 12 April 2017 and therefore has limited listed share price history until the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
The below graph reflects the performance of an investment of 100 in the Group against the same investment in the FTSE All Share Index on a monthly basis since the date of listing.
TEG share price performance versus FTSE All Share Index 17tel13tel90 130417 130517 130617 130717 130817 130917 131017 131117 131217
ASX.
Corporate governance  53 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual report on remuneration continued
Chief Executive Officer historical remuneration
The table below sets out the total remuneration delivered to the Chief Executive Officer over the last two years valued using the methodology applied to the single total figure of remuneration.
The Remuneration Committee does not believe that the remuneration payable in its earlier years as a private company bears any comparative value to that paid in its later years and therefore the Remuneration Committee has chosen to disclose remuneration only for the two most recent financial years
Chief Executive Officer
31 December 1 January Total single figure 205754 313879 Payments to past Directorspayments for loss of office No payments were made to past Directors or for loss of office.
Statement of Directors shareholdings and share interests as at 31 December 2017 There are currently no shareholding requirements in operation for the Company.
The number of shares of the Company in which current Directors had a beneficial interest and details of longterm incentive interests as at 31 December 2017 are set out in the table below.
Director
Shares held at IPO
Shares disposed acquired Shares held at 31 December
LTIP interests Alan Hand 868146  868146 333333 Mark Willis 144699  144699 212121 Graham Blackwell 578748 55555 523193 193939 Nick Basing 2025642 225642 1800000 David Wild Christopher Mills 25213768 1268017 23945751 Julie Sneddon Rob McWilliam  10000 10000 The number of ordinary shares shown as held by Christopher Mills includes ordinary shares held by certain funds of which Harwood Capital LLP is the discretionary fund manager.
Shareholder voting at general meetings This is the Companys first year as a public company and therefore the FY17 AGM will be the first.
This means that there is no historical voting to disclose on the Companys executive remuneration.
Implementation of policy in FY18 The Remuneration Committee proposes to implement the policy for FY18 as set out below
FY17 FY18 % increase Salary Fees Salary Fees Alan Hand 275000  275000  0% Mark Willis 175000  200000  14% Graham Blackwell 160000  170000  6% Nick Basing  135000  135000 0% David Wild  50000  50000 0% Christopher Mills  50000  50000 0% Julie Sneddon  50000  50000 0% Rob McWilliam  50000  50000 0% 54  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors remuneration report continued Benefits and pension No changes are proposed to benefits or pension.
Annual Bonus Plan The maximum bonus opportunity for the Executive Directors remains at 100% of salary.
Performance Share Plan There are no changes to the Performance Share Plan.
Advisers to the Remuneration Committee During the year the Committee received advice from BDO LLP related to the drawing up of employee share schemes Directors share plans and remuneration advice and independent analysis and advice on executive packages arising as a result of the transition from a private to public company.
BDO LLP received fees of 62k for its advice during the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Remuneration report was approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by David Wild Remuneration Committee Chair 21 March 2018 Corporate governance  55 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Details of the Groups policy on addressing financial risks and details about financial instruments are shown in note 24 to the Group financial statements on pages 96 to 97.
The sections of the Annual Report dealing with corporate governance the reports of the Nomination Committee and Audit Committee and the Directors remuneration report set out on pages 43 to 55 inclusive are hereby incorporated by reference into this Directors report.
For the purposes of compliance with the Disclosure Guidance and T ransparency Rules DTR 4.1.5R2 and DTR 4.1.8R the required content of the Management Report can be found in the Strategic report and Directors report including the sections of the Annual Report and Accounts incorporated by reference.
Directors interests The number of ordinary shares of the Company in which the Directors were beneficially interested as at 31 December 2017 are set out in the Directors remuneration report on page 54.
There have not been any changes in the interests of the Directors including share options and awards in the share capital of the Company between the year end and 21 March 2018.
None of the Directors have a beneficial interest in the shares of any subsidiary.
In line with the Companies Act 2006 the Board has clear procedures for Directors to formally disclose any actual or potential conflicts to the whole Board for authorisation as necessary.
All new conflicts are required to be disclosed as and when they arise.
There is an annual review of conflicts disclosed and authorisations given.
The register of Directors conflicts is maintained by the Company Secretary.
Directors indemnities The Companys Articles provide subject to the provisions of UK legislation an indemnity for Directors and officers of the Company and the Group in respect of liabilities they may incur in the discharge of their duties or in the exercise of their powers.
Directors
The Directors of the Company who held office during the year and up to the date of signing the Directors report are Alan Hand Appointed 15 March 2017 Mark Willis Appointed 15 March 2017 Graham Blackwell Appointed 15 March 2017 Nick Basing Appointed 15 March 2017 David Wild Appointed 15 March 2017 Rob McWilliam Appointed 15 March 2017 Christopher Mills Appointed 15 March 2017 Julie Sneddon Appointed 22 March 2017 The roles and biographies of the Directors as at the date of this report are set out on pages 36 to 37.
The appointment and replacement of Directors is governed by the Articles of the Company the UK Corporate Governance Code the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
Subject to the Articles of Association the Companies Act 2006 and any directions given by special resolution the business of the Company is managed by the Board which may exercise all the powers of the Company.
The Directors have pleasure in presenting the audited financial statements for the Group for the 52 weeks ended 31 December 2017.
Ten Entertainment Group plc the Company or the parent company is a public limited company.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 comprise the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group.
Additional information which is incorporated by reference into this Directors report including information required in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and the Listing Rule 9.8.4R of the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules and which includes information on future business developments can be located as follows the Chairmans statement on pages 6 to 7
the Chief Executive Officers statement
Statement of Directors responsibilities on page 61.
Together this information is intended to provide a fair balanced and understandable analysis of the development and performance of the Groups business during the year and its position at the end of the year its strategy likely developments and any principal risks and uncertainties associated with the Groups business.
56  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors report The Directors are all covered by a Directors and Officers liability insurance policy maintained by the Company with a qualifying thirdparty insurance company which was maintained throughout the financial period and is still in place as at the date of the approval of these financial statements.
Results and dividend The results for the year are set out in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on page 69.
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend of 7p per share on 5 July 2018 subject to approval at the AGM on 9 May 2018 with a record date of 25 May 2018.
As at 31 December 2017 the Companys authorised share capital was 650000 divided into a single class of 65000000 ordinary shares of 1p each.
Details of the Companys share capital including changes during the year are set out in note 17 to the financial statements.
All issued ordinary shares are fully paid up.
The ordinary shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange and can be held in certificated or uncertificated form.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to attend and speak at general meetings of the Company to appoint one or more proxies and if they are corporations corporate representatives who are entitled to attend general meetings and to exercise voting rights.
On a show of hands at a general meeting of the Company every holder of ordinary shares present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote unless the proxy is appointed by more than one shareholder and has been instructed by one or more shareholders to vote for the resolution and by one or more shareholders to vote against the resolution in which case the proxy has one vote for and one vote against.
This reflects the position in the Shareholders Rights Regulations 2009 which amended the Companies Act 2006.
On a poll every member present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote shall have one vote for every ordinary share held.
None of the ordinary shares carry any special voting rights with regard to control of the Company.
The Articles specify deadlines for exercising voting rights and appointing a proxy or proxies to vote in relation to resolutions to be passed at the AGM.
The relevant proxy votes are counted and the number for against or withheld in relation to each resolution are announced at the AGM and published on the Companys website after the meeting.
There are no restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company other than certain restrictions that may be imposed from time to time by the Articles law or regulation and pursuant to the Listing Rules whereby certain Directors officers and employees require approval to deal in ordinary shares of the Company.
As part of the IPO the following restrictions were also put in place restrictions on Harwood Capital Nominees Limited Oryx International Growth Fund Limited and North Atlantic Smaller Companies Investment Trust plc the Principal Selling Shareholders as a result of the Principal Selling Shareholders entering into a lockin deed with the Company and its sponsor Numis restricting the transfer of ordinary shares held by the Principal Selling Shareholder immediately after Admission for a period of 12 months.
For the 180day period thereafter they have agreed not to directly or indirectly transfer any of the shares other than through Numis and restrictions on certain Directors of the Company the Management Selling Shareholders as a result of the Management Selling Shareholders entering into a lockin deed with the Company and its sponsor Numis restricting the transfer of the legal andor beneficial interest in ordinary shares held by the Management Selling Shareholders immediately after Admission for a period of 12 months.
For the 180day period thereafter they have agreed not to directly or indirectly transfer any of the shares other than through Numis.
The Group is not aware of any other agreements between holders of securities that may result in restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares.
Authority for the Company to purchase its own shares Subject to authorisation by shareholder resolution the Company may purchase its own shares in accordance with the Act.
Any shares which have been bought back may be held as treasury shares or cancelled immediately upon completion of the purchase.
Immediately prior to but conditional upon Admission the Company was generally and unconditionally authorised to make market purchases within the meaning of Section  of the Companies Act of its shares provided that in doing so it could not purchase more than 6500000 shares in aggregate pays not less than 1p excluding expenses per share and pays a price per share that is not more excluding expenses per share than the higher of 105% of the average of the middle market quotations for a share as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five business days immediately before the day on which it purchases that share and the amount equal to the higher of the price of the last independent trade of an ordinary share and the highest current independent bid for an ordinary share as derived from the London Stock Exchange trading service SETS.
This authority shall expire at the conclusion of the next AGM of the Company or within 15 months from the date of passing of the resolution whichever is the earlier but the Company may if it agrees to purchase shares under this authority before it expires complete the purchase wholly or partly after this authority expires.
The Company Corporate governance  57 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Authority for the Company to purchase its own shares continued has not repurchased any of its ordinary shares under this authority.
Employment policies The Group is committed to the principle of equal opportunity in employment.
The
Group recruits and selects applicants for employment based solely on a persons qualifications and suitability for the position whilst bearing in mind equality and diversity.
It is the Groups policy to recruit the most capable person available for each position.
The Group recognises the need to treat all employees honestly and fairly.
The Group is committed to ensuring that its employees feel respected and valued and are able to fulfil their potential and recognises that the success of the business relies on their skill and dedication.
Applications for employment by disabled persons are always fully considered bearing in mind the aptitudes of the applicant concerned.
In the event of members of staff becoming disabled efforts are made to ensure that their employment with the Group continues and that appropriate training is arranged.
It is the policy of the Group that the training career development and promotion of disabled persons should as far as possible be identical with that of other employees.
The Group attaches importance to good communications and relations with employees.
Information that is or may be relevant to employees in the performance of their duties is circulated to them on a regular basis or immediately if it requires their immediate attention.
There is regular consultation with employees through meetings or other lines of communication so that their views are known and can be taken into account in making decisions on matters that will or may affect them.
Employee participation in their bowling venues performance is encouraged through various bonus and incentive schemes and there is regular communication with all employees on the performance of their bowling venue or central function and on the financial and economic factors affecting the overall performance of the Group.
For more information on the Companys employment practices please see page 35 and for the policy on remuneration and loss of office payments please see pages 47 to 55.
AGM
The notice convening the AGM to be held on 9 May 2018 at 6 Stratton Street London W1J 8LD is contained in a separate shareholder circular.
Full details of all resolutions to be proposed are provided in that document.
The Directors consider that all of the resolutions set out in the Notice of AGM are in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders as a whole.
The Directors will be voting in favour of them and unanimously recommend that shareholders vote in favour of each of them.
Significant agreements and change of control provisions The Group judges that the only significant agreements in relation to its business are its Group banking arrangements with the Royal Bank of Scotland plc gaming Substantial shareholdings As at 31 December 2017 the Company had been notified in accordance with the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules of the following holdings of voting rights attaching to the Companys shares Shareholder Number of shares % of total voting rights as at 31 December 2017 North Atlantic Smaller Companies Investment Trust plc 20000000 30.77% Harwood Capital Nominees Limited 6914713 10.64% Schroders plc 3742096 5.76% Woodford Investment Management Ltd 5147971 7.92% FMR LLC 3545819 5.45% Janus Henderson Group plc 3285766 5.05% These are funds managed by Harwood Capital LLP.
There have been no further notifications of any changes to these interests between 31 December 2017 and 19 March 2018.
Europe Limited and the relationship agreements between the Principal Selling Shareholders Numis and the Company.
The Groups gaming machine contracts do not terminate on a change of control.
The Group does not have agreements with any Director or employee that would provide compensation for loss of office or employment resulting from a takeover except that provisions of the Groups Performance Share Plan may cause options and awards granted to Directors to vest on a change of control.
The Groups banking arrangements do contain change of control provisions which if triggered could limit future utilisations require the repayment of existing utilisations or lead to a renegotiation of terms.
Relationship agreement On 12 April 2017 the Company the Harwood Shareholders Harwood as the discretionary investment manager of the Harwood Shareholders and Numis as Sole Sponsor and Financial Adviser entered into a relationship agreement the principal purpose of which is to ensure that the Company is capable of carrying on business independently at all times.
58  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Directors report continued Under the terms of the relationship agreement the Harwood Shareholders each undertake and undertake to procure that each of their associates shall procure insofar as they are able to do so that any transaction arrangement or contract entered into between the Harwood Shareholders or any of the Harwood Shareholders associates or their nominees and the Company will be conducted on an arms length basis and normal commercial terms and among other things neither the Harwood Shareholders nor any of their associates or nominees i will take any action that would have the effect of preventing the Company from complying with its obligations under the Listing Rules or ii will propose or procure the proposal of a shareholder resolution which is intended or appears to be intended to circumvent the proper application of the Listing Rules.
Harwood as the discretionary investment manager of Oryx and Harwood Capital Nominees has also undertaken to procure that Oryx and Harwood Capital Nominees will comply with the undertakings listed above.
The relationship agreement will continue in effect until the earlier of the aggregate voting rights of the Harwood Shareholders whether held directly or indirectly through the Harwood Shareholders associates andor their nominees are less than 10% or the shares are no longer admitted to the premium listing segment of the Official List and to trading on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
Articles of Association The Articles of Association remained unchanged during the 2017 financial year post the IPO and can only be amended by special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders.
Political donations The Company made no political donations in the year.
Key performance indicators KPIs Details of the Groups KPIs can be found on pages 20 to 21.
Independent auditors PwC have signified their willingness to continue in office as auditors to the Company and the Group is satisfied that PwC are independent and there are adequate safeguards in place to safeguard their objectivity.
A resolution to reappoint PwC as the Companys auditors will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
Directors statement of disclosure of information to auditors Having made the requisite enquiries the Directors in office at the date of this Annual Report and Accounts have each confirmed that so far as they are aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps heshe ought to have taken as a Director to make himself herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
Going concern The financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis which the Directors believe to be appropriate based on the ongoing review of current trading performance and results and the impact on cash flows and the financial position of the Group the review of the Groups operational cash requirements investment and maintenance capital needs financing cash requirements in the servicing and repaying of debt and how the current and forecast cash position covers these areas the preparation of annual budgets which analyse the future trading performance the conversion to cash and the movement in the Groups financial position the review of current compliance with banking covenants and the analysis of forecast results and how they impact on compliance.
This includes reviewing sensitised cases for potential risks impacting on forecast performance and what levels of headroom the Group can sustain to remain compliant the ongoing review of material risks and uncertainties to the business and the maintenance or implementation of controls and procedures to ensure these are monitored and managed.
These risks are reviewed under the Strategic report on pages 23 to 25 and the ongoing review of the business model and implementation of new technology and ideas as well as entering into new contracts and business partnerships to improve the business performance and ensure its going concern for at least the following year as per current forecasts.
Cautionary statement This Annual Report and Accounts contains forwardlooking statements.
These forwardlooking statements are not guarantees of future performance rather they are based on current views and assumptions as at the date of this Annual Report and Accounts and are made by the Directors in good faith based on the information available to them at the time of their approval of this report.
These statements should be treated with caution due to the inherent risks and uncertainties underlying any such forwardlooking information.
The Group undertakes no obligation to update these forwardlooking statements.
By order of the Board Mark Willis Company Secretary 21 March 2018 Corporate governance  59 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 60  Corporate governance Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial 52week period.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the Corporate Governance report confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and loss of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
In the case of each Director in office at the date the Directors report is approved so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and Companys auditors are unaware and they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and Companys auditors are aware of that information.
We consider the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
By order of the Board Alan Hand
Chief Executive Officer
21 March 2018 Corporate governance  61 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Statement of Directors responsibilities 62  Financial statements Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Opinion In our opinion Ten Entertainment Group plcs group financial statements and company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups profit and the groups and the companys cash flows for the 52week period then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the companys financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the Consolidated and Company statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income the Consolidated and Company statements of cash flows and the Consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity for the 52week period then ended the accounting policies and the notes to the financial statements.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group or the company.
Other than those disclosed in the Directors Report we have provided no nonaudit services to the group or the company in the period from 2 January 2017 to 31 December 2017.
Our audit approach
Ten Entertainment Group plc is a tenpin bowling operator and operations are wholly UKbased.
As described in note 3 to the financial statements the Group listed on the London Stock Exchange on 19 April 2017.
A group reorganisation took place as part of the IPO in which Ten Entertainment Group plc became the new parent company of the existing group.
The group has applied the principles of predecessor accounting and as such the comparatives are presented as if the group has always existed in its current form.
Overview
Materiality  Overall group materiality 559000 2016 420000 based on 5% of adjusted profit before tax.
Overall company materiality 409000 2016 430000 based on 1% of total assets.
Audit scope  The Ten Entertainment Group plc group operates with one significant component being Tenpin Limited which is a UK subsidiary.
There are 7 other UK based subsidiaries.
We performed a full scope audit over Tenpin Limited whilst performing specific procedures over transactions and balances within the other statutory entities based on their contribution to the groups financial statement line items.
Our audit scoping gave us coverage of 97% of revenue and 89% of profit before tax.
Key audit matters  Goodwill and site asset impairment.
Financial statements  63 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent auditors report To the members of Ten Entertainment Group plc The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
We gained an understanding of the legal and regulatory framework applicable to the group and the industry in which it operates and considered the risk of acts by the group which were contrary to applicable laws and regulations including fraud.
We designed audit procedures at group and significant component level to respond to the risk recognising that the risk of not detecting a material misstatement due to fraud is higher than the risk of not detecting one resulting from error as fraud may involve deliberate concealment by for example forgery or intentional misrepresentations or through collusion.
We focused on laws and regulations that could give rise to a material misstatement in the group and company financial statements including but not limited to the Companies Act 2006 the Listing Rules and UK tax legislation.
Our tests included but were not limited to review of the financial statement disclosures to underlying supporting documentation review of correspondence with legal advisors and enquiries of management.
There are inherent limitations in the audit procedures described above and the further removed noncompliance with laws and regulations is from the events and transactions reflected in the financial statements the less likely we would become aware of it.
We did not identify any key audit matters relating to irregularities including fraud.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including testing journals and evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Goodwill and site asset impairment assessment Refer to pages 4446 Audit Committee Report pages 7677 Significant Accounting Policies and pages 86 to 89 notes.
The group has property plant and equipment of 34.9 million.
The group operates in the leisure market and is therefore exposed to fluctuations in consumer discretionary spending and the wider economy.
Management considers each site to be a cashgenerating unit CGU and has performed an impairment assessment using discounted cash flows to ensure that the carrying value of each sites assets is supported by expected future cash flows.
We focused on this area as the determination of whether an impairment charge was necessary involved significant estimates about the future results of each site.
The group also has goodwill and intangible assets of 26.7 million which have arisen through a number of acquisitions.
Goodwill is not allocated to individual CGUs as management considers that the synergies arising from each acquisition benefit the group as a whole rather than individual sites and management monitors goodwill in aggregate for internal purposes.
Therefore for goodwill impairment testing the CGUs are aggregated into a single group.
We considered the carrying value of the groups assets compared to its market capitalisation which gives an indication of the overall value of the group.
The market capitalisation was significantly in excess of the carrying value of assets.
We evaluated the reasonableness of managements future cash flow forecasts and tested the underlying value in use calculations.
We agreed managements forecast to the latest Board approved strategic plan.
We also compared historic actual results to those budgeted to assess the quality of managements forecasting.
Based on this evaluation we considered managements ability to forecast was appropriate to support the basis upon which the future cash flows have been prepared.
The key assumptions in the calculations were growth in revenue and EBITDA.
In assessing these assumptions we considered external leisure market growth forecasts from a variety of sources as these were good indicators of expected growth in tenpin bowling operator sales.
Where managements growth assumptions were in excess of these forecasts we evaluated the rationale being the benefit of refurbishments and other management actions to drive growth.
We considered the forecasts had been prepared on a supportable basis.
64  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Independent auditors report continued To the members of Ten Entertainment Group plc Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Goodwill and site asset impairment assessment continued Managements assessment of the site portfolio as detailed above is used to form the basis of the goodwill impairment review and is therefore subject to the same assumptions as the site impairment review above.
We also tested managements assumption in respect of the long term growth rates in the forecasts by comparing them to long term average growth rates of the UK economy and the discount rate by assessing the cost of capital for the company and comparable organisations.
We were satisfied these assumptions were appropriate.
We also performed sensitivity analysis in respect of key assumptions to determine at what level changes in these would eliminate headroom in the impairment test.
There were no changes in key assumptions that were considered reasonably possible which would eliminate headroom.
We evaluated the appropriateness of allocating goodwill to a single group of CGUs.
We considered the rationale for the acquisitions level of integration with the rest of the group and the nature of synergies derived.
We also confirmed this is the way in which management monitors goodwill by reviewing managements internal reporting.
We were satisfied that synergies benefited the group as a whole and therefore the allocation of goodwill to a single group of CGUs was appropriate.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the company to communicate in our report.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group and the company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Ten Entertainment Group plc group operates with one significant component being Tenpin Limited which is based the UK.
There are 7 other UK subsidiaries.
We performed a full scope audit over Tenpin Limited whilst performing specific procedures over transactions and balances within the other statutory entities based on their contribution to the groups financial statement line items.
Our audit scoping gave us coverage of 97% of revenue and 89% of profit before tax.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Key audit matters continued Financial statements  65 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Materiality continued Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall materiality 559000 2016 420000.
409000 2016 430000.
How we determined it 5% of adjusted profit before tax.
1% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Adjusted profit before tax is a primary measure used by management and shareholders in assessing the performance of the group and is disclosed as a key performance indicator in the annual report.
This measure provides us with a consistent yearonyear basis for determining materiality based on trading performance and eliminates the impact of nonrecurring items.
Adjusted profit before tax excludes exceptional items shareholder loan note interest amortisation of acquired intangibles and loss on disposal of assets.
Total assets is deemed an appropriate benchmark as this is a nontrading entity which predominantly holds investments in subsidiaries.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 409000 and 500000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 28000 Group audit 2016 21000 and 20450 Company audit 2016 21500 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups and companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
66  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Independent auditors report continued To the members of Ten Entertainment Group plc Reporting on other information continued With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements CA06.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report CA06.
The directors assessment of the prospects of the group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 24 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 32 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the group and company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit Listing Rules.
Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 61 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the groups and companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the group and company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 44 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 CA06.
Financial statements  67 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities in respect of the annual report set out on page 61 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the members on 12 April 2017 to audit the financial statements for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 1 year covering the 52week period ended 31 December 2017.
Prior to this we had been the auditor to predecessor companies since the 52week period ended 26 December 2004.
John Ellis Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
21 March 2018 68  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Independent auditors report continued To the members of Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Revenue 1 71040 67319 Cost of sales 21478 20639 Gross profit 49562 46680 Administrative expenses 39640 36924 Operating profit 9922 9756 Analysed as Group adjusted EBITDA 19012 17605 Exceptional administrative costs 6 4283 1902 Onerous lease provision releasecharge 1403 272 Amortisation of acquisition intangibles 607 1307 Depreciation and amortisation 5247 4426 Lossprofit on disposal of assets 356 58 Operating profit 9922 9756 Exceptional finance costs 5 703 904 Finance costs 5 1927 5224 Net finance costs 5 2630 4320 Profit before taxation 7292 5436 Taxation 8 2111 1805 Profit and total comprehensive income for the period attributable to owners of the parent 5181 3631 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share 9 7.97p 5.59p Diluted earnings per share 9 7.96p 5.59p Adjusted basic earnings per share 9 16.20p 14.77p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 9 16.18p 14.75p The accompanying statements of accounting policies and notes on pages 73 to 99 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements  69 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 Group Company
31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 11 25171 23552 Intangible assets 11 1490 2190 Investments 12   38915 Property plant and equipment 13 34891 34720 61552 60462 38915 Current assets Inventories 14 1356 1339 Trade and other receivables 15 3521 3346 28 Cash and cash equivalents 16 5571 10185 1959 10448 14870 1988
Current liabilities Bank borrowings and finance leases 19 7846 4111 Trade and other payables 21 5502 7093 2823 Corporation tax payable 825 669 Provisions 22 70 293 14243 12166 2823 Net current liabilitiesassets 3795 2704 835 Noncurrent liabilities Bank borrowings and finance leases 19 2244 13158 Shareholder loan notes 20  42435 Other noncurrent liabilities 21 233 442 Deferred tax liability 23 1726 1511 Provisions 22 361 1577 4564 59123 Net assets 53193 4043 38080
Share capital 1tel Merger reserve 6171 555 Share based payment reserve 87  87 Retained earnings 46285 2839 37343 Total equity 53193 4043 38080 1 The loss for the Company amounted to 2.9m for the period ended 31 December 2017.
The accompanying statement of accounting policies and notes on pages 73 to 99 are an integral part of these financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 69 to 72 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 21 March 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Alan Hand Mark Willis Company number 70  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Consolidated and Company statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 Group Notes 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Cash flows generated from operating activities Cash generated from operations 18 13302 14754 Corporation tax paid 1861 Finance costs paid 621 977 Net cash generated from operating activities 10820 13777 Cash flows used in investing activities Acquisition of sites by Tenpin Limited 2594 2322 Purchase of property plant and equipment 3463 2455 Purchase of software 160 575 Net cash used in investing activities 6217 5352 Cash flows used in financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary shares 1 4 Finance lease principal payments 2312 1471 Drawdown of bank borrowings 6000 Repayment of borrowings 12906 3594 Net cash used in financing activities 9217 5061 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 4614 3364 Cash and cash equivalents  beginning of period 10185 6821 Cash and cash equivalents  end of period 16 5571 10185 Company Notes 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Cash flows generated from operating activities Cash generated from operations 18 8 Net cash generated from operating activities 8 Cash flows generated from financing activities Proceeds from allotment of ordinary shares 1 Dividends received 1950 Net cash generated from financing activities 1951 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 1959 Cash and cash equivalents  beginning of period Cash and cash equivalents  end of period 16 1959 The accompanying statement of accounting policies and notes on pages 73 to 99 are an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements  71 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Consolidated and Company statements of cash flows for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 Group
Share based payment reserve
Retained earnings accumulated losses
53 weeks to 1 January 2017 Balance at 28 December 2015 649  555 792 412 Profit for the period and total comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent    3631 3631 Balance at 1 January 2017 649  555 2839 4043 52 weeks to 31 December 2017 Balance at 2 January 2017 649  555 2839 4043 Issue of ordinary shares 1  43882  43883 Share based payment charge note 27  86   86 Group reorganisation note 3   38266 38266 Profit for the period and total comprehensive income attributable to owners of the parent    5181 5181 Balance at 31 December 2017 650 86 6171 46286 53193
Share capital Share based payment reserve
Retained earnings accumulated losses
53 weeks to 1 January 2017 Balance at 28 December 2015 Loss for the period and total comprehensive expense Issue of ordinary shares Balance at 1 January 2017 52 weeks to 31 December 2017 Balance at 2 January 2017 Issue of ordinary shares note 17 650  38266  38916 Share based payment charge note 27  86   86 Group reorganisation note 3   38266 38266 Dividend received    1950 1950 Loss for the period    2872 2872 Balance at 31 December 2017 650 86  37344 38080 The accompanying statement of accounting policies and notes on pages 73 to 99 are an integral part of these financial statements.
72  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 General information T en Entertainment Group plc the Company is a public limited company limited by shares incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom and registered in England and Wales.
The address of the registered office is Aragon House University Way Cranfield Technology Park Cranfield Bedford MK43 0EQ.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 comprise the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group that were acquired by the Company on 12 April 2017 before the Company was admitted to the London Stock Exchange on 19 April 2017.
The principal activity of the Group comprises the operation of tenpin bowling centres.
Basis of preparation The Company was incorporated on 15 March 2017 and acquired the businesses of the Indoor Bowling Equity Limited Group on 12 April 2017 as detailed in note 3.
The consolidated financial statements of the Company for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 have been prepared as a continuation of the existing Indoor Bowling Equity Limited business and to account for its acquisition by insertion of the holding company Ten Entertainment Group plc using the principles of predecessor accounting.
In doing so the comparatives for the 53week period to 1 January 2017 have been presented as if the Group had always existed in its current form.
Refer to note 3 for a detailed explanation of the Group reorganisation.
The Group and Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations as they apply to the financial statements of the Group and the Company for the 52 weeks ended 31 December 2017 and applied in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
The accounting policies which follow set out those policies which apply in preparing the financial statements for the 52 weeks ended 31 December 2017 and have been applied consistently.
The Group and the Company financial statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand pounds 000 except when otherwise indicated.
The financial statements are prepared using the historical cost basis.
On publishing the company financial statements here together with the Group financial statements the Company is taking advantage of the exemption in Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its individual statement of comprehensive income and related notes that form a part of these approved financial statements.
Changes in accounting policy and disclosures During the year a number of amendments to IFRS became effective and were adopted by the Group none of which had a material impact on the Groups net cash flows financial position total comprehensive income or earnings per share.
At the date of authorisation of the consolidated financial statements certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published but are not yet effective.
The Group has not adopted early any of these pronouncements.
The new standards amendments and interpretations that are expected to be relevant to the Groups financial statements in the future are as follows IFRS 2 Share Based Payment has been amended to clarify the classification and measurements of share based payment transactions effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The clarifications and amendments are for the accounting for cashsettled share based payment transactions that include a performance condition the classification of share based payment transactions with net settlement features and the accounting for modifications of share based payment transactions from cashsettled to equitysettled.
The
Directors do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements in future periods.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments  and amendment IFRS 9 Financial Instruments are effective for periods commencing on or after 1 January 2018.
IFRS 9 is a replacement for IAS 39 Financial Instruments and covers three distinct areas.
Phase 1 contains new requirements for the classification and measurement of financial assets and liabilities.
Phase 2 relates to the impairment of financial assets and requires the calculation of impairment on an expected loss basis rather than the current incurred loss basis.
Phase 3 relates to less stringent requirements for general hedge accounting.
The Directors do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements in future periods.
Financial statements  73 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Statement of accounting policies Changes in accounting policy and disclosures continued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers replaces IAS 18 Revenue and introduces a fivestep approach to revenue recognition based on performance obligations in customer contracts.
The International Accounting Standards Board IASB has proposed to issue some clarifications and to defer the standards effective date of 1 January 2017 to 1 January 2018.
The Directors have carried out an initial assessment of the impact and based on the assessment completed to date do not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements in future periods.
IFRS 16 Leases sets out the principles for the recognition measurement presentation and disclosure of leases for both parties to a contract i. the customer lessee and the supplier lessor.
IFRS 16 completes the IASBs project to improve the financial reporting of leases and replaces the previous leases standard IAS 17 Leases and related interpretations.
The effective date for the Group is 1 January 2019.
The standard will affect primarily the accounting for the Groups operating leases and will result in a material decrease in operating lease rental costs material increases in depreciation and finance costs a decrease in profit before and after tax a decrease in net assets and recognition of lease assets and liabilities.
As at the reporting date the Group has noncancellable operating lease commitments of 142.7m see note 25.
The Directors are in the process of evaluating the impact of IFRS 16 on the Group.
Basis of consolidation Subsidiaries are all entities including structured entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
All intercompany balances and transactions and any unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
On acquisition of a subsidiary all of the identifiable acquired assets including intangible assets liabilities and contingent liabilities are recorded at their fair values reflecting their condition on the date control passes.
The cost of an acquisition is measured as the fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed.
The excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
All accounting policies are applied consistently throughout the Group companies.
Going concern The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements with the assistance of its bank facilities.
The Groups forecasts and projections take account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance and show that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current facilities meet future debt repayments and continue to comply with its banking covenants for at least the next 12 months.
At 31 December 2017 the Group had cash balances of 5.6m and undrawn committed financing facilities of 9.0m with a further 5.0m of uncommitted financing.
In their consideration of going concern the Directors have reviewed the Groups future cash forecasts and profit projections which are based on past experience and the projected opening programme of an average of two new centres per annum.
Taking the above into consideration and also the principal risks the Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the Financial Statements.
The Directors have made this assessment after consideration of the annual budgeted cash flows and related assumptions and in accordance with the FRCs Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting.
Statement of compliance Both the company financial statements and the Group financial statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union Adopted IFRSs IFRIC interpretations and those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under Adopted IFRS.
Adopted
IFRSs are subject to an ongoing process of review and endorsement by the European Commission and amendment and interpretation by the IASB.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of financial statements requires the use of accounting estimates and requires management to exercise judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
Accounting estimates are based on historical experience and various other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances the results of which form the basis of making the judgements about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources.
74  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Statement of accounting policies continued Critical accounting estimates and judgements continued Actual results may differ from these estimates and the estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both the current and future periods.
Intangible assets and tangible property plant and equipment These assets are affected by impairment assessments and estimates of value in use and residual value.
The calculation of value in use is based on pretax cash flow projections from the financial budgets approved by the Board covering a oneyear period and extrapolated by management using an estimated mediumterm growth rate for a further two years.
Cash flows beyond this threeyear period are extrapolated over the life of the lease relating to that site at the estimated longterm growth rate extended by 15 years for short leasehold premises in England and Wales where the provisions of the Landlord and Tenants Act apply and the Company has the right and expects to extend the lease on expiry or over 50 years for a long leasehold or freehold site.
The pretax discount rate applied to the cash flow projections approximates the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted only to reflect the way in which the market would assess the specific risks associated with the estimated cash flows of the bowling businesses and to exclude any risks that are not relevant to estimated cash flows of the bowling businesses or for which they have already been adjusted.
The effect of varying the key assumptions in the goodwill and tangible property plant and equipment impairment calculations is presented in note 13.
Business combinations IFRS 3 requires assets and liabilities acquired to be recorded at fair value and to separately identify intangible assets from goodwill.
There is judgement involved in estimating fair value which requires the Directors to estimate the useful economic life of each asset and the future cash flows expected to arise from each asset and to apply a suitable discount rate.
Onerous lease provisions Onerous lease provisions are made where the future minimum contractual payments exceed the future cash flows expected to be generated by the relevant site.
The assessment of expected further cash flows and the discount rate used requires estimation.
The cash flow projections are calculated on the same basis as those for the assessment of impairment of intangible assets and property plant and equipment as outlined above.
Deferred tax Estimation is required of temporary differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities and their tax base.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for all taxable temporary differences but where deductible temporary differences exist managements judgement is required as to whether a deferred tax asset should be recognised based on the availability of future taxable profits.
The deferred tax assets actually recoverable may differ from the amounts recognised if actual taxable profits differ from managements estimates.
Share based payments The estimation requires the selection of an appropriate valuation model consideration as to the inputs necessary for the valuation model chosen and the estimation of the number of awards that will ultimately vest inputs for which arise from judgements relating to the probability of meeting nonmarket performance conditions and the continuing participation of the Executive Directors as detailed in note 27.
NonGAAP performance measures The Group has identified certain measures that it believes will assist in the understanding of the performance of the business.
The measures are not defined under IFRS and they may not be directly comparable with other companies adjusted measures.
The nonIFRS measures are not intended to be a substitute for an IFRS performance measure but the business has included them as it considers them to be important comparables and key measures used within the business for assessing performance.
These financial statements make reference to the following nonIFRS measures Group adjusted EBITDA  This consists of earnings before interest taxation depreciation amortisation costs exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets adjustments to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
The reconciliation to operating profit is included on note 2.
Adjusted underlying profit after tax  This consists of the profit after tax adjusted for exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets amortisation of acquisition intangibles shareholder loan note interest adjustments to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
The reconciliation of this number to profit after tax is included under note 2.
Financial statements  75 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc NonGAAP performance measures continued Exceptional costs  Exceptional items are those significant items which management considers to be oneoff and nonrecurring.
The separate reporting of these per note 6 helps to provide a better indication of underlying performance.
Likeforlike sales  These are a measure of growth of sales adjusted for new or divested sites over a comparable trading period.
Revenue
Revenue represents the total amounts earned from customers from bowling food beverage machines and amusements together with any other goods and services delivered in the normal course of business net of VAT.
The Group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured when it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and in the case of bowling when the game has been played.
All deposits paid in advance for a game of bowling that has yet to be played are accounted for as deferred revenue under current liabilities until the game is played upon which it is recognised as revenue.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are those significant items which are separately disclosed by virtue of their size or nature to enable full understanding of the Groups financial performance.
Transactions which may give rise to exceptional items include but are not limited to gains or losses on disposal of assets legal and professional fees from corporate transactions and costs associated with subsidiary and new site acquisitions such as professional and legal fees taxes and redundancy costs.
Professional fees taxes and other costs arising on regears are treated as exceptional as they are believed to be oneoff in nature and arising as the property market adjusts to the performances of companies in the wider entertainment industry.
Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of the acquisition of a subsidiary or business combination over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired.
Goodwill is carried at cost less impairment and is tested annually for impairment or earlier if circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred.
Excess of acquirers interest in the net fair value of acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities over cost arising on acquisition is recognised immediately in the statement of comprehensive income.
Goodwill is not allocated to individual cashgenerating units CGUs as the Group considers that the synergies arising from each acquisition benefit the Group as a whole rather than individual sites and monitors goodwill in aggregate for internal purposes.
Therefore for goodwill impairment testing the CGUs are aggregated into a single group.
Software
Software costs are capitalised and amortised over their estimated useful lives of up to three years.
All software has been purchased and generated externally.
Customer lists Customer lists are recognised at fair value on acquisition of subsidiaries and are amortised over the years from which their expected benefits are determined to be recognised in the income statement to nil over a fiveyear period with the rate of amortisation decreasing.
Favourable leases Favourable leases are recognised at fair value on acquisition of subsidiaries and are amortised over the period of the lease.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any impairment in value with property plant and equipment acquired in a business combination recognised at their fair value.
Cost of assets includes acquisition costs net of VAT as well as other directly attributable costs in bringing the asset into a working condition.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost less estimated residual value of each asset on a straightline basis over its expected useful economic life.
The principal useful lives used for this purpose are as follows Long leasehold premises The shorter of 50 years or their estimated useful lives Short leasehold premises Their estimated useful lives Fixtures fittings and equipment Between three and 40 years Amusement machines Four years Assets in the course of construction are not depreciated until they are brought into use.
As required by IAS 16 property plant and equipments expected useful life and residual values are reviewed annually.
Residual value is calculated based upon prices prevailing at the date of acquisition.
76  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Statement of accounting policies continued Impairment of assets At each reporting date all assets are considered for evidence of impairment.
If there is an indication of impairment the Group carries out an impairment test by measuring the assets recoverable amount which is the higher of the fair value less costs to sell and the value in use.
If this recoverable amount is below the carrying value an impairment loss is recognised in the statement of comprehensive income and the asset is written down to the recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows arising from the use of the asset are discounted to their present value using a discount rate which reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
Impairment of the Groups property plant and equipment is assessed at the cashgenerating unit CGU level being a bowling site with goodwill allocated at company level and impairment tested for goodwill at company level.
Impairment losses are charged to the statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they are identified and are allocated first to goodwill then to carrying amounts of other assets at the CGU level.
Reversals of impairment An impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed.
In respect of other assets an impairment loss is reversed when there is an indication that the impairment loss may no longer exist and there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation or amortisation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
Property disposals Disposals of properties and any resultant gain or loss on disposal are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income once all conditions of the sale contract become unconditional.
Business combinations The purchase of a company or bowling site being a group of inputs and processes capable of generating profits is accounted for as a business combination.
Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting.
The consideration for a business combination is measured at fair value on the date of acquisition with the assets acquired and liabilities incurred measured at fair value on exchange.
Goodwill is recognised as the surplus of the consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired and is accounted for as per the accounting policy on goodwill.
Transaction costs that the Group incurs in connection with business combinations are expensed as incurred.
Management judgements are made in the measurement of fair values to the net assets acquired in a business combination in particular the customer lists inventories and property plant and equipment acquired.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is calculated as cost of purchase on a first in first out basis based on normal levels of activity.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less further costs expected to be incurred to completion and disposal which is the same method used to fair value the inventory on a business combination.
Provision is made for obsolete slowmoving or defective items where appropriate.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value and then subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Financial assets The Group classifies its financial assets as either at fair value through profit and loss all of which were designated as such upon recognition or as loans and receivables.
There are no financial assets held as available for sale.
Loans and receivables including nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments are classified as trade and other receivables in the balance sheet.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and call deposits.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of the statement of cash flows while being included in financial liabilities for the balance sheet.
Interestbearing borrowings Interestbearing borrowings are recognised initially at fair value with attributable debt issue costs capitalised.
Subsequent to initial recognition interestbearing borrowings are stated at amortised cost with any difference between cost and redemption value being recognised in the statement of comprehensive income over the period of the borrowings on an effective interest basis.
Financial statements  77 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Debt issue costs Issue costs of debt such as bank arrangement fees and legal fees incurred in arranging debt are capitalised under noncurrent other receivables and are amortised in the statement of comprehensive income on an effective interest rate method.
Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently held at amortised cost.
Shareholder loan notes Shareholder loan notes were 1 principal amount unsecured 10% interestbearing notes which were listed on the Channel Island Securities Exchange CISE.
Interest is capitalised on 31 December each year with an equivalent in loan notes being issued listed and bearing interest.
These were redeemed for shares as detailed in note 20.
Leases
Costs incurred in respect of operating leases are charged to the statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Benefits received and receivable as an incentive to sign an operating lease are similarly spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The majority of the Groups shortterm property leases are treated as operating leases.
Finance lease arrangements which transfer substantially all of the benefits and risks of ownership of the related property and machines to the Group are treated as if the property and machines had been acquired.
The properties and machines are included in property plant and equipment classified as long leasehold premises for the properties and amusement machines for the machines.
The capital element of the leasing commitment is shown as a finance lease obligation in liabilities.
Lease rentals are separated into capital and interest elements with the capital element applied to reduce the finance lease obligation and the interest element charged to finance costs in the statement of comprehensive income so as to give a constant periodic rate of charge on the remaining balance of the obligation outstanding at each accounting period end.
The properties and amusement machines are depreciated in accordance with the accounting policy for property plant and equipment.
Lease incentives Lease incentives are recognised as a reduction of rental expense over the term of the lease.
These are amortised on a straightline basis.
Onerous lease commitments Provisions are recognised for the present value of onerous leases and vacant properties calculated as the expected net cash out flows over the remaining life of the lease discounted at a pretax rate which reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability.
Notional interest is charged in respect of the unwinding of the discount.
Pension costs The Group operates a defined contribution pension plan.
The Group pays contributions to privately administered pension insurance plans on a mandatory basis.
The Company has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
The contributions are recognised as employee benefit expense when they are due.
Prepaid contributions are recognised as an asset to the extent that a cash refund or a reduction in the future payments is available.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as the result of a past event and it is both probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount of the obligation can be reliably estimated.
Where the Group expects to be reimbursed for an outflow of resources associated with a provision for example under an insurance contract the expected reimbursement is recognised as a separate asset but only when the reimbursement is virtually certain.
If the effect of the time value of money is material provisions are calculated by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Where discounting is used the increase in the provision due to the unwinding of the discount over time is charged to finance costs in the statement of comprehensive income.
Tax
The tax charge comprises current tax payable and deferred tax.
The current tax charge represents an estimate of the tax payable in respect of the Groups taxable profits and is based on an interpretation of existing tax laws.
As required by IAS 12 revised the Group provides deferred income tax using the balance sheet liability method on all temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying values at the balance sheet date.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities so recognised are determined using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of the assets or liabilities.
78  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Statement of accounting policies continued Tax continued Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred tax is not recognised in respect of the initial recognition of an asset or liability acquired in a transaction which is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction does not affect accounting or taxable profits.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income tax assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the taxable entity or different taxable entities where there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
Segment reporting The Groups segments distinguishable components of the Group that are engaged either in providing products or services are its tenpin bowling operations and its central management.
The Group wholly operates within the UK.
The Group has identified the Board of Directors as the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM.
Share capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Share premium arises on the excess between the fair value of the shares issued and the par value of the shares issued and the existing shares issued have none.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax against share premium.
Share based payments Performance Share Plans PSPs for its Executive Directors are accounted for in accordance with IFRS 2 Share Based Payments.
The value of the awards is measured at fair value at the date of the grant and recognised as an expense.
The total amount expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the awards granted including any market performance conditions.
The cost of the transactions is recognised together with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the performance conditions are fulfilled ending on the date on which the relevant Directors become fully entitled to the award.
Financial statements  79 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 1 Segment reporting Segmental information is presented in respect of the Groups business segments.
Strategic decisions are made by the Board based on information presented in respect of these segments.
The Group comprises the following segments Tenpin Limited Bowls  Tenpin Limited is a leading tenpin bowling operator in the UK.
All revenue is derived from activities conducted in the UK.
Central  Comprises central management including company secretarial work the Board of Directors and general head office assets and costs.
The segment results for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 are used by the Board for strategic decision making and a reconciliation of those results to the reported profit in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and the segment assets are as follows
Limited
Central
Group
For the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 Segment revenue  external 71040  71040 Adjusted EBITDA note 2 20420 1408 19012 Segment assetsliabilities as at 31 December 2017 76022 4022 72000 Reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to reported operating profit Adjusted EBITDA note 2 20420 1408 19012 Amortisation and depreciation of intangibles and property plant and equipment 5245 2 5247 Loss of disposals note 6 356  356 Amortisation of fair valued intangibles  569 569 Unwind of other fair value adjustments  38 38 Exceptionals note 6 1849 3137 4986 Onerous lease provision movement 1403  1403 Operating profitloss 14373 5154 9219 Finance costs note 5 787 1140 1927 Profitloss before taxation 13586 6294 7292 For the 53week period ended 1 January 2017 Segment revenue  external 67319  67319 Adjusted EBITDA note 2 18178 573 17605 Segment assets as at 1 January 2017 70915 5203 76118 Reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to reported operating profit Adjusted EBITDA note 2 18178 573 17605 Amortisation and depreciation of intangibles and tangible fixed assets 4416 10 4426 Amortisation of fair valued intangibles  971 971 Unwind of other fair value adjustments  336 336 Profit on disposal of amusement machines note 6 58  58 Oneoff costs note 6 1320 582 1902 Onerous lease provision movement 272  272 Operating profitloss 12228 2472 9756 Finance costs note 5 198 4122 4320 Profitloss before taxation 12030 6594 5436 All assets have been allocated to segments.
80  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 2 Alternative performance measures  nonGAAP measures The Group has identified certain measures that it believes will assist in the understanding of the performance of the business.
The measures are not defined under IFRS and they may not be directly comparable with other companies adjusted measures.
The nonIFRS measures are not intended to be a substitute for an IFRS performance measure but the business has included them as it considers them to be important comparables and key measures used within the business for assessing performance.
These financial statements make reference to the following nonIFRS measures Group adjusted EBITDA  This consists of earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation costs exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets adjustment to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
Reconciliation of operating profit to Group adjusted EBITDA 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Group adjusted EBITDA 19012 17605 Amortisation of software 237 109 Amortisation of fair valued items on acquisition 607 1307 Loss on disposals 356 58 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 5010 4317 Operating profit before oneoff items 12802 11930 Onerous lease provision released 1403 272 Operating profit before exceptional items 14205 11658 Exceptional items  IPO 3101 Exceptional items  other 1885 1902 Operating profit 9219 9756 Adjusted underlying profit after tax  This consists of the profit after tax adjusted for exceptional items profit or loss on disposal of assets amortisation of acquisitions intangibles shareholder loan note interest adjustments to onerous lease and impairment provisions and derecognition of finance leases.
The reconciliation of this number to profit after tax is included under note 9.
Exceptional costs  Exceptional items are those significant items which management considers to be oneoff and nonrecurring.
The separate reporting of these per note 6 helps to provide a better indication of underlying performance.
Proforma sales  This consists of the sales for the 52week period to 1 January 2017 representing weeks 2 to 53 of FY16.
This number will exclude the sales for week 1 which is the week ending 3 January 2016 which is the most comparable to the 53rd week included in the FY16 results.
This has been done to provide a more useful comparative to understand the underlying trading performance for the 52 weeks to 31 December 2017.
Likeforlike sales  These are a measure of growth of sales adjusted for new or divested sites over a comparable trading period.
3 Group reorganisation On 12 April 2017 as part of the Offer and Admission of the ordinary share capital of the Company to the premium segment of the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange a Group reorganisation was carried out resulting in the Company becoming the ultimate holding company of the Group.
The steps carried out on 12 April 2017 and their impact on the financial statements are as follows Capitalisation of shareholder loan notes Indoor Bowling Equity Limited shareholders converted their holding of 43586573 shareholder loan notes for 824253 shares at a nominal value of 1 increasing the number of issued shares to 2028175.
A share premium reserve of 42762320 was recognised for the difference in the value of the issued shares swapped for the shareholder loan notes.
Share for share exchange  acquisition of TEG Holdings Limited by Ten Entertainment Group plc The Company acquired the entire share capital of TEG Holdings Limited with the consideration being the issue and allotment of shares in the Company.
The Company issued 64901400 shares at 0.01 each as consideration for the entire holding in TEG Holdings
The investment in TEG Holdings Limited was 38914665 with the excess over the value of the issued shares being 38265649 and accounted for in the merger reserve account.
The Company allotted a further 98400 shares to bring the share capital to 65000000 shares immediately prior to the issue of the prospectus on 12 April 2017.
Admission
On 12 April 2017 the Company announced its Initial Public Offering IPO of 65000000 shares including 16250000 shares in the capital of the Company offered at a price of 165p per share by certain discretionary investment management andor advisory clients of Harwood Capital LLP the Executive Directors and Nick Basing representing 25% of the Companys issued ordinary shares on
The Company was admitted to the premium segment of the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange on 19 April 2017.
Financial statements  81 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 3 Group reorganisation continued Capital reduction Subsequent to the IPO on 7 June 2017 shareholders of the Company approved a special resolution for the reduction of its share capital which involved the capitalisation of 38265649.03 of the merger reserve into new B ordinary shares and the reduction in full of these B ordinary shares to distributable reserves.
As the Company is a publicly listed entity this process required approval by a court order.
On 28 June 2017 the High Court of England and Wales confirmed the reduction of 38265649 B ordinary shares which was registered at Companies House on 28 June 2017.
The effect of the reduction and cancellation is to create distributable reserves to support the Boards future dividend policy.
4 Staff cost and numbers Staff costs  Group 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Wages and salaries 15080 14327 Social security costs 921 848 Other pension costs 137 67 Cashsettled share based payments note 8 87 16225 15242 Staff costs included within cost of sales are 13.3m 2016 12.9m.
The balance of staff costs is recorded within administrative expenses.
Details of Directors remuneration are set out in the Directors report.
No Directors have accrued any retirement benefits.
The highest paid Director for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 received remuneration of 205754 2016 263536.
All key management positions are held by Executive Directors of Ten Entertainment Group plc and accordingly no further disclosure of key management remuneration is deemed necessary.
The average monthly number of persons employed including Executive Directors during the period analysed by category was as follows Staff numbers  Group 52 weeks to 31 December
53 weeks to 1 January
Staff 953 812 Administration 47 38 Unit management 134 210 1134 1060 Staff costs and average monthly numbers  Company 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Wages and salaries 843 304 Social security contributions 79 41 Share based payments note 27 87 1009 345 Staff numbers Number Number Administration including Executive Directors 9 2 5 Finance costs 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Interest on bank loans and overdrafts 260 569 Amortisation of debt issuance costs 112 255 Shareholder loan note interest 1152 3909 Finance lease interest 218 333 Notional interest on unwinding of discount on provisions note 22 42 51 Other 143 107 Finance costs 1927 5224 Exceptional finance costs Writeoff of capitalised finance costs of repaid loans 703 Gain on derecognition of finance leases  904 Total finance costs 2630 4320 82  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 6 Profit before taxation The following items have been included in arriving at a profit before taxation 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Staff costs note 4 16225 15242 Consumables charged to cost of sales 1387 1347 Depreciation of property plant and equipment note 13 5010 4317 Amortisation of software note 11 237 109 Amortisation of fair valued intangibles on acquisition note 11 569 971 Lossprofit on disposal of assets Onerous lease provision movements note 22 1403 272 Operating lease rentals payable  property 11102 11085 Share based payments note 27 87 Repairs on property plant and equipment 1789 1795 Exceptional items Professional fees taxes and other IPO costs 3101 Professional fees taxes and other costs in acquisition of sites 325 547 Professional fees costs and taxes from property regears 520 1355 Professional fees and other oneoff costs Total exceptional administrative costs 4283 1902 Writeoff of capitalised finance costs of repaid loans 703 Gain on derecognition of finance leases  904 Total exceptional items 4986 998 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to Companys auditors for the company and consolidated financial statements 158 50 Audit of Companys subsidiaries 40 40 Fee payable related to IPO 260 Professional fees and other oneoff costs have been on corporaterelated transactions undertaken by the Group and redundancy costs.
Loss on disposals includes 282k of bowling equipment disposed of at the sites where Pins and Strings have been implemented and thus have replaced the bowling machinery which is now redundant.
The Group anticipates that it will continue to roll out Pins and Strings across the entire estate over a period of a further three years this will result in around a further 1.4m writeoff of bowling equipment.
Professional fees taxes and other costs arising on lease regears are treated as exceptional as they are believed to be oneoff in nature at a site level.
These costs are currently arising as the Group looks to take advantage of changes in the property market which have made Tenpin an attractive tenant for landlords.
It is anticipated that the Group will continue to look to continue to take advantage of the changes in market conditions and could incur further regear costs through its exceptional items over the next two to threeyear period.
7 Results attributable to Ten Entertainment Group plc The financial statements of the company Ten Entertainment Group plc were approved by the Board of Directors on 21 March 2018.
The result for the financial period dealt with in the financial statements of Ten Entertainment Group plc was a loss of 2.9m.
As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 no separate statement of comprehensive income is presented in respect of the company.
Financial statements  83 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 8 Taxation Recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Current tax Current tax on profits for the period 2017 669 Deferred tax note 23 Origination and reversal of temporary differences 69 719 Adjustment in respect of prior years 163 427 Change in tax rate to 19% effective 1 April 2017  10 Tax charge in statement of comprehensive income 2111 1805 The tax on the Groups profit before tax differs 2016 differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the standard rate of tax in the UK of 19.24% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below.
52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Profit before taxation 7290 5436 Tax using the UK corporation tax rate of 19.24% 2016 20% 1403 1087 Expenses not deductible 629 658 Allowable depreciation on finance leases 84 357 Adjustment in respect of prior years 163 427 Effect of tax losses Change in tax rate to 20% effective 1 April 2015  10 Tax charge 2111 1805 The Finance Bill 2015 included legislation to reduce the main rate of corporation tax to 19% for the financial years beginning 1 April 2017 1 April 2018 and 1 April 2019 and to 17% for the financial year beginning 1 April 2020.
These changes had been substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and consequently are included in these financial statements by using a blend rate of 19% which has been used to determine the overall net deferred tax liability as the temporary differences are expected to reverse at the various rates over those periods.
9 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share for each period is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period.
Earnings per share is based on the capital structure of the Company and includes the weighted average of the 65000000 ordinary shares issued upon the Admission of the Company on 19 April 2017.
The total shares in issue at the end of the 52week period were 65000000.
The weighted average number of shares for the preceding periods has been stated as if the Group share for share exchange had occurred at 27 December 2015.
The Company has 79153 potentially issuable shares 2016 nil all of which relate to share options issued to Directors of the
Diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing profit for the year and total comprehensive income attributable to equity holders of the company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year together with the dilutive number of ordinary shares.
Adjusted basic earnings per share has been calculated in order to compare earnings per share year on year and to aid future comparisons.
Earnings has been adjusted to exclude IPO expenses share based payments and other oneoff costs and any associated impact on the taxation charge.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share is calculated by applying the same adjustments to earnings as described in relation to adjusted earnings per share divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year adjusted by the effect of the outstanding share options.
Basic and diluted 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Profit after tax 5181 3631 Basic weighted average number of shares in issue 65000000 64901600 Adjustment for share awards 79153 Diluted weighted average number of shares in issue 65079153 65000000 Basic earnings per share pence 7.97p 5.59p Diluted earnings per share pence 7.96p 5.59p 84  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 9 Earnings per share continued Below is the calculation of the adjusted earnings per share Adjusted earnings per share 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January Profit after tax 5181 3631 Amortisation of fair valued items on acquisition 607 1307 Lossprofit on disposals 356 58 Exceptional costs 4283 1902 Exceptional costs within finance costs 703 904 Onerous lease provision movements 1403 272 Shareholder loan note interest 1152 3909 Tax impact on above adjustments 346 471 Adjusted underlying earnings after tax 10533 9588 Adjusted profit after tax 10533 9588 Weighted average number of shares in issue 65000000 64901600 Adjusted basic earnings per share 16.20p 14.77p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 16.18p 14.75p 10 Business combinations As part of the Groups strategy to grow and expand the following sites were acquired as part of a business combination.
Business combination  Eastbourne On 21 February 2017 the Group acquired the assets and trade of the Eastbourne bowling site known as The Lanes part of the David Lloyd Leisure Centre.
The Group entered into a Business Purchase Agreement with David Lloyd Leisure Limited and acquired the assets for 1.5m.
The table below summarises the consideration paid for the acquisition the fair value of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed on the date of acquisition Consideration as at 21 February 2017 000 Cash consideration paid 1538 Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed Inventory 21 Property plant and equipment 467 Cash and cash equivalents 6 Deferred tax liabilities 67 Other assets and liabilities net 23 Total identifiable net assets 450 Goodwill 1088 Total 1538 Acquisitionrelated costs of 0.1m have been charged to administrative expenses.
Food and bar stocks were initially recognised with a step up in value from their historical cost of 0.02m which was expensed when the inventories were sold.
Property plant and equipment fair values were determined internally looking at the market prices for the acquired assets and for similarly aged assets elsewhere in the Companys business which resulted in a step up from the assets book values of 0.4m which will be depreciated over five years.
Deferred tax liabilities were recognised on the fair values of assets acquired and their tax bases which will be released as the related fair value measurement differences are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
Since the date of the business combination the site generated 1.1m of sales and made EBITDA of 0.3m which has been included in the statement of comprehensive income.
As part of the due diligence the sales and profit numbers prior to acquisition from the sellers management accounts were reviewed including the period from 2 January 2017 to the date of acquisition.
As they had not been audited they are not reflected here to provide a guide to potential fullyear performance.
The goodwill is made up of the expected benefits to arise from Tenpinisation of the sites operations and processes under the management of the Tenpin brand.
None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
Business combination  Rochdale On 26 June 2017 the Group acquired the assets and trade of the Rochdale bowling site known as Sandbrooke Leisure.
The Group entered into a Business Transfer Agreement with Sandbrooke Leisure Limited and acquired the assets for 1.0m.
The table below summarises the consideration paid for the acquisition the fair value of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed on the date of acquisition Consideration as at 26 June 2017 000 Cash consideration paid 1056 Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed Inventory 16 Property plant and equipment 543 Cash and cash equivalents 22 Deferred tax liabilities 54 Other assets and liabilities net 2 Total identifiable net assets 525 Goodwill 531 Total 1056 Financial statements  85 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 10 Business combinations continued Business combination  Rochdale continued Acquisitionrelated costs of 0.1m have been charged to administrative expenses and included in exceptional items.
Food and bar stocks were initially recognised with a step up in value from their historical cost of 0.02m which was expensed when the inventories were sold.
Property plant and equipment fair values were determined internally looking at the market prices for the acquired assets and for similarly aged assets elsewhere in the Companys business which resulted in a step up from the assets book values of 0.1m which will be depreciated over five years.
Deferred tax liabilities were recognised on the fair values of assets acquired and their tax bases which will be released as the related fair value measurement differences are recognised in the statement of comprehensive income.
Since the date of the business combination the site generated 0.6m of sales and made EBITDA of 0.1m which has been included in the statement of comprehensive income.
As part of the due diligence the sales and profit numbers prior to acquisition from the sellers management accounts were reviewed including the period from 2 January 2017 to the date of acquisition.
Due to not having access to the information they are not reflected here to provide a guide to potential fullyear performance.
The goodwill is made up of the expected benefits to arise from Tenpinisation of the sites operations and processes under the management of the Tenpin brand.
None of the goodwill is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
The acquisition of the site in Blackburn was not deemed to be a business combination per IFRS 3 but the acquisition of assets as per IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment.
11 Goodwill and intangible assets
Fair valued intangibles on acquisition
Software
Total
Cost
At 27 December 2015 2098 22757 151 25006 Additions 840 795 575 2210 At 2 January 2017 2938 23552 726 27216 Disposals   66 66 Additions  1619 160 1779 At 31 December 2017 2938 25171 820 28929 Accumulated amortisation and impairment losses At 27 December 2015 366  28 394 Charge for the period  amortisation 971  109 1080 At 2 January 2017 1337  137 1474 Charge for the period  amortisation 569  237 806 Disposals  amortisation   12 12 At 31 December 2017 1906  362 2268 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1032 25171 458 26661 At 1 January 2017 1601 23552 589 25742 At 27 December 2015 1732 22757 123 24612 Statement of accounting policies continued 86  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 11 Goodwill and intangible assets continued Goodwill is tested for impairment at each financial year end based on the recoverable amount of each CGU.
The overall process for testing impairment follows the same methodology as detailed in note 12 for property plant and equipment.
Due to the strong performance of the Group there is significant headroom before any goodwill would become impaired.
As part of the business combination accounting for the acquisition of Essenden Limited in 2015 the fair value of customer lists rebate contracts and the Tenpin Limited website were recognised and will be amortised over the period for which the benefits are expected to be recognised.
The goodwill acquired during the period arose on the business combination of the site in Eastbourne on 21 February 2017 and Rochdale on 26 June 2017 as detailed in note 10.
The amortisation charged on the above intangible assets is included in other administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
12 Investments
Subsidiaries shares As at incorporation on 15 March 2017 Acquisition of TEG Holdings Limited on 12 April 2017 38915 At 31 December 2017 38915 The Directors believe that the carrying value of the investments is supported by the underlying net assets of the business and the future profits that will be generated by the Group.
Group investments The Company has investments in the following subsidiary undertakings which affected the results and net assets of the Group.
Parent
Country of registration Percentage of shares held Companies owned directly by Ten Entertainment Group plc TEG Holdings Limited England and Wales 100% Companies owned indirectly by Ten Entertainment Group plc Tenpin Limited TEG Holdings Limited England and Wales 100% Indoor Bowling Equity Limited TEG Holdings Limited England and Wales 100% Indoor Bowling Acquisitions Limited Indoor Bowling Equity Limited England and Wales 100% Essenden Limited Indoor Bowling Acquisitions Limited England and Wales 100% Georgica Limited Essenden Limited England and Wales 100% Georgica Holdings Limited Georgica Limited England and Wales 100% Tenpin Five Limited Tenpin Limited England and Wales 100% Tenpin One Limited Tenpin Limited England and Wales 100% Georgica Lewisham Limited Georgica Holdings Limited England and Wales 100% GNU 5 Limited Georgica Holdings Limited England and Wales 100% Tenpin Sunderland Limited Tenpin Limited England and Wales 100% Tenpin Halifax Limited Tenpin Limited England and Wales 100% Ten Entertainment Group plc and TEG Holdings Limited registered office is at Aragon House University Way Cranfield Technology Park Cranfield Bedford MK43 0EQ.
The rest of the Group companies are registered at 5 St Georges House St Georges Road Wimbledon SW19 4DR.
Tenpin Five Limited and Tenpin One Limited are claiming exemption from the audit and the preparation of financial statements in accordance with Section 476A of the Companies Act 2006.
A parent guarantee will be issued for the liabilities of these companies which only consist of intercompany loans with the parent company and thus the guarantee is not expected to be called upon.
Financial statements  87 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 13 Property plant and equipment
Long leasehold premises
Amusement machines
Total
Cost
At 27 December 2015 2617 9879 4963 18164 35623 Additions  301 2149 3685 6135 Disposals 495  1023  1518 At 2 January 2017 2122 10180 6089 21849 40240 Additions  1 1816 3463 5280 Acquisition of new sites    1010 1010 Disposals  612 1078 948 2638 At 31 December 2017 2122 9569 6827 25374 43892 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 27 December 2015 5tel1444 Charge for the period 91 585 1713 1928 4317 Disposals  depreciation 72  169  241 At 2 January 2017 70 815 2107 2528 5520 Charge for the period 61 606 1929 2414 5010 Disposals  depreciation  584 589 356 1529 At 31 December tel3447 4586 9001 Net book value At 31 December 2017 1991 8732 3380 20788 34891 At 2 January 2017 2052 9365 3982 19321 34720 At 27 December 2015 2566 9649 4400 17564 34179 Property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment on an annual basis.
The recoverable amount of each CGU each of the 40 2016 38 sites open as at the period end has been treated as a CGU has been calculated as the higher of its value in use and its fair value less cost to sell.
The calculation of value in use is based on pretax cash flow projections from the financial budgets approved by the Board covering a oneyear period and extrapolated by management using an estimated mediumterm growth rate for a further two years.
Cash flows beyond this threeyear period are extrapolated over the life of the lease relating to that site extended by 15 years for nononerous sites for short leasehold premises in England and Wales where the provisions of the Landlord and Tenants Act apply and the Company has the right and expects to extend the lease on expiry or over 50 years for a long leasehold or freehold site.
The key assumptions of the value in use calculation are 31 December 1 January Period on which management approved forecasts are based 3 years 3 years Growth rate applied beyond approved forecast period 2% 2% Pretax discount rate 12.6% 12.9% The budgets which underlie the calculations are compiled on a site by site basis with gross margin staff cost property cost and other operating profit assumptions being based on past performance and known factors specific to that site which are expected by management to affect future performance to reflect the operating circumstances and risks relevant to each part of the business.
They also include an allocation of central overheads which are allocated across the sites based on turnover.
The pretax discount rate applied to the cash flow projections approximates the Groups weighted average cost of capital adjusted only to reflect the way in which the market would assess the specific risks associated with the estimated cash flows of the bowling businesses and to exclude any risks that are not relevant to estimated cash flows of the bowling businesses or for which they have already been adjusted.
This pretax discount rate has been benchmarked against the discount rates applied by other companies in the leisure sector.
Statement of accounting policies continued 88  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 13 Property plant and equipment continued The key assumptions to which the calculation is sensitive remain the future trading performance and the growth rate that is expected of each site which have a similar effect on the quantum of the onerous lease provision as the discount rate assumed.
If the sales in the budgets which underlie the calculations were reduced by 5% reducing the cash flows of the bowls by 4% the onerous lease charge would increase by 0.0m 2016 0.2m.
If the pretax discount rate applied in the calculations is increased by 1% the impairment charge increases by 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
For the calculation of fair value less cost to sell management has assumed that each Tenpin Limited business could be sold for a multiple of 5x EBITDA 2016 5x EBITDA.
The depreciation and impairment charges are recognised in administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
Bank borrowings are secured on property plant and equipment for the value of 20.0m 2016 20.0m.
Properties held under finance leases had a net book value of 0.2m 2016 0.2m and the finance lease depreciation charged in the period was 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
Amusement machines held under finance leases had a net book value of 3.9m 2016 4.0m and the finance lease depreciation charged in the period was 1.9m 2016 1.7m.
14 Inventories
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Goods held for resale 1356 1339 The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales amounted to 5.8m 2016 5.5m.
There is a provision of 0.4m 2016 0.3m for obsolete bowling spares included in the figures above.
Bank borrowings for the value of 20.0m 2016 20.0m are secured on all assets of the Group including inventory.
15 Trade and other receivables Current receivables
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Trade receivables 167 562 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings note 26   1 Other receivables 77 60 22 Prepayments and accrued income 3277 2724 5 3521 3346 28 All trade receivables are within their due date and considered recoverable and accordingly no provision for impairment has been recognised.
Noncurrent receivables
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings    31232 Capitalised financing costs Financial statements  89 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 16 Cash and cash equivalents
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Cash and cash equivalents 571 10185 1959 17 Share capital 31 December 2017 1 January 2017 Shares 000 Shares 000 Ordinary shares of 1 each   1203923 1204 Ordinary shares of 0.01 each 65000000 650 65000000 650 1203923 1204 The share capital of the Group is represented by the share capital of the company Ten Entertainment Group plc which was incorporated on 15 March 2017.
Prior to this the share capital of the Group was represented by the share capital of the previous parent Indoor Bowling Equity Limited.
However as stated in the statement of accounting policies on page 73 the principles of predecessor accounting have been applied with these financial statements and therefore the comparative share capital of the Group has been adjusted as if the Group had always existed.
The basis of preparation included in the statement of accounting policies includes a reconciliation of the prior years shares and reserves to the opening shares and reserves included in the statement of changes in equity.
The shares confer on each holder the right to attend speak and vote at all the meetings of the Company with one vote per ordinary share on a poll or written resolution.
The table below summarises the movements in share capital of Ten Entertainment Group plc during the year ended 31 December 2017 Notes Shares 000 At date of incorporation a 2 Share split b 198 Share for share exchange c 64901400 649 Issue of shares d 98400 1 Authorised allotted called up and fully paid share capital 65000000 650 a The Company was incorporated on 15 March 2017 with two ordinary shares at 1 each. b Prior to the IPO the Company split the two ordinary shares into 200 ordinary shares at 0.01 each.
The Company acquired the entire share capital of TEG Holdings Limited with the consideration being the issue and allotment of shares in the Company.
The Company issued 64901400 shares at 0.01 each as consideration for the entire holding in TEG Holdings Limited. d The Company allotted a further 98400 shares at 0.01 each.
90  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 18 Cash generated from operations Cash flows from operating activities
52 weeks to 31 December
53 weeks to 1 January
52 weeks to 31 December
53 weeks to 1 January Profitloss for the period 5181 3631 2873 Adjustments for Tax 2111 1805 Finance costs 1927 4320 Noncash oneoff costs 718 Noncash share based payments charge 87  87 Loss on disposal of assets 356 Amortisation of intangible assets 806 1080 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 5010 4317 Changes in working capital Increase in inventories 17 9 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 175 320 29 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 1304 982 2823 Decreaseincrease in provisions 1398 272 Cash generated from operations 13302 14754 8 19 Bank borrowings and finance leases Current liabilities
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Bank loans 6000 2872 Finance leases 2001 2025 Capitalised financing costs 155 786 7846 4111 Noncurrent liabilities
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Bank loans  10034 Finance leases 2244 3124 2244 13158 Financial statements  91 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 19 Bank borrowings and finance leases continued Bank borrowings are repayable as follows Bank loans
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Within one year 6000 2872 Between one and two years  2872 Between two and five years  7162 6000 12906 Available borrowings are as follows Group Currency Interest rates Maturity Total available Total drawn Revolving credit facility GBP LIBOR  1.75% Apr20 14500 6000 Accordion facility GBP LIBOR  1.75% Apr20 5000 Bank overdraft GBP LIBOR  1.75% Annually 500 Total borrowings 20000 6000 Finance lease liabilities  Group The payment profile of minimum lease payments under finance leases are as follows
Property leases Machines leases Total 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January Within one year 3 43 1998 1982 2001 2025 Between one and two years 3 47 1071 1519 1074 1566 Between two and five years 9 173 888 1037 897 1210 After five years 273 348   27tel3957 4538 4245 5149
Property leases Machines leases Total 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January Within one year 23 95 2107 2119 2129 2214 Between one and two years 23 95 1125 1583 1147 1678 Between two and five years 67 286 912 1060 981 1346 After five years 586 682   586 682 699 1158 4144 4762 4843 5920 Future finance charges on finance leases 411 547 187 224 598 771 Present value of finance lease liabilities 288 611 3957 4538 4245 5149 Finance leases are in place for one 2016 two property at a value of 0.3m 2016 0.6m.
The leases of amusement machines are from Bandai Namco Europe Limited with a value of 4.0m 2016 4.5m.
92  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 19 Bank borrowings and finance leases continued Analysis of statutory net debt Net debtcash as analysed by the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents less bank loans and overdrafts and amounts to 0.4m 2016 2.8m.
Statutory net debt as analysed below includes finance leases and the shareholder notes.
Cash and cash equivalents
Net cash excluding notes and leases
Shareholder loan notes
Balance at 28 December 2015 6821 16500 9679 6437 38526 54642 Cash flows 3364 3594 6958 1856  8814 Finance lease acquisition of amusement machines    1505  1505 Derecognition of property finance leases    1270  1270 Interest on finance leases    333  333 Loan note interest note 5     3909 3909 Balance at 1 January 2017 10185 12906 2721 5149 42435 50305 Cash flows 4614 6906 2292 2312  4604 Finance lease acquisition of amusement machines    1475  1475 Derecognition of property finance leases    285  285 Interest on finance leases    218  218 PIK note repayments     43587 43587 PIK note interest note 5     1152 1152 Balance at 31 December 2017 5571 6000 429 4245  4674 20 Shareholder loan notes
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Payment in kind notes in issue  42424 Interest to be capitalised on 31 December 2015  11 The payment in kind notes were converted to equity as part of the IPO process on 12 April 2017 as detailed in note 3.
21 Trade and other payables and other noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Trade payables 462 1073 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings note 26   2753 Social security and other taxes 1377 1263 Other payables 1293 1908 Accruals 2305 2792 70 Deferred income  lease incentives 65 57 5502 7093 2823 Financial statements  93 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 21 Trade and other payables and other noncurrent liabilities continued Other noncurrent liabilities
31 December
1 January
31 December
1 January Deferred income  lease incentives 233 442 22 Provisions The Groups onerous lease provisions are as follows
At 28 December 2015  current 164 At 28 December 2015  noncurrent 1383 Provided in the period 1180 Utilised in the period 158 Released unused in the period 750 Notional interest on unwinding of discount 51 At 1 January 2017 and 2 January 2017  current 293 At 1 January 2017 and 2 January 2017  noncurrent 1577 Provided in the period Utilised in the period 250 Released unused in the period 1231 Notional interest on unwinding of discount 42 At 31 December 2017  current 70 At 31 December 2017  noncurrent 361 The provision for onerous leases comprises provision for the onerous element of the property leases on certain trading units covering the expected period of the onerous commitment.
As the provision is based on the future budgeted trading performance of the bowling centres subject to the onerous leases the amount and timing of the related cash outflows is sensitive to future variances in EBITDA from those budgets.
If the pretax discount rate of 12.6% 2016 12.9% applied in the calculations is increased or decreased by 1% the onerous lease provision will increase or decrease by 0.0m 2016 0.1m.
In calculating the future budgeted trading performance central overheads are allocated to the CGUs based on turnover.
The provision is expected to unwind as follows Onerous lease provisions
Between one and two years 61 Between two and five years 157 After five years 143 Within one year 70 94  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 23 Deferred tax Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following Assets Liabilities Net 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January 31 December 1 January Property plant and equipment   1615 1525 1615 1525 Tax losses Fair value on business combination  14 111  111 14 Rollover relief 564 564 564 564 Total 564 578 2290 2089 1726 1511 A deferred tax asset is provided on taxable losses to the extent that there will be probable future taxable income against which the loss can be utilised.
No deferred tax asset has been provided for the year ended 31 December 2017 and 1 January 2017 on the losses other than that for the rollover relief.
A 1% change in the corporation tax rate would cause a 0.1m 2016 0.1m change in the value of the deferred tax liability.
Movement in deferred tax during the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 1 January
Recognised in income statement
31 December Property plant and equipment 1525  90  1615 Tax losses Fair value on business combination 14 121 4  111
Total deferred tax 1511 121 94  1726 Current income tax 669  2017 1861 825 Total taxation 2180 121 2111 1861 2551 Movement in deferred tax during the 53week period ended 1 January 2017 28 December
Recognised in income statement
1 January Property plant and equipment 1160  365  1525 Tax losses 1001  1001 Fair value on business combination 43 173 230  14
Total deferred tax 202 173 1136  1511 Current income tax   669  669 Total taxation 202 173 1805  2180 Financial statements  95 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 23 Deferred tax continued The Group has carryforward tax losses of an estimated 27.3m 2016 21.7m.
Of these nil 2016 nil are held by Tenpin Limited 12.6m 2016 12.2m held by Essenden Limited 8.7m 2016 8.7m held by Georgica Limited 0.8m 2016 0.3m held by Indoor Bowling Equity Limited 2.1m 2016 0.5m held by Indoor Bowling Acquisitions Limited nil 2016 nil held by Georgica Holdings Limited 0.3m 2016 nil held by TEG Holdings Limited and 2.8m 2016 nil held by Ten Entertainment Group plc.
All of the Tenpin Limited losses have been utilised.
The losses in Essenden Limited Georgica Limited Indoor Bowling Equity Limited Indoor Bowling Acquisitions Limited Georgica Holdings Limited TEG Holdings Limited and Ten Entertainment Group plc have not been recognised as these companies are not currently generating profits for which these losses can be utilised.
The potential deferred tax asset of 5.2m 2016 4.1m on these losses is the only unprovided deferred tax.
A deferred tax asset has been recognised on the 0.8m 2016 0.8m in capital allowances in Georgica Limited which can be group relieved across to Tenpin Limited.
This asset is netted off against the deferred tax liability recognised on the difference between the tax and accounting base of the capital allowances in Tenpin Limited of 9.5m 2016 9.2m.
The 3.7m 2016 3.7m of capital losses from disposals of the CVA sites has generated a deferred tax asset equivalent to the rollover relief liability carried under Tenpin Limited as these two tax balances have right of set off.
24 Financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans cash and shortterm deposits and are held in Sterling.
The purpose of these financial instruments is to provide finance for the Groups operations.
The Group has various other financial instruments such as trade receivables trade payables and finance leases that arise directly from its operations.
All the Groups financial instruments are denominated in Pound Sterling.
The carrying value of all the Groups financial instruments approximates fair value and they are classified as loans and receivables with the financial liabilities measured at amortised cost.
Financial instruments by category
Loans and receivables 31 December 1 January Financial assets Current trade and other receivables 245 622 Noncurrent trade and other receivables  786 Cash and cash equivalents 5571 10185 5816 11593 Financial instruments by category
Financial liabilities at amortised cost 31 December 1 January Financial liabilities Current borrowings excluding finance leases 5845 2872 Noncurrent borrowings excluding finance leases  10034 Shareholder loan notes  42435 Finance leases 4245 5149 Current trade and other payables 4059 5773 14149 66263 Financial risk management Market risk Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates interest rates and equity prices will affect the Groups income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments.
The objective of market risk management is to manage and control market risk exposures within acceptable parameters while optimising the return on risk.
Cash flow and fair value interest rate risk The Group borrows in Sterling at floating rates of interest.
The interest rate profile of the Groups financial liabilities gross of debt issue costs was as follows Interest rate risk profile of financial liabilities 31 December 1 January Floating rate financial liabilities 6000 12906 Finance leases 4245 5149 Payment in kind notes  42435 Financial liabilities on which no interest is paid 430 1870 10675 62360 Cash flow interest rate risk derives from the Groups floating rate financial liabilities being its bank debt and overdraft facility which are linked to LIBOR plus a margin of 1.75%.
The Group has no fair value interest rate risk.
The average period to the expected maturity date of the interestfree financial liabilities being the onerous lease provisions is 12 years.
In managing interest rate risk the Group aims to reduce the impact of shortterm fluctuations on the Groups earnings.
Over the longer term however sustained changes in interest rates would have an impact on the Groups earnings.
A 1% increase in the current interest rate charged on the bank loans would decrease earnings by 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
The bulk of the finance lease liability is for amusement machines and there is no actual interest charge on the arrangement with the supplier.
96  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 24 Financial instruments continued Financial risk management continued Credit risk As almost all of the Groups sales are for cash the Group is exposed to minimal credit risk.
The receivables mainly relate to rebate income or vouchers sold and are from companies with strong credit histories and good credit ratings and thus none are classified as past due or impaired.
Liquidity risk The Groups cash position and cash flow forecasts are reviewed by management on a daily basis.
The current bank facilities consist of a 15m RCF and a 5m uncommitted Accordion facility.
Credit quality of financial assets
31 December 1 January Cash at bank and shortterm bank deposits A rated 4936 9628 Other cashrelated balances 635 557 Total cash and cash equivalents 5571 10185 Capital risk management The Groups capital management objectives are to ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurate with the level of risk.
The Group has declared a final dividend of 7p having paid an interim dividend of 3p resulting in a dividend of 10p per share amounting to 6.5m as a return to shareholders in the Groups first year as a public company.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the carrying amount of equity less cash and cash equivalents as presented on the face of the consolidated balance sheet.
31 December 1 January Total equity 53193 4043 Shareholder loan notes  42435 Cash and cash equivalents note 15 5571 10185 Capital 47622 36293 Total financing 47622 36293 Finance leases note 18 4245 5149 Bank borrowings note 18 6000 12906 Overall financing 57867 54348 Capital to overall financing ratio 82.3% 66.8% 25 Operating leases The Group has regeared four of its current leases extending their terms and also entered into two 2016 two new operating leases after the acquisition of the two sites in the period ended 31 December 2017.
The Groups future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Payments due 31 December 1 January Within one year 11408 11085 Between one and five years 44289 41747 After five years 86984 71027 142681 123859 Tenpin Limited had 40 2016 38 bowling venues open as at the year end with one under finance lease and 39 held on operating leases all with less than 25 years to run.
The majority of the leases are in England and Wales two in Scotland and the provision of the Landlord and Tenants Act giving the tenant the right to extend the lease by 15 years on expiry applies in most cases.
26 Related party transactions Transactions with key management personnel The Executive and NonExecutive Directors are deemed to be key management personnel of the Company.
It is the Board which has responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Company.
There were no material transactions or balances between the Company and its key management personnel or members of their close family.
At the end of the period key management personnel did not owe the Company any amounts.
The compensation of key management personnel is summarised in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
The remuneration of the Directors of Ten Entertainment Group plc is set out in detail in the Directors remuneration report commencing on page 47.
Transactions with other related parties During the period the Group entered into transactions in the ordinary course of business with related parties.
Transactions entered into and trading balances outstanding with related parties are as follows Sales from transactions with related party Expenses from transactions with related party
Related party Harwood Associates  12 Goals Plc  55 31 December 2017  67 Harwood Associates  48 Goals Plc 20 1 January 2017 20 48 Financial statements  97 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 26 Related party transactions continued Transactions with other related parties continued Sales and purchases between related parties are made at normal market prices.
Outstanding balances with entities are unsecured and interest free and cash settlement is expected within 30 days of invoice.
The Group has not provided for or benefited from any guarantees for any related party receivables or payables.
During the financial period ended 31 December 2017 the Group has made a provision of nil 2016 nil for doubtful debts relating to amounts owed by related parties.
All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated on consolidation.
The intercompany balances and transactions incurred by the Company in its first year since incorporation relate to professional fees paid on behalf of the Company and are reflected as follows 31 December 1 January Essenden Limited 669 Tenpin Limited 2084 TEG Holdings Limited 1 27 Performance Share Plan The Company operates a Performance Share Plan PSP for its Executive Directors.
In accordance with IFRS 2 Share Based Payments the value of the awards is measured at fair value at the date of the grant.
The fair value is written off on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on managements estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
In accordance with the PSP scheme announced on 22 May 2017 the vesting of these awards is conditional upon the achievement of two performance conditions which will be measured following the announcement of results for the year to 31 December 2019 FY19.
The first performance condition applying to the awards will be based on earnings per share of the Company EPS and will apply to 50% of the total number of share awards granted.
The second performance condition will be based on T otal Shareholder Return TSR of the Company over the period from the date of grant to the announcement of results for FY19 relative to a comparator group of companies and will apply to the remaining 50% of share awards granted.
The assumptions used in the calculation of share based payments are as follows an expected term for awards granted under the PSP as being three years from the date of grant on the basis that these are nilcost awards and therefore we assume that participants will exercise their options as soon as possible to benefit from full shareholder rights e. a term commensurate with the expected life of the awards.
The models and model inputs are as follows EPS condition TSR condition Model used for valuation Share price at grant
Carlo
Share price at valuation date  1.68 1.68 Exercise price  Nil Nil Riskfree rate na 0.10% Expected dividend yield 6.33% 6.33% Expected volatility na 27.03% Fair value of one share  1.39 0.81 During the period ended 31 December 2017 739393 share awards were granted under the PSP .
For this grant the Company recognised a charge of 87069.
These are equitysettled share based payments and the remaining contractual life of the share options at the period end is two years and six months.
The following table splits the awards that were granted to the Executive Directors on 22 May 2017.
Director Position
Grants as at 1 January 2017 Alan Hand Chief Executive
Mark Willis Chief Financial
Graham Blackwell Chief Commercial
Total as at 31 December 2017 739393 98  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Notes to the financial statements continued for the 52week period ended 31 December 2017 28 Dividends paid and proposed The following dividends were declared and proposed.
No dividends had been paid or were liable as at the balance sheet date.
31 December 1 January Interim dividend declared by Directors for year ended 31 December 2017  3.0p per Ordinary share paid 5 January 2018 1950 The below final dividend is proposed for approval by shareholders at AGM not recognised as a liability at 31 December 2017 Final dividend year ended 31 December 2017  7p per Ordinary share 4550 The Company received a cash dividend of 1950000 from its subsidiary TEG Holdings Limited that was declared and paid in the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
29 Post balance sheet events Tenpin Limited acquired the trade and assets of a bowling site in Chichester in February 2018 and also acquired the entire share capital of a company in February 2018.
The trade and assets of the acquired company consisted of a bowling site in Warrington.
The completion of these two acquisitions brings the Groups number of sites to 42 as at the date of this Annual Report.
The total consideration paid for the two acquisitions is reflected in the below table.
The valuation of tangible assets and goodwill is based on an indicative review and these may be subject to change when the final valuation is complete.
Chichester
Warrington
Total
Tangible assets 305 595 900 Goodwill 495 1105 1600 Total consideration paid 800 1700 2500 Financial statements  99 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc 52 weeks to 31 December 53 weeks to 1 January 52 weeks to 27 December 52 weeks to 28 December 52 weeks to 29 December Cost of sales 21.5 20.6 16.7 16.0 16.4 Gross profit 49.5 46.7 36.3 30.8 29.3 Administrative and other costs 40.3 36.9 34.1 33.7 24.3 Profit on disposal Profit before finance charges 9.2 9.8 2.1 2.9 5.0 Finance charges 1.9 4.3 2.0 1.0 1.4 Profitloss before taxation 7.3 5.4 0.1 3.9 3.6 Taxation 2.1 1.8 0.7 1.3 0.0 Profitloss after taxation 5.2 3.6 0.6 5.2 3.6 100  Financial statements Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Unaudited fiveyear record Directors Company Secretary and advisers Directors Nick Basing Graham Blackwell Alan Hand Rob McWilliam Christopher Mills Julie Sneddon David Wild Mark Willis Company Secretary Mark Willis Registered office Aragon House University Way Cranfield Technology Park
Bedford MK43 0EQ Solicitors Bircham Dyson Bell LLP 50 Broadway London SW1H 0BL Independent auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH Registrars Computershare Investor Services Plc 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET Brokers Numis Securities Limited Peel Hunt LLP The London Stock Exchange Moor House 10 Paternoster Square 120 London Wall London EC4M 7LT London EC2Y 5ET Company number Company change of name Name changed from Birchams Newco Plc to Ten Entertainment Group plc on 16 March 2017 Country of registration England and Wales United Kingdom Ten Entertainments commitment to environmental issues is reflected in this annual report which has been printed on Chorus Silk made from an FSC certified material.
Printed in the UK by CPI colour using their environmental printing technology.
Both manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and are Forest Stewardship Council FSC chainofcustody certified.
Ten Entertainment Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ten Entertainment Group plc Aragon House University Way Cranfield Technology Park
