Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 nationwide across three distinct brands.
The Belvoir vision The Belvoir Group aims to extend its market share of the UK property sector through its multibrand franchise business model and by building on its reputation for delivering a highly professional lettings and estate agency service throughout the customer property journey.
What we have achieved during the year properties under management Gold awards won assisted acquisitions by franchisees New acquisition Acquisition of Brook Financial Services Limited Brook providing mortgage insurance and other financial services to the Group.
Brook was bought by Belvoir Lettings in a deal worth 2.2m.
The Barnsleybased brokerage is an appointed representative of the Mortgage Advice Bureau and was founded by Michelle Brook in 2010.
Read more about our acquisitions on page 3 01 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Highlights 2017 Operational highlights Acquisition of Brook a specialist mortgage broker 0.3m reduction in cost base from further integration of Northwood GB Limited Northwood 23 2016 nine assisted acquisitions adding over 3.3m 2016 1.5m to network revenue The Group now manages 58020 2016 55756 properties Belvoir won the Gold award for FranchiseNetwork Group of the Year at The Negotiator Awards 2017 Northwood won the 2017 Gold allAgents award for Best Franchise and Best Lettings Agent Financial highlights Group revenue increased by 14% to 11.3m 2016 9.9m Growth in management service fees MSF of 23% to 7.9m 2016 6.4m Profit before tax up 62% to 3.9m 2016 2.4m Strong lettings bias reflected in lettings to sales ratio of 8020 2016 7624 Yearend bank balance of 1.4m 2016 1.6m Increased final dividend recommended of 3.5p 2016 3.4p
PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED m 62% 39%
23%
14% BASIC EPS AND ADJUSTED p 51% 28% See our full KPIs on page 22 See note 9 on page 48.
Strategic report Highlights 2017 01 At a glance 02 Chairmans statement 04
Chief Executive Officers statement 05
Our business model 08 Our people 10 Our markets 12 Our strategy Risk management 18 Financial review 20 Our key performance indicators KPIs 22
Introduction to governance 24 Board of Directors 25 Statement of corporate governance 26 Directors remuneration report 28 Directors report 30 Financial statements Independent auditors report 32 Group statement of comprehensive income 36 Statements of financial position 37 Statements of changes in shareholders equity 38 Statements of cash flows 39 Notes to the financial statements 40 Shareholder information Notice of Annual General Meeting 59 Corporate information 60 Corporate calendar 60 Our awards 61 02 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 At a glance Our reach Belvoir operates in both the lettings and sales markets and has 300 offices across the whole of the UK.
See our business model on pages 89 Growth through acquisition We are the UKs largest property franchise group and we continue to grow organically by delivering awardwinning service and through acquisition at both the franchisee and the corporate level.
Our Group Belvoir was founded in February 1995 as a specialist franchised lettings agent and extended its services to encompass estate agency in 2014.
Over the past three years the Belvoir Group has adopted a multibrand strategy by acquiring the Newton Fallowell Goodchilds and Northwood franchise networks and now operates from 300 offices nationwide with a portfolio of 58020 managed properties making it the UKs largest property franchise group with total revenue of 11.3m.
In 2017 the Group acquired Brook a specialist mortgage broker providing customers with mortgage and propertyrelated financial services products.
Why invest in Belvoir Proven multibrand franchise model Awardwinning services delivered by established network Recurring revenue stream Longserving experienced leadership team delivering growth Highly trained staff with expert knowledge
YORKSHIRE
AND THE
EAST OF
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SOUTH WEST
SOUTH EAST
EAST
NORTH
WEST
LONDON
EAST
MIDLANDS
WEST
MIDLANDS
Belvoir Northwood Newton Fallowell 03 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Our acquisition timeline Having developed a multibrand platform the Group is looking to grow further through the acquisition of additional significant franchise networks or companies offering specialist propertyrelated services from which our franchisees can benefit.
The latter underpinned the rationale of acquiring Brook during 2017.
Historically a lettings franchise Belvoir now offers both sales and lettings services and has nationwide coverage.
Established in
Belvoir
Originally an East Midlandsbased estate agent but with seven of the Goodchilds offices rebranding to Newton Fallowell this network is becoming a leading property brand across both the East and West Midlands.
Newton Fallowell Established in
Northwood also started as a specialist lettings franchise but now has national coverage offering both sales and lettings.
The Northwood franchisees have welcomed becoming part of a larger wellfunded group with 14 franchisees buying out a local agency under the Belvoir Assisted Acquisitions programme.
Established in
July 2017 Acquisition of Brook providing mortgage insurance and other financial services to the Group June 2016 Acquisition of Northwood the largest remaining independent UK property franchise network at the time July 2015 Acquisition of Newton Fallowell one of the largest estate agents in the East Midlands October 2015 Acquisition of Goodchilds consisting of lettings and estate agency branches located across the West Midlands Brook trades as an appointed representative of the Mortgage Advice Bureau MAB one of the UKs leading networks for mortgage intermediaries.
As part of the Belvoir Group Brook will leverage its expertise to introduce new mortgage products and financial services across all Group networks.
Brook Financial Services Northwood Established in
Read about our acquisition strategy on page 16 04 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017
Chairmans statement
I am pleased to report that the Belvoir Group has made significant progress increasing profitability by over 60% in a year that has been a testing one for some companies in the property sector.
Performance
Total revenue of 11.3m was underpinned by increases in both MSF from lettings and sales of 23% and 21% respectively with organic growth being enhanced by growth from acquisitions and increased takeup of property sales by both the Belvoir and Northwood networks.
This is a testament to the resilience of the business format franchising model and the responsiveness of this model to changing markets.
In the face of uncertainty from the introduction of new regulations our franchisees have risen to the challenge with many seeing growth through portfolio acquisition opportunities at a local level and pursuing new revenue streams such as property sales and financial services as a means to securing their longterm future.
Strategy
The Board of Belvoir identified financial services as a potential growth area for the Group and in July 2017 acquired Brook as an excellent vehicle for maximising our return from individual property transactions through the sale of specialist mortgage and propertyrelated financial services.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome Michelle Brook and her team to the Belvoir Group.
Brook is already working closely with all 39 Newton Fallowell offices and with 25 Belvoir and six Northwood offices already on board I have every confidence in their ability to roll out their financial services offering across the other Group networks.
At the Group level we continue in our aim to extend our share of the UK property market by leveraging our expertise as a franchisor as we see a genuine benefit to all stakeholders from further consolidation within the sector.
We firmly believe that Belvoir is best placed to take advantage of consolidation at both the franchisee and franchisor level.
Furthermore the Board is committed to broadening the range of property services offered by our franchisees building on their reputation for delivering a highly professional lettings and estate agency service throughout the customer property journey.
Experienced management team delivering significant progress 2017 marked 21 years of uninterrupted profit growth for the Belvoir Group.
Senior management As Chairman I am especially pleased with the strength and depth of our senior team from the main Board Directors to the management teams of our various trading subsidiaries Belvoir Northwood Newton Fallowell and Brook all of whom are long serving and very capable.
These dedicated teams have been instrumental in doubling the number and value of transactions under the Assisted Acquisitions programme successfully integrating the Northwood network to deliver a 58% increase in its EBITDA within 19 months and starting the process of crossselling financial services to the whole Group through Brook.
In addition we have recently completed our planned programme to franchise all but the two original Grantham based Belvoir and Newton Fallowell corporate offices enabling us to focus entirely on the further development of our franchise model.
Growth
Our headline figures reflect how successfully the Belvoir Group has performed in 2017.
Revenue increased by 14% to 11.3m 2016 9.9m operating profit of 3.9m 2016 2.5m is an increase of 56% profit before tax of 3.9m 2016 2.4m is up 62% and there has been a 28% improvement in the adjusted earnings per share EPS to 11.3p 2016 8.8p.
These figures reflect a full year of Northwood and a partyear contribution from Brook but nevertheless they are significant and have encouraged us to increase our dividend to 6.9p per share showing our confidence in the strength of the Group to continue to deliver on its growth strategy.
Board changes Finally we say farewell to Nicholas Leeming as a NonExecutive Director and the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
Nicholas has been with us for over five years having joined just after Belvoir floated on AIM and in that time he has brought a wealth of experience and wisdom to the Board.
I would like to thank him for his valuable contribution and wish him the very best for the future.
At the same time we welcome Michael Stoop to the Board.
Michael has over 40 years experience of the franchise property market having held the role of group managing director initially at Winkworth then at Legal and Generals estate agency network Xperience where he was instrumental in converting the corporateowned offices into a wholly franchised network of 95 offices and most recently at the Property Franchise Group plc until he stood down in 2016.
I am confident that with his background and experience Michael will make a valuable contribution to the Groups strategy.
Mike Goddard
Looking to the future I have every confidence in the success of our franchise business model which having flourished historically in all phases of the property market can and will adapt to the current changing market conditions.
05 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc
Chief Executive Officers statement
To what extent will online estate agencies threaten the traditional estate and lettings agency business Traditional estate agents as opposed to exclusively online estate agency businesses handle over 90% of property transactions in the UK.
Vendors especially landlords continue to value the local expertise and cost effectiveness available across our network of offices.
Online agents have succeeded in lowering the publics expectation of how much they should be paying for estate agency services.
As a relatively new entrant to estate agency downward pressure on fees has not negatively impacted our business and in fact having adjusted for the full year impact of Northwood we are still 10% up year on year on MSF from estate agency.
What impact do you see Brexit having on the property market There has been no discernible impact from the transition towards Brexit.
Whilst during 2017 a slow down in the property market was anticipated the number of property transactions remained surprisingly stable and was only 1% down year on year and changes in our business model has meant that network revenue from estate agency increased.
In our opinion the reason that property transactions remained stable in 2017 was due to two main factors supply and demand and access to relatively cheap mortgage lending.
There continues to be a shortage of suitable housing within the UK for either home ownership or to rent and given that EU nationals currently living in the UK will have the same residency rights after Brexit there is no foreseeable reduction in the current level of demand for housing.
So whilst any uncertainty could have a shortterm impact the longerterm dynamics remain the same.
Do you think the upcoming ban on tenancy fees is the right solution to make renting more secure for tenants
It has been widely commented on in the press that the tenancy fee ban will simply increase the cost of renting for many tenants.
There are a number of Government consultations happening as we speak as policy makers recognise the importance of the private rented sector PRS.
It is likely that with the introduction of redress for tenants from DIY landlords licensing for agents and the possibility of longer tenancies standards of accommodation are likely to increase and encourage more people to use a wellfunctioning PRS similar to other European countries.
Do you expect the size of the PRS to increase or decrease in the next ten years The PRS will undoubtedly continue to grow both in terms of the number of properties in the PRS and also the number of properties in the social housing sector.
Watch our Proactive Investors interview at httpssitewatchvfgZkV56wqUo What changes might encourage private landlords to use a lettings agent Increased regulation around property letting and licensing for both agents and landlords is likely to make the prospect of renting property without the involvement of a fully qualified agent less attractive.
Recent proposals that private landlords should be subject to a redress scheme as is already applicable to lettings agents will add to the risk and cost profile for private landlords such that the negatives of managing their portfolio themselves will start to outweigh the positives.
How does the volatility of house prices affect Belvoir As far as the rental sector is concerned Belvoir has traded successfully delivering yearonyear growth since 1995 during which time house prices have both fallen as in the period between 2007 and 2010 and risen well above general inflation as during the late 1990s and early 2000s.
As far as estate agency is concerned during a period where prices are falling typically the number of transactions also falls as sellers are less willing to sell their property at a lower price or at a loss and this will impact on estate agents.
However if properties are more difficult to sell vendors are more likely to use a proactive local estate agent to ensure they get the best price possible.
Do you expect to see more or fewer lettings agents in the future We predict that the number of lettings agencies will reduce by 20% in the next three years.
There are simply too many estate and lettings agents in the UK which we see as a significant opportunity for a network of our strength.
Since 2014 our Assisted Acquisitions programme has enabled 44 franchised businesses across all of our networks to grow their businesses and increase their market share by acquiring their competition.
QandA with Dorian Gonsalves
Chief Executive Officer
A 06 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017
Chief Executive Officers statement continued
Capitalising on opportunities as the industry evolves In a changing market our franchise network benefits from the agility of franchise owners coupled with a central support system to give us an edge over both the large corporate networks and small independent operators.
MSF growth Management service fees MSF increased by 23% to 7.9m 2016 6.4m.
These fees are collected by each network as a royalty for providing a brand a system and the considerable knowhow for a franchisee to operate a profitable business at local office level.
The increase in MSF reflects growth across our existing network of offices and a full years contribution from Northwood.
Lettings
Like Belvoir Northwood has a strong lettings background which is evident in lettings now representing 80% 2016 76% of our network revenue providing a reliable and recurring income from a nationwide portfolio of 58020 2016 55576 rented properties.
Belvoirs Rental Index for the final quarter of 2017 confirms that rents are rising broadly in line with average wages.
Belvoir has 300 offices nationwide and data for those offices that have traded consistently over the last nine years in England Wales and Scotland indicate a yearonyear YoY increase in average rents of 2% from 744 in Q4 2016 to 759 in Q4 2017 whereas average earnings increased 2.5% YoY according to ONS figures Average rents including all Belvoir offices range from 597 per month in the North West down 5% YoY up to 657 in the East Midlands up 6% YoY and through to 1046 in the South East up 7% YoY and 1431 in London down 5% YoY.
Property sales Our main estate agency network Newton Fallowell achieved a 10% growth in revenue from property sales whilst the lettingsbiased networks Belvoir and Northwoodbranded offices saw property sales MSF increase by 47% and 7% respectively.
The ability of our traditional lettings agents to be able to process property sales is critical to retaining the ongoing portfolio of managed properties with most landlords looking first to sell through their lettings agent.
Where the new owner is a landlord buyer there is a strong probability of retaining the vast majority of their properties under management.
Financial services Financial services were identified as a means of increasing the return from property sales that would benefit both franchisee and franchisor.
The acquisition of Brook represented an opportunity to bring into the Group a very successful business with a track record in the financial services sector.
The Board believes that the focused approach operated by Brook will enable the Group to achieve materially greater penetration of Belvoirs client base and increase the financial services fees generated on property sales across all Group networks.
As our lettingsbiased networks Belvoir and Northwood grow their property sales business Brook will enable our brands to increase further their revenue from estate agency related services and mitigate some of the impact of the upcoming ban on tenant fees.
Additionally Brook will be able to make immediate inroads into the Groups main estate agency network Newton Fallowell by increasing the available number of mortgage advisors to service its substantial house sales transactions.
Acquisitions
2017 saw a record number of portfolio acquisitions at a franchisee level under the Assisted Acquisitions programme a core part of the Groups growth strategy.
The Boards target of doubling the number of transactions under this programme was significantly exceeded with 23 2016 nine independent agencies being acquired.
These acquisitions were undertaken by one Newton Fallowell eight Belvoir and 14 Northwood franchisees and added 3.3m 2016 1.5m to network revenue 2264 managed properties and 351000 2016 243000 p. in MSF.
There remain over 10000 potential acquisition targets comprising small to mediumsized independent lettings and sales agents in the UK which might look to exit following increased regulation and the prospect of the ban on tenant fees in 2019.
Our dedicated inhouse acquisitions team currently has 73 franchises registered on the Assisted Acquisitions programme and 17 opportunities under consideration.
A growing business Our growth depends directly on the entrepreneurial drive of our franchisees and unlike many franchise offerings our model offers our franchisees both a revenue stream from their business and a capital value on exit.
In order to maximise our growth potential we have recently launched a new strategy to enable existing franchisees to expand into an adjacent empty territory.
Franchisees can appoint a suitable business partner to work the new territory from home as a satellite of their existing franchise office which would provide all back office support.
The focus will be on establishing a reliable revenue stream within the first three years after which a high street office would be opened in the new territory to ensure that the business could fulfil its maximum growth potential.
Our successful strategy of growing our network organically with single and multiunit operators and by acquisition continues to evolve to ensure we improve our physical footprint and brand awareness.
Corporate offices In 2016 the Board determined to implement a franchise solution for eight of its ten corporateowned offices retaining the two original Granthambased Belvoir and Newton Fallowell offices both of which are very profitable to be used for system development purposes.
This process is now complete with four offices having been sold in 2016 two in 2017 and the final two in the first quarter of 2018.
Of these three were sold to adjacent franchisees two to the existing branch manager and three to a new franchise owner.
In one case the new owner was already operating two existing lettings businesses which will now be rebranded to Belvoir.
The Board sees this as a way of bringing fresh impetus to these offices and freeing the Board to focus on the Groups franchising operations.
07 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Acquisition strategy Having raised 5.0m through equity in 2013 to fund the Assisted Acquisitions programme we have since provided both commercial and financial support to 45 of our franchisees many of whom have doubled the size of their business overnight through a portfolio acquisition.
Each year between 0.7m and 1.0m is repaid by franchisees which is then available to fund further portfolio acquisitions and around 0.3m is received in interest on the loan book.
The success of our franchisees in securing alternative funding means that each year we have been able to support a larger number of transactions from the same funding base.
The Board has once again doubled the Assisted Acquisitions target and so far in 2018 has completed on eight transactions totalling 3.3m which will bring in 2.8m of network revenue and 2238 managed properties.
Compliance
The Belvoir Group has built its reputation by delivering a highly professional lettings and estate agency service which embraces the principles of specialism quality and customer care.
Compliance is at the top of our agenda with all franchisees undergoing a training programme and ongoing business support and every office being audited annually to ensure strict adherence to our high operational standards and current legislation.
This is increasingly important as the Government looks to professionalise the PRS sector through greater regulation and control.
The Board welcomes the Governments initiatives that we believe will deter rogue landlords and agents.
Market conditions The size of the PRS in the UK has been steadily increasing for over a decade resulting in the PRS representing 20% of the total households.
A lack of affordable housing static wages and indeed personal choice are causing the PRS to cater for a wider reaching demographic including families professionals and even retirees.
For this reason the PRS is evolving the average tenancy is now just under four years and many people are turning to lettings looking for their longterm stable home.
In line with these changes tenants are expecting a much higher standard of property and service from their agent meaning a reputable professional agent is more important than ever for landlords to attract the right tenant.
Impacting on this shift is the added increase in regulation of the lettings industry imposed by the Government.
These changes are already leading to consolidation in the lettings market as smaller independent agents look to exit leaving market share for our franchisees to capitalise on either organically or directly through our Assisted Acquisitions programme.
Some of the changes in our industry such as the upcoming ban on tenant fees will certainly be a challenge for our business but robust plans have been in place ever since the ban was announced to give franchisees additional opportunities such as property sales to mitigate the loss in revenue.
The sales market in the UK has been fairly uneventful with unchanged transaction numbers and a modest increase in house prices of 5.2% during 2017.
This result was more positive than anticipated though and was probably due to supply and demand with net migration exceeding the number of new builds completed in 2017.
The Groups performance in property sales was very positive in 2017 with an increase in MSF of 21%.
Our relatively small reliance on the property sales market and the fact that the majority of our franchisees are offering sales as an additional service alongside a very stable lettings business mean there is only really upside for us with property sales.
The acquisition of Brook also helped us build on this opportunity as franchisees can generate additional revenue from each house sale whilst offering their clients a more comprehensive property service.
Franchising
In 2016 the British Franchising Association and NatWest jointly reported that the franchising industry was estimated to be worth 15.1bn to the UK economy an increase of 46% over the last ten years.
The increasing popularity of franchising was linked to the greater chance of financial success with a record 97% of franchiseeowned units reported profitability with 56% saying they are quite or very profitable.
Franchising offers a relatively low risk way for young people to get into business with one in five franchise owners launching their business in the last two years being under the age of 30.
It also offers opportunity for scale with 29% of franchises running multiple outlets.
Current trading and outlook 2018 has started well with eight franchisees having completed on portfolio acquisitions estimated to bring in a total of 2.8m p.
2018 target within Q1.
Furthermore despite the anticipated slow down in house sales our main estate agency network Newton Fallowell has reported on both sales subject to contract and its pipeline being ahead of 2017.
Our investment in Brook to deliver a planned increase in revenue from financial services is proving to be a success with the value of mortgages written and net banking up 30% through a combination of a greater number of mortgages being written a higher penetration from life policies and an increased average case value on the same period last year.
We do anticipate some tempering of the underlying organic growth of the lettings market with YoY average rent increases reported at 2% in Q4 2017 and evidence of slightly longer void periods between tenancies in some regions.
However given the shortfall of properties available to buy continuing to fuel demand within the PRS and the additional legislative demands on both lettings agents and private landlords seeing an increase in the need for a qualified wellsupported agent we believe that our franchisees are in a good position to capitalise on the opportunities within the sector and anticipate a further year of positive growth for the Belvoir Group.
Dorian Gonsalves
Chief Executive Officer
Our franchisees are already adapting to changes within the sector and welcome the professionalisation of our industry as an opportunity not a threat.
08 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Our business model A formula for success Our franchise model is built on 23 years of experience the entrepreneurial drive and local knowledge of our franchisees and the support and guidance of our Central Office team.
Our difference Service excellence Our experience and focus on customer service has enabled us to stand out from the crowd and is key to the success of our Group.
Our intensive training and annual audit further support this to ensure our franchisees are equipped to deliver the standards we require.
Greater financial stability A strong lettings base coupled with a growing revenue stream from property sales provide our franchisees and the Group as a whole with greater financial stability compared to a typical estate agency.
Our model also enables franchisees to build a capital asset which unlike incomebased franchise options provides a financial return on exit.
The franchise network Our franchisees benefit from the backup and support associated with a large franchise operation whilst operating their own business with the entrepreneurial drive of an ownermanager.
Proactive growth We proactively identify suitable businesses for our franchisees to bolt onto their existing business whilst also initiating the roll out of additional property services to be offered by our franchisees providing the opportunity for accelerated and sustained growth.
Our process
New franchisees pay an upfront fee to cover the licence for their exclusive territory and our induction training.
An ongoing monthly management service fee based on franchise revenue covers the cost of our mentoring programme and contributes towards Central Office operations and further investment in the business.
Brand equity Our brands are highly regarded and respected for their core values of professionalism and customer service.
We invest continually in our brands to ensure that messaging remains fresh and relevant to our markets.
Networking
We facilitate a culture where franchisees learn from each other and share experiences through both national and regional networking groups and at the annual conference held by each network.
09 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Delivering value
We provide a proactive support system bringing the best and most uptodate tools advice and services to our franchisees with group deals negotiated where possible.
5887 hours spent on training
We recognise the need for our Central Office operations to attract train reward and retain highly motivated staff to deliver a professional service to our franchised networks.
17 staff holding or training towards a professional qualification
Our professional service goes above and beyond legal requirements.
Our franchisees key role is to deliver exceptional customer service to their clients.
Shareholders
Our Board is committed to building a business capable of creating value for our shareholders based on sound business ethics.
Adjusted basic EPS increased to 2016 8.8p See note 9 on page 48.
Our process
We work closely with potential new franchisees to ensure that they are a good fit for our business model of high quality service delivery and sound business ethics.
This process minimises the risk to both the franchisor and the franchisees and assures our high success rate.
Support
Each franchisee has a dedicated business mentor who helps them to develop their business.
Advice and support is available from Central Office in specialist areas such as legal IT compliance and marketing.
Training
New franchisees undertake an intensive training course prior to opening.
Continual professional training and development is conducted both at Central Office and via webinars.
Read more about our offering on pages 1011 10 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Our people People are the most important factor in any business but even more so in sales and lettings.
When dealing with a persons most valued possession trust confidence and communication are of paramount importance to delivering the service the customer expects.
Our business could not thrive without exceptional franchisees who exceed their customers expectations and grasp the opportunities that come their way.
At the heart of our business We recognise the need to attract train reward and retain highly motivated staff and franchisees to deliver a professional and exceptional service.
Stephen Summerhayes of Northwood Norwich and Ipswich Cold start resale and acquisition Stephen is a longstanding Northwood franchisee having owned Northwood Norwich for 14 years during which time he has built up his lettings portfolio to 690 managed and guaranteed rent properties.
Stephens first acquisition was over five years ago for 80 properties and the largest in December 2017 was for 300 properties.
Also in 2017 Stephen decided to acquire a second territory through the resale of the Northwood Ipswich office which had a portfolio of 200 properties.
Stephen is now looking to expand this further through acquisition.
The growth by acquisition in the last five years has seen Stephens business grow by 60% in size with turnover more than doubling.
I realised that acquisition was more cost effective than advertising for organic growth.
I decided to focus on acquisition and have completed five portfolio purchases in as many years.
As a result I have grown twice as fast in the last five years than I did in the previous ten.
Only through acquisition could this have been possible.
Laura Mearns of Northwood Aberdeen Cold start and two acquisitions Laura and her husband Steven opened Northwood Aberdeen in 2008.
Trading in Aberdeen has been extremely tough in 2017 due to longterm falling oil prices dramatically changing the dynamic of this unusual city.
The difficult trading conditions presented opportunities which Laura has fully taken advantage of with two acquisitions in quick succession in November 2017 bringing over 300 additional managed properties to Northwood Aberdeen.
To make her achievement even more impressive this was all done just after Laura had just given birth to the couples third child.
2017 was an exciting year for Northwood Aberdeen.
As the rental market experienced a huge shift in rental values following the oil crisis and in addition as significant legislative changes were being faced it was an opportunity for us to consolidate with other agents during this period.
This growth is really exciting for Northwood.
However it is important to highlight that although we have grown the portfolio we continue to be a small family run local business ensuring our landlords and tenants receive a personal service.
11 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Clayton Foston of Belvoir Hinckley and Nuneaton Tamworth and Burton Cold start resale and acquisition Clayton Foston joined Belvoir in 2011 when he purchased a cold start office in Nuneaton and Hinckley.
In 2014 he was one of the first franchisees to benefit from the Assisted Acquisitions programme when acquiring a local lettings portfolio.
Subsequently Clayton joined forces with two new business partners in order to purchase Belvoir Tamworth as a resale in 2016.
In 2017 Clayton took over the previous corporateowned office in Burton and made a significant acquisition comprising 293 managed properties and 200 letonly properties.
He is currently embarking on further grand plans for his existing Nuneaton and Hinckley business.
Clayton is a very progressive franchisee and fully appreciates that a successful business must evolve and develop in order to remain relevant.
A new shopping centre in Claytons territory is about to change the dynamic of the traditional town centre and rather than waiting and seeing what impact a lack of footfall will have on his business Clayton is taking an unusual approach for a high street lettings and estate agent and is moving his business to the shopping centre to make the most of the opportunity.
Clayton is looking to maximise this opportunity even further by working with the Belvoir Central Office to create a new updated version of the Belvoir shop fit that is vibrant and modern and fully embraces technology.
He is also creating a onestopshop for customers incorporating a MAB mortgage advisor and a range of other services to help make his new office a destination for Nuneaton and Hinckleys property needs.
Traditional lettings and estate agency must adapt to meet new challenges in the sector as the disruptors such as Purplebricks have clearly shaken up the market.
For me differentiating myself from all of the numerous agents in town is an essential part of this evolution with premises designed to meet the challenges of the next decade in a location of high footfall where we can showcase new innovations and ideas.
Employees
Belvoir believes that employee engagement and human capital management is key to ensuring that we have the necessary team to deliver future success.
In order to attract and retain professional staff with the requisite skill Belvoir invests in a high level of employee engagement through regular staff reviews setting out and monitoring performance against an agreed personal development plan.
We also invest in professional training to enable our employees to develop in their roles.
We currently have seven members of staff undertaking professional qualifications encompassing lettings accountancy and project management.
This includes the sponsorship of two very successful accounting apprentices taking their AAT exams within the Group finance team.
Accounting apprentice Catalyn wins two local awards In 2017 accounting apprentice Catalyn Bavister who works in the Belvoir Group finance department won both the Grantham College Advanced Accounting Apprentice of the Year award and the Grantham Journal Apprentice of the Year award.
Catalyn was nominated for the Grantham Journal award by Chief Financial Officer Louise George Catalyn is a perfect example of how the apprenticeship qualification provides young people with the opportunity to achieve their ambitions and potential given the right mix of academic and workbased experience and support.
She has grown in confidence over the last year and we look forward to supporting her professional development and future career progression at Belvoir.
Catalyn was ecstatic with her success stating I was over the moon It was a great feeling just to have been nominated and I am so very proud to have won.
Catalyn believes that the apprenticeship was the right path for her to take I get to both earn and learn at the same time gaining a professional qualification in a well regarded company.
Catalyn has recently progressed onto level 4 of the Accounting Technician AAT exams.
Her original purchase ledger role has been taken on by the latest addition to the finance team accounting apprentice Adam Egner who is working towards his level 2 AAT exams and has a 100% record on both exams taken to date.
12 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Our markets 2017 was very much a continuation from the year before for the property market with economic uncertainty resulting in flat transaction rates for sales although our own performance within this sector has remained positive.
The upcoming ban on tenant fees together with the likelihood of greater regulation within the lettings market has brought challenges to our industry but also opportunity through increasing consolidation.
Ever increasing importance of the lettings market Tenure type rising The latest English Housing Survey for 20162017 demonstrates the continuing increased reliance in the UK on the PRS which now represents 4.7 million households 13 million people or 20% of the total households.
In London this is more significant with 30% of households now privately renting.
Looking at the demographic detail behind this trend those in the age groups of 2534 and 3544 seem to be the biggest cause of this shift.
The decline in home ownership has been particularly pronounced for these age groups leading to a significant increase in the PRS for that same group.
In 20062007 38% of the 2544 age group were privately renting which increased to 75% in 20162017.
Growth in the PRS for this key age group in particular is likely to be for various reasons.
With the deposit needed from firsttime buyers averaging 48591 mean affordability is likely to be a major factor in this shift away from home ownership.
Also an increasing number of people are choosing to rent as the freedom that comes without being tied to a mortgage better suits their lifestyle.
The need for flexible or temporary accommodation is also prevalent for groups such as professionals students and migrants.
The housing market and how we are responding to it With a lack of affordable housing and average wages down in real terms the private rented sector PRS continues to grow as households decide to rent rather than buy.
19801991 DOE Labour Force Survey Housing Trailer.
19922008 ONS Labour Force Survey.
20082017 English Housing Survey full household sample.
Owner occupiers Private renters Social renters
Trends in tenure proportions 1980 to 20162017 go v . file201617EHSHeadlineReport. df.
2006Percentage aged 2534 Trends in tenure for households with a HRP aged 2534 or 3544 20062007 to 20162017 Base all households with a Household Reference Person HRP aged 2534 or 3544.
Notes
Based on the age of the HRP.
The HRP is the person in whose name the accommodation is owned or rented.
Sources
20032004 to 20072008 English House Condition Survey full household sample.
20082009 onwards English Housing Survey full household sample.
Percentage aged 3544 Owner occupiers Private renters Social renters 13 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc The changing face of the typical tenant The information presented overleaf demonstrates the changing face of todays tenant.
As a result the PRS is becoming increasingly important for families as well as single households.
With regard to renters economic status 74% of private renters were working with 63% in fulltime work and 11% in parttime work.
In addition 9% of private renters were retired 6% were in fulltime education and 4% were unemployed.
The average length of tenure for private renters remains unchanged at 3.9 years showing that many renters are looking for a longterm stable home.
Our own analysis ten years of the Belvoir Rental Index In 2008 Belvoir started producing its Rental Index based on data from the Belvoir network gathered and analysed quarterly by an independent party.
This Rental Index is one of the longest running of its kind and crucially one of the few to predate the property market crash of 20082009.
The Belvoir Rental Index taken together with other industrywide data gives us a more accurate picture of the industry within which we operate and enables us to make more informed business decisions as a result.
Our data shows that rents are increasing but at a slow steady and sustainable rate.
The average rent for the Belvoir network in 2017 was 798 which is 2% up on the average rent charged in 2016.
Rental increases have stalled during 2017 which is possibly due to an increase in negative focus on our industry to support upcoming changes in Government legislation.
England Scotland and Wales  Average rent by quarter including all new offices telteltel 2015
Q3
Q2
Q4
991N 0% Just a 1 increase 982N 2% Average rent Q4 2017
Increase from 2016 average to Q4 17 average rent 14 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governmentled initiatives and their potential effect on the lettings industry The last few years have seen a marked increase in the rules and regulations introduced to our industry.
These changes include stricter health and safety regulations and the additional administrative tasks associated with identifying the eligibility of a tenant to live in the UK as part of Right to Rent.
Reputable lettings agents will usually carry the burden of this extra work for their landlords and as such we expect to see more private landlords start to enlist the services of a lettings agent.
A recent announcement by Communities Secretary Sajid Javid detailed proposals for potentially introducing compulsory membership for private landlords to a consumer redress scheme which would also encompass certain additional regulations to adhere to.
This would further improve a tenants experience of the PRS ensuring they receive adequate support in a dispute regardless of who they rent from.
This would also help to level the playing field between lettings agents and private landlords making it even more beneficial for a landlord to use a lettings agent.
The 2016 announcement of the proposed ban on tenant fees is probably the biggest challenge for our industry.
Although not due to come into force until 2019 the impending ban has forced letting agents to rethink their business plans and income streams in order to offset the costs associated with carrying out the necessary checks and administrative tasks associated with placing a tenant.
For some agents this cost may be passed onto the landlord some may need to increase the rent charged to the tenant and some may be able to find new opportunities or efficiencies within their own business in order to absorb the additional cost.
Our response The PRS clearly has an important role to play in providing homes for an ever increasing section of the UK population.
With long average tenancies and fair steady growth in rents tenants can feel secure in their home and the PRS can continue to remain profitable for lettings agents and landlords.
Increased regulation for landlords can only help to make the PRS a more reliable sector for tenants.
Banning of tenant fees while less favourable in our opinion than a cap on fees will help to rid the PRS of less reputable lettings agents who may have abused this revenue stream in the past.
Ultimately a safer fairer more transparent PRS can only be a good thing for the perception of our industry as a whole.
Some smaller independent lettings agents without the support of a national brand legal expertise and business development planning are now struggling to maintain a profitable business.
This is leading to continued consolidation in our industry which is creating more opportunities for our franchisees to buy competitors lettings portfolios to add to their existing businesses. httpssitepropertylandlordguidepropertyombudsmanscheme.
Market case study The upcoming tenant fee ban has been a concern for our franchisees and we have estimated that our network revenue could be affected by around 13%.
As with all setbacks in business the level of impact is somewhat controllable if you evolve and develop in other ways to compensate.
Our Belvoir Doncaster franchisee Chris Duffy is a prime example of this.
Six months ago Chris decided to get ahead of the upcoming ban on tenant fees and started to work on a series of changes in an attempt to mitigate any future loss in revenue.
Through moving to a more costeffective business premises upgrading some of his technology for greater efficiency improving his processes and putting more emphasis on selling the best level of insurance products to his landlords and tenants Chris has completely compensated for all loss in tenant fees when the ban comes into place meaning Chris will go forward with a better performing more efficient business as a result.
Our markets continued 15 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc The importance of estate agency for the Group With our Belvoir and Northwood networks being relative newcomers to estate agency this market still represents more of an opportunity than a risk to us.
Despite a challenging sales market in 2017 as a Group our network revenue from sales increased by 20% yet as shown in the graph below sales still represents only 20% of our total revenue meaning there is still the potential to increase this further.
The acquisition of Brook in July 2017 also presents an opportunity for increased revenue from sales once integrated into our franchisees business operations.
The existing smaller Newton Fallowells mortgage business was transferred into Brook at the start of 2018 resulting in 29 financial advisors with a target to grow to 50 over the next two years.
The Brook advisors are already fully supporting the Newton Fallowell network and during 2018 will start to integrate with the Belvoir and Northwood networks offering franchisees the opportunity to benefit from this additional revenue stream.
Typically a franchisee will earn around 300 for simply introducing a customer with no ongoing costs or charges.
This will be an extremely welcome addition to its income particularly when faced with the probable withdrawal of tenant fees in 2019.
Total Group MSF income 17 83N Belvoir
Newton Fallowell The sales market Residential property transactions have remained fairly static throughout 2017 potentially due to continued economic uncertainty and static wages.
House prices however are still faring well with a modest increase of 5.2% year on year.
This is likely due to a simple case of supply and demand.
Government figures report net migration of 244000 compared to 154220 new builds completed for the year to September 2017 which is only adding to the existing housing shortage.
Contrary to elsewhere in the UK house prices in London actually fell for the first time in eight years according to mortgage lender
House prices in London fell by 0.5% making it the weakest performing region for the first time since 2004 with a greater number of people in the capital unable to afford to buy a home.
The Belvoir Group has been largely immune to the effects of a suffering London housing market as our coverage in the capital remains low with less than 5% of our franchisees revenue derived from the London area.
Sources go v . december2017ukhousepriceindexsummarydecember2017. on s . go v . internationalmigrationbulletinsmigrationstatisticsquarterlyreportfebruary2018. go v . fileHouseBuildingReleaseSepQtr2017. df. th e g u a r di a n . dentsukhousepricegrowth.
Mar 17 Dec 17 Oct 17 Nov 17 Sep 17 Aug 17 Jul 17 Jun 17 May 17 Apr 17 Jul 16 Jan 17 Feb 17 Dec 16 Nov 16 Oct 16 Sep 16 Aug 16 Total UK residential property transactions Not seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted 3% 3% 14% 50% 26% 4% Total sales income 2017 T otal lettings income 2017 20% 80% 16 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Leveraging our expertise GROUP ACQUISITIONS
Accelerating business growth through the acquisition of additional franchised lettings and estate agency networks and propertyrelated services companies to the Belvoir Group Milestones of 2017 Integrated Northwood into the Group reducing the cost base by 300000 p.
Acquisition of Brook to strengthen propertyrelated financial services offered throughout the Group Rebranding of four Goodchilds offices to Newton Fallowell and three to Belvoir Focus for the future Further integration of Group functions to deliver efficiencies and economies of scale Identify further propertyrelated service companies to bring into the Group Position Belvoir to take advantage of further strategic consolidation within the property franchising sector ASSISTED ACQUISITIONS
Increasing the market penetration of existing franchise territories through a proactive approach to finding them a local portfolio acquisition Milestones of 2017 23 2016 nine transactions completed by franchisees under the Assisted Acquisitions programme Added 3.3m 2016 1.5m to network revenue and 351000 2016 243000 p.
Yearend pipeline of transactions with lawyers totalling 2.8m 73 franchisees enrolled on the acquisition research programme Focus for the future Target to add 6.6m of additional network revenue in 2018 under the Assisted Acquisitions programme Strengthen relations with business transfer agents and improve targeting of potential sellers Position our franchisees to take advantage of consolidation within the sector
RECRUITMENT
Increasing UK coverage with newly franchised territories Milestones of 2017 Nine new offices opened in 2017 including one hot start Five existing offices sold on to new franchise owners Development of a new satellite recruitment strategy targeted at existing franchisees supporting new franchisees opening in adjacent territories Focus for the future Target to open six satellite offices in 2018 Expecting to resell six existing offices to a new franchise owner in 2018 Match new franchised territories with a portfolio acquisition where possible to give new franchisees an established income from day one Read about our brands on page 3 Read about our acquisitions on page 3 Read about our reach on page 2 Our strategy 17 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc
Continuing to expand our service offering with over twothirds of our franchisees now offering property sales and more proactive marketing of insurance and financial services Milestones of 2017 Property sales delivered a 47% increase in MSF to 270000 2016 184000 from the Belvoir network with 109 2016 93 of Belvoir offices having now completed sales training Three of the Newton Fallowell estate agents took up the lettings franchise for their territory Acquisition of Brook to enhance revenue opportunities from financial services Focus for the future Drive to maximise revenue from financial services and insurance products Continue to focus on improving reputation of local offices through online reviews Ongoing encouragement of franchisees to proactively offer additional services MARKETING AND PR Continuously driving for increased brand awareness Milestones of 2017 Belvoir won Gold at The Negotiator Awards for Franchise or Large Group of the Year Northwood won Best Lettings Agency in the allAgents Awards based entirely on customer reviews Belvoir Group marketing team undertook Northwood brand refresh Alignment of Group marketing suppliers to achieve economies of scale Focus for the future New Belvoir website for 2018 with more emphasis on lead management and conversion Further success with key industry awards across all brands Drive additional value by utlilising economies of scale wherever appropriate and most importantly using learnings to further improve each brands marketing success Increase focus on digital marketing to generate and convert leads Read about our services on page 8 Read about our awards on page 61
In September Belvoir launched its MovingMemories video campaign an emotive video to capture the excitement stress and occasional sadness that a house move can bring.
Behind every house move there is a person with a story to tell and this is something that Belvoir never forgets.
See the video here httpssite watchvH4q7pszBJE Our strategy is to leverage our expertise as a property franchisor to deliver both network growth and value for shareholders underpinned by highly professional franchisees and sound business ethics.
See our KPIs on page 22 18 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017
Risk management
Principal risks and uncertainties The Board has determined the most significant risks to achieving the business objectives including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The table opposite summarises these principal risks and how they are managed or mitigated.
The risks listed do not comprise all those associated with the Group and are not set out in any order of priority.
There could be additional risks and uncertainties which are not presently known to management or currently deemed to be less material which may also have an adverse effect on the business.
Going concern statement The Groups business model as set out on pages 8 and 9 has proved to be a robust and successful model for over 23 years.
The Groups corporate strategy has been clearly set out to investors since flotation in 2012 and has resulted in Belvoir becoming the largest franchise property group within the UK.
We continue to open new agencies across the UK and to support growth by assisting our franchisees to make local portfolio acquisitions and by making corporatelevel acquisitions of other property franchise networks and property servicesrelated companies.
The Group has demonstrated strong growth from a mixture of likeforlike and acquisitionbased growth as evidenced by increasing revenue and profitability over many years.
At the year end the Group had cash at bank of 1.4m and a bank term loan of 6.5m.
On 28 March 2017 the Group entered into new banking arrangements with HSBC which included a 12.0m loan facility and a 5.0m accordion facility to replace the existing lending by NatWest and to provide further access to funds to support Group growth plans.
Based on their assessment of prospects and viability above the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due.
Board of Directors Audit Committee Subsidiary boards Executive Directors Leadership of risk management sets strategic objectives and risk appetite and monitors performance Accountable for the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management processes Delegated responsibility from the Board to oversee risk management and internal controls Oversees the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management processes Monitors the independence and expertise of the external auditor Define risk management roles at operational and project level Use approach to risk as an explicit part of decision making and management of external relationships Continuous identification of risk assurance and selfassessment Communicate and disseminate risk policies Support and help operating companies to assess risk Encourage open communication on risk matters Assess materiality of risks in the context of the whole Group and monitor mitigation and controls Our risk management framework How we manage risk As with all businesses we face a wide range of risks and uncertainties on a daily basis.
19 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Nature of risk and impact Potential impact Mitigating activities Ability to generate planned revenue and profit growth No change There is no certainty that the Group will continue to expand its share of the residential property market through organic growth or by acquisition.
The Group derives its main source of income from its MSF chargeable at a percentage of franchise network revenue.
This depends upon market conditions and the willingness of landlords to pay commission to lettings agents and of vendors to pay commission for a traditional estate agency service.
Our forecast growth relies on the continued commercial success of our franchisees to outperform the underlying market growth and to diversify their propertyrelated service offering in what is a highly competitive residential property market.
The risks are mitigated by the Board regularly monitoring the revenue from the MSF and the Group management accounts and taking the appropriate action when variances are identified.
Given that some of the risk arises due to extraneous factors there may be limits to the level of direct action that can be taken.
However the Board does prioritise the work of the business development mentors who work closely with franchisees to target and address how they grow their business and respond to market conditions.
Furthermore the Board identifies additional propertyrelated services and supports the roll out of such new services to franchisees.
Ability to recruit and retain skilled franchisees Risk increased The ability of the Group to attract new franchisees with the appropriate expertise and skills in available and suitable locations cannot be guaranteed.
Given the prevailing market conditions the Group may experience difficulties in finding appropriate franchisees and failure to do so would have a detrimental effect upon trading performance.
The Board continually monitors the performance of the recruitment team and is focused on identifying innovative ways of attracting successful new franchise owners.
Reputational risk to the franchise model No change The Groups reputation in terms of the service it and its franchisees provide the way in which it and its franchisees conduct their business and the financial results which they achieve are central to the Groups future success.
Failure by the franchisees to meet the expectations of their landlords tenants buyers and sellers may have a material impact on the reputation of the brands within the Group.
The franchisees join subject to an intensive training programme and subsequent monitoring and support from a dedicated business development mentor.
The
Group also offers ongoing training courses to ensure continuing professional development.
Ability to execute the Belvoir Assisted Acquisitions strategy Risk decreased The Group needs to continue to identify suitable acquisition targets for its franchisees through its Assisted Acquisitions programme and to be able to support the franchisee to fund the acquisition through both third party and Belvoir lending.
The competitive process in the marketplace might increase the acquisition price and the tight lending criteria of major lenders might limit resources available to our network.
The Board monitors the Assisted Acquisitions programme to target a return on investment in excess of 25%.
Belvoir saw acquisition activity double in 2017 and only provided 10% of the deal value as loans to franchisees.
The year ended with a strong pipeline of potential acquisitions for 2018.
Legislative changes Risk increased Tax changes on interest relief against buytolet BTL mortgages and higher stamp duty on second homes have cooled BTL landlord activity in the market.
Furthermore the introduction of a ban on tenant fees now expected in 2019 following a period of consultation has led to uncertainty for both existing and potential new franchise owners.
The Board is focused on supporting the network in expanding their service offering Property sales still represent a viable new revenue stream for our many lettingsbased franchise owners.
A drive to engage with our franchisees on the upsale possibilities in the financial services sector including the commission on insurances conveyancing and mortgages.
Local acquisitions to expand their lettings portfolios.
Online threat Risk increased Online agencies offering a low cost solution are likely to increase their market share.
The Group needs to ensure that it can meet the demands of a new generation of landlords tenants buyers and sellers for whom a technical platform is second nature and for whom a physical office presence is less critical.
The Board is pursuing a strategy of improving the customer journey via its traditional agency service through a better technology platform to give landlords tenants buyers and sellers greater online visibility and interaction.
Marketing and PR
Franchise recruitment A s sis t e d A c q uisi t i o n s programme Link to strategy G r o up a c q uisi t i o n s strategy 20 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017
Financial review
Revenue
In 2017 Group revenue increased by 14% to 11.3m 2016 9.9m reflecting the full years impact of our 2016 acquisition of Northwood the 2017 acquisition of Brook Financial Services and the franchising out of six corporateowned offices during the two years under review.
MSF increased by 23% to 7.9m 2016 6.4m of which 17% resulted from Northwood being within the Group for twelve months 2016 seven.
Adjusting for the full year impact of Northwood lettings MSF increased by a further 4.3% of which 2.7% arose from likeforlike growth and 1.6% from portfolio acquisitions by franchisees.
Meanwhile MSF from property sales increased by 1.6% overall with the main estate agency network Newton Fallowell on par with last year and growth of 47% and 7% within the lettingsbiased networks Belvoir and Northwood respectively.
Income from corporateowned offices was down 0.9m as a result of the disposal of six Belvoir offices to franchisees between August 2016 and March 2017.
At the year end there remained four corporateowned offices of which Cumbria and Spalding have since each been acquired by a new franchise owner leaving the two original Grantham offices of Belvoir and Newton Fallowell which are both profitable and will be retained for future development purposes.
Revenue from franchise sales in 2017 was 0.3m 2016 0.4m.
The Groups recruitment policy is geared towards bringing on new franchise owners via a resale of an existing franchised territory or into a hot start where a portfolio acquisition is executed at the time of opening so as to give our new franchise owners a launch pad.
During 2017 we processed five resales and one hot start.
Meanwhile we saw nine of our existing franchise owners open a second office often as part of a portfolio acquisition transaction.
The acquisition of Brook Financial Services Brook in July 2017 has introduced a new reportable revenue stream for the Group with Brook adding 0.9m to the 0.3m of financial services Significant growth delivered from a sound financial platform Our focus on delivering shareholder value underpins our investment and longterm growth strategy. for the year.
Having recognised financial services as a separate revenue stream the 2016 other income has been adjusted to extract financial services leaving other income comparable at 0.5m 2016 0.5m for both years under review.
Operating profit before exceptional items The 0.4m reduction in nonexceptional administrative expenses to 6.5m 2016 6.9m reflected a number of underlying factors.
The full year impact of Northwood expected to add around 0.6m was considerably mitigated by a restructuring exercise carried out in Q1 2017 which eliminated 0.3m from overheads and tighter cost control resulting in a net increase of 0.2m in the Northwood cost base.
The July 2017 acquisition of Brook added 0.7m to overheads and the franchising out of the six corporate offices reduced overheads by 1.2m.
Within administrative expenses there is a charge of 72000 2016 25000 associated with the share options issued to Directors and certain staff between 2014 and 2017.
Full disclosure is in note 26 to the accounts.
Operating profit before exceptional items was 3.9m 2016 2.5m an increase of 56% over the prior year.
Exceptional items Exceptional items totalled 0.5m 2016 0.7m of which 0.1m and 0.2m related to legal and professional fees associated with the acquisition of Brook and an aborted merger offer respectively and 0.1m represented the deemed interest on the Northwood contingent consideration.
Profit before taxation Profit before taxation of 3.9m 2016 2.4m is after interest receivable on franchisee loans of 0.3m 2016 0.3m which is regarded by the Group as part of its ongoing operations to extend the network reach.
Taxation
The effective rate of corporate tax for the year was 24.2% 2016 23.9% due to the 0.3m exceptional legal and professional costs of the acquisition and deemed interest not being an allowable deduction from profits for tax purposes.
Earnings per share Basic earnings per share was up 51% to 8.6p 2016 5.7p based on an average number of shares in issue in the period of 34638939 2016 32375694 an increase arising from the issue of 803284 shares in January against the Northwood earnout and 475162 shares in July 2017 against the Brook acquisition.
When diluted to incorporate 1830399 2016 938399 share options the earnings per share was 8.1p 2016 5.5p.
21 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Financial position The Group continues to operate from a sound financial platform and is strongly cash generative.
This together with the 1.4m opening cash balance will enable the Group to meet the bank loan repayment of 0.7m in 2018.
Also the capital repayments from the existing franchisee loan book will enable the Group to give further financial assistance to franchisees acquiring local managed lettings portfolios which delivers both network growth and favourable rates of return for the Group.
Key performance indicators The Group uses a number of key financial and nonfinancial performance indicators to measure performance.
The Group also uses alternative performance measures to improve comparability of information between reporting periods and across the sector for uncontrollable and oneoff factors which impact upon IFRS measures to aid the users of the annual report in understanding the activity taking place across the Groups portfolio.
The key financial indicators are as follows management service fees adjusted net profit before tax and adjusted earnings per share.
These have been discussed in further detail above.
Following the introduction of property sales to the Belvoir network in 2014 the Board started tracking the number of offices offering property sales as a KPI.
Since the acquisitions of Newton Fallowell Goodchilds and Northwood all of which were already offering sales to varying degrees and given that the penetration of sales within the Belvoir network is now up to over 60% the number of offices offering property sales is no longer deemed to be a key determinant of future growth.
Meanwhile the Board is closely monitoring the success of the Assisted Acquisitions programme as a key part of its strategic growth plans.
This change in focus has been reflected in the key nonfinancial indicators listed below number of offices managed properties and additional MSF arising from assisted acquisitions.
These have been discussed in further detail throughout the Strategic report and are illustrated on page 22.
Louise George Chief Financial Officer The successful integration of Northwood has demonstrated our capability to manage effectively a multibrand franchise group and to deliver increasing profitability.
Adjusted basic earnings per share of 11.3p 2016 8.8p reflects adjustments for exceptional administrative costs profitloss on disposal of corporate offices and deemed interest on contingent consideration totalling 0.7m.
The adjusted diluted earnings per share was 10.7p 2016 8.5p.
The profit attributable to owners was up 67% to 3.0m 2016 1.8m.
Dividends
The Board is proposing a final dividend for 2017 of 3.5p per share 2016 3.4p.
Together with the interim dividend of 3.4p paid to shareholders on 27 October 2017 this equates to a total dividend for the year of 6.9p per share 2016 6.8p a modest increase in line with the Boards progressive dividend policy.
Subject to shareholders approval at the AGM on 29 May 2017 the dividend will be paid on 31 May 2018 based upon the register on 20 April 2018.
The exdividend date will be 19 April 2018.
Cash flow The net cash inflow from operations was 4.6m 2016 2.9m reflecting the enlarged Group.
The net cash used in investing activities was 0.9m 2016 9.4m On 12 July 2017 the Group acquired the entire share capital of Brook Financial Services Limited a specialist mortgage advice company for consideration of 2.2m of which 1.7m was settled in cash and 0.5m by the issue of shares to the vendor.
On 2 May 2017 the Group took ownership of the Yardley franchise office at a cost of 0.1m.
This office and two existing corporate offices Devizes and Burton were sold to new franchise owners during the year giving rise to a cash inflow of 0.3m 2016 0.8m on disposal.
0.4m was returned from the Northwood escrow account to settle a tax liability.
During the year the net inflow from the franchise loan book was 0.1m 2016 net outflow of 0.4m.
Loans repaid to the bank in the year were 0.5m 2016 1.0m and dividend payments totalled 2.4m 2016 2.2m.
As a result net cash outflow from financing activities totalled 3.1m 2016 net cash inflow of 5.9m.
Liquidity and capital resources At the year end the Group had cash balances of 1.4m 2016 1.6m and a term loan of 6.5m 2016 7.0m.
The Group entered into new banking facilities with HSBC on 28 March 2018.
As part of that process the yearend NatWest bank loan was settled and a new revolving credit facility of 12.0m was put in its place to provide the Group with sufficient liquidity to settle the Northwood earnout expected to crystallise in July 2018.
The initial drawdown of 7.0m under the HSBC facility is repayable in half yearly payments of 350000.
22 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Our key performance indicators KPIs Measuring our performance The Group tracks a series of financial and nonfinancial metrics that demonstrate the progress we are making.
These have been discussed in further detail throughout the Strategic report.
Financial
Nonfinancial
Definition
Fees to the franchisor based on a percentage of franchisee revenue
17% growth from full year impact of 2016 Northwood acquisition.
6% from ongoing network activities Link to strategy
23%
Adjusted profit before tax arising from ongoing operations
Cost savings from integration of Northwood into the Group and revenue growth from the acquisition of Brook Link to strategy
Earnings per share adjusted for nonrecurring transactions
Increase in adjusted EPS also reflecting enlarged group Link to strategy BASIC EPS AND ADJUSTED p 51% 28% PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED m 62% 39% See note 9 on page 48.
Adjusted
Link to strategy G r o up a c q uisi t i o n s strategy A s sis t e d A c q uisi t i o n s programme Franchise recruitment
Marketing and PR
OF OFFICES 1%
OF MANAGED PROPERTIES 4% ASSISTED ACQUISITIONS MSF p.
44%
All our offices have a physical high street presence
Growth of the network has come from greater market penetration of existing territories Link to strategy
Total number of properties managed on behalf of landlords within the Group
Substantial increase from portfolio acquisitions by our franchisees Link to strategy
Additional MSF p.
Comment
23 assisted acquisitions were completed in 2017 adding 3.3m of network revenue and 351000 in recurring MSF Link to strategy Governance Introduction to governance 24 Board of Directors 25 Statement of corporate governance 26 Directors remuneration report 28 Directors report 30 Financial statements Independent auditors report 32 Group statement of comprehensive income 36 Statements of financial position 37 Statements of changes in shareholders equity 38 Statements of cash flows 39 Notes to the financial statements 40 Shareholder information Notice of Annual General Meeting 59 Corporate information 60 Corporate calendar 60 Our awards 61 24 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Introduction to governance
At Belvoir we recognise that high standards of corporate governance underpin our continuing success.
The Directors confirm that so far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and Companys auditor is unaware the Directors have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as Directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the auditor is aware of that information and the Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
We continually review the framework within which we operate and the processes implemented to ensure that they reflect the complexities of our business and whilst acknowledging our size are also capable of adding value as the business grows.
The Company seeks guidance as set out in the Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies published in 2013 by the Quoted Companies Alliance the QCA Corporate Governance Code.
The Board sets out the overall strategic direction for Belvoir regularly reviews management performance and ensures that the Group has the right level of resources available to support our strategic goals.
The Board is satisfied that the necessary controls and resources are in place such that these responsibilities can be properly addressed.
Within Belvoir we promote a culture of good governance in dealing with all key stakeholders our franchisees our employees our customers and our shareholders.
This section of the annual report describes our corporate governance structures and processes and how they have been applied throughout the year ended 31 December 2017.
Mike Goddard
2017 key shareholder engagements January Preclose trading update RNS April Preliminary results Annual report published
Report
May Investor visit to Belvoir AGM trading update
Meeting
RNS
Meeting
July Acquisition of Brook and change of Board RNS August New Long Term Incentive Plan RNS September Interim results MeetingsRNS October Investor visit to Belvoir Rule 2.4 announcement
MeetingsRNS
November Communication between Chair and investors Rule 2.7 announcement Northwood growth
RNS
RNS
December Brook update RNS 25 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Board of Directors Belvoir Lettings has a highly experienced Board of Directors with a commitment to driving profitability and longterm shareholder value.
The Directors of the Company who were in office during the year up to the date of signing the financial statements were Mark Newton Executive Director Appointment March 2016
Mark a Chartered Surveyor has over 30 years experience of estate agency having joined Black Horse Agencies in 1984 and subsequently becoming managing director of Legal and General Estate Agents.
In 1999 Mark established Newton Fallowell which he built into a network of 30 franchised offices before selling to Belvoir in July 2015.
Mark has Boardlevel responsibility for the diversification into financial services.
Key skills Estate agencyfinancial services Dorian Gonsalves
Chief Executive Officer
Appointment April 2005
Dorian has extensive experience in the property industry having spent seven years with Countrywide before joining Belvoir in 2005 as Business Development Manager and being appointed Sales Director a year later.
Currently Chief Executive Officer Dorian
Property Ombudsman.
Key skills People managementbusiness development Louise George Chief Financial Officer Appointment June 2014
Louise is a Chartered Accountant and Chartered Secretary having qualified with Ernst and Young in 1991.
She has over 14 years boardlevel experience with AIMlisted companies overseeing a wide range of corporate transactions.
Over the past three years Louise has undertaken four significant acquisitions for the Group.
Louise also serves as Company Secretary to the Group.
Key skills Financial managementmergers and acquisitions Mike Goddard
Appointment January 1995
Mike founded Belvoir in 1995 having previously served in the Royal Air Force.
He is a wellrespected figure in both the UK lettings market and franchising industry having been chairman of the British Franchising Association a director of the National Approved Lettings Scheme and a director of The Property Ombudsman and having served on the World Franchise Council.
Key skills Team buildingstrategic business planning Andrew Borkowski NonExecutive Director Appointment March 2014
Andrew has over 26 years experience as a corporate lawyer having been an equity partner at a national law firm until 2015 leading its corporate and banking team.
Andrew is now chief executive of a private family investment fund Fullbrook Thorpe Investments LLP which has built up a portfolio of 26 investments and a nonexecutive director of a number of privately held concerns.
Key skills Legalcorporate transactions
Audit Committee Remuneration Committee C Chair of Committee Michael Stoop NonExecutive Director Appointment March 2018
Michael has over 40 years experience of the franchise property market initially with Winkworth as both a franchisee and as the group managing director.
This was followed by 22 years as managing director of Legal and Generals estate agency network Xperience which he was instrumental in converting into a wholly franchised network of 95 offices.
In 2014 this was sold to the Property Franchise Group plc where Michael was group managing director until he stood down in 2016.
Key skills Estate agencyfranchising Nicholas Leeming C NonExecutive Director Key skills Estate agencyonline technology Nicholas served as a NonExecutive Director from 2012 until he stood down from the Board on 10 April 2018.
During 2017 Nicholas served on the Audit Committee and was Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
26 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Statement of corporate governance Board diversity As of 31 December 2017.
Composition and roles The QCA Corporate Governance Code provides that the Board should be balanced between Executive and NonExecutive Directors and should have at least two independent NonExecutive Directors.
Board composition and roles members
NonExecutive
Chairman
17% female 83% male Length of tenure As of the date of this report.
Director Appointmentteltelteltelteltelteltel Tenure Mike Goddard Jan 1995 23 years Dorian Gonsalves Apr 2005 13 years Louise George Jun 2014 4 years Mark Newton Mar 2016 2 years Nicholas Leeming Nov 2012 5 years Andrew Borkowski Mar 2014 4 years Michael Stoop Mar 2018 0 years Nicholas Leeming stood down from the Board on 10 April 2018.
Compliance
The Board ensures that the Company adopts proper standards of corporate governance and that the principles of best practice as set out in the QCA Corporate Governance Code are followed so far as is practicable and appropriate to the size and nature of the Company and the constitution of the Board.
Set out below is a summary of how at 31 December 2017 and for the year then ended the Company was applying the key requirements of the Code.
Board of Directors Throughout the year the Board comprised a Chairman three Executive Directors and two NonExecutive Directors.
At every AGM onethird of the Directors must retire by rotation.
Notwithstanding their small shareholdings both NonExecutive Directors are considered to be independent.
The Board has ten scheduled meetings a year but meets more frequently if required and has full and timely access to all relevant information to enable it to carry out its duties.
The Board reserves for itself a range of key decisions such as strategy acquisitions significant contracts and internal controls to ensure it retains proper direction and control of the Group whilst delegating authority to individual Directors who are responsible for the Executive management of the business.
With effect from July 2017 the roles of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer have been separated and are no longer held by the same individual.
There is a clear division of responsibilities at the head of the Company between the running of the Board and the running of the Groups operations.
The role of the Chairman is to manage the Board in the best interests of its stakeholders to ensure that shareholders views are communicated to the Board and to be responsible for ensuring the Boards integrity and effectiveness.
The role of the Chief Executive Officer is to manage the Group on a daytoday basis to ensure that Board decisions are implemented effectively and to develop and propose Group strategy to the Board.
The Board considers the current Board structure appropriate for the Company.
There are processes in place enabling Directors to take independent advice at the Companys expense in the furtherance of their duties and to have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
27 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Board Committees The Board has delegated specific responsibilities to the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Given its relatively small size the Board as a whole fulfils the function of the Nominations Committee.
The Board considers that all the members of each Committee have the appropriate experience and none of them have interests which conflict with their positions on the Committees.
All Board Committees have their own terms of reference which are available from the Company Secretary upon request.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee has two scheduled meetings a year and is responsible for determining the contractual terms remuneration and other benefits of the Executive Directors.
The Remuneration Committee comprised Mike Goddard Andrew Borkowski and Nicholas Leeming who acted as the Chairman until stepping down from the Board on 10 April 2018.
Michael Stoop has been appointed Chairman of the Remuneration Committee as of 10 April 2018.
Details of the level and composition of the Directors remuneration are disclosed in the Directors remuneration report on pages 28 and 29.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee has three scheduled meetings a year.
The
Audit Committee comprised Andrew Borkowski who acted as the Chairman and Nicholas Leeming until he stepped down from the Board on 10 April 2018.
Andrew Borkowski is considered to have recent and relevant financial and legal knowledge and experience.
Michael Stoop has been appointed to serve on the Audit Committee as of 10 April 2018.
The Audit Committee is responsible for ensuring the integrity of the financial statements of the Group and the effectiveness of the Groups underlying internal controls.
The Audit Committee will make recommendations to the Board on the appointment reappointment and removal of the external auditor taking into account the cost effectiveness independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
The Committee meets with the external auditor for the purpose of discussing matters relating to the financial reporting accounting policies and internal controls of the Group.
During the year the Groups external auditor provided nonaudit services to the Group including tax advice.
The fees paid for these services are outlined in note 3.
The use of the external auditor for nonaudit work has been carefully evaluated by the Audit Committee and was not considered to have impaired the external auditors independence and objectivity.
Internal control The Board is responsible for the Companys system of internal control including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The
Board has introduced procedures designed to meet the particular needs of the Company in managing the risks to which it is exposed.
The Board is satisfied with the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls but by their very nature these procedures can provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board has reviewed the need for an internal audit function.
The Board has decided that given the nature of the Companys business and assets and the overall size of the Company the systems and procedures currently employed provide sufficient assurance that a sound system of internal control which safeguards shareholders investment and the Companys assets is in place.
An internal audit function is therefore considered unnecessary.
However the Group does operate an audit and compliance team which carries out legal compliance checks and riskbased audits on all franchisees at least once a year.
Financial reporting There is a comprehensive planning system including regular periodic forecasts which are presented to and approved by the
The performance of the Group is reported monthly and compared to the latest forecast and the prior period.
Relations with shareholders Keeping investors informed is an essential part of the Companys corporate communications strategy and is achieved by means of an active investor relations programme.
The aim is to ensure that the Companys business model strategic goals and future prospects are clearly understood by the investment community.
The Company operates a high level of transparency with regards to its operations by providing consistent information across all channels of communication.
The Board places a high emphasis on shareholder engagement and through an open and transparent dialogue with shareholders aims to ensure that shareholders objectives and views on the Companys performance are understood.
The Chairman makes himself available to major shareholders on request and periodically attends meetings with and gives presentations to shareholders.
The Groups corporate website site aims to provide investors with the required information to fully understand the business including the annual and interim report and to potentially make an investment decision.
The website is regularly reviewed and updated to reflect new information.
All shareholders will receive at least 21 clear days notice of the Annual General Meeting which is normally attended by all Directors.
Shareholders are invited to ask questions during the meeting and to meet with Directors after the formal proceedings have ended.
Attendance at meetings Meetings attended Main Board Remuneration Committee Audit Committee Total number of meetings 10 5 3 Mike Goddard Dorian Gonsalves Louise George Mark Newton Nicholas Leeming Andrew Borkowski 28 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Directors remuneration report During the year our executive remuneration packages were revised to ensure that we retain and motivate our talented Executive Team over a longer period of time and that their reward is aligned to maximising shareholder return.
The Directors present the Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 December 2017.
The Remuneration Committee sets the overall policy on remuneration and other terms of employment of Directors.
The
Remuneration Committee aims to ensure that the remuneration packages offered are competitive and designed to attract retain and motivate Directors of the right calibre.
When assessing the pay and benefits of the Directors the Remuneration Committee takes account of remuneration and benefits information in the marketplace and the pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Group.
In 2017 executive remuneration packages were reviewed by FIT Remuneration Consultants LLP who advised the Remuneration Committee on a new remuneration plan comprising a fixed salary a variable annual bonus based on achieving certain budgeted shortterm targets and a longterm share option element linked to performance targets over the period to 31 December 2020.
The provisions of the new plan reflect the increasing responsibilities of the Executive Team given the enlarged Group and incorporates longerterm objectives to ensure that the Executive Team is incentivised to maximise profitability and shareholder return.
Remuneration for NonExecutive Directors consists of fees for their services in connection with Board and Committee meetings.
These fees are to be determined by the Committee without the involvement of the NonExecutive Director concerned.
NonExecutive Directors do not participate in any Group pension or share option schemes.
All Directors are subject to retirement by rotation.
Basic salary or fees Basic salary or fees for each Director are reviewed annually by the Remuneration Committee taking into account the performance of the individual and information from independent sources on the rates of salary for similar posts.
Annual bonus The Company operates a bonus scheme to incentivise Executive Directors to meet the financial and strategic objectives of the Group.
During the financial year ended 31 December 2017 a total bonus of 178000 2016 135000 was awarded to the Directors.
Pension
During the year pension contributions of 34000 2016 16000 were paid to Executive Directors.
Taxable benefits The Directors taxable benefits are tabled opposite.
Service contracts The Executive Directors of the Company do not have a notice period in excess of twelve months under the terms of their service contracts.
Their service contracts contain no provisions for predetermined compensation on termination which exceed one years salary and benefits in kind.
NonExecutive Directors do not have service contracts with the Company but have letters of appointment which can be terminated on three months notice.
Board members Notice period Mike Goddard Six months notice Dorian Gonsalves Twelve months notice Louise George Twelve months notice Mark Newton Three months notice Andrew Borkowski Three months notice Nicholas Leeming Three months notice Michael Stoop Three months notice Company policy on external appointments The Company recognises that its Directors are likely to be invited to become nonexecutive directors of other companies and that exposure to such nonexecutive duties can broaden their experience and knowledge which will benefit the Group.
Executive and NonExecutive Directors are therefore subject to approval of the Companys Board allowed to accept nonexecutive appointments as long as these are not with competing companies and are not likely to lead to conflicts of interest.
Executive and NonExecutive Directors are allowed to retain the fees paid.
Nicholas Leeming has extensive experience of the property market but was appointed to the Board mainly for his knowledge of internetbased business.
Nicholas other appointments may also draw upon this knowledge but he does not act for any other businesses involved in property franchising and hence no conflict arises.
Audited information Details of the Directors shareholding interests and remuneration for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 disclosed opposite have been audited by the Groups external auditor.
29 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Share options The Remuneration Committee is responsible for awarding options over ordinary shares to Executive Directors and certain senior managers under the Companys enterprise management incentive EMI share option scheme.
The scheme is intended to offer longterm incentives to Directors and senior management.
The Remuneration Committee believes that the potential for share ownership and participation in the growing value of the Company increases the commitment and loyalty of Directors and staff.
Options outstanding as at 31 December 2017 are tabled below Directors share options Share option scheme Number
Date of grant
Expiry date Executive Directors Dorian Gonsalves Unapproved 163399 0.75 16022012 Two years 31122018 Dorian Gonsalves EMI scheme 200000 1.32 04072014 Three years 04072024 Dorian Gonsalves LTIP 540000 0.01 01082017 41 months 31122020 Louise George EMI scheme 175000 1.32 04072014 Three years 04072024 Louise George LTIP 432000 0.01 01082017 41 months 31122020 Directors emoluments The figures below represent emoluments earned by Directors during the relevant financial year and relate to the period of each Directors membership of the Board.
Benefits incorporate all benefits assessable to tax arising from employment by the Group.
Directors emoluments
Bonus
Pension
Benefits
Total
Total
Executive Directors Mike Goddard 117   2 119 191 Dorian Gonsalves Louise George Mark Newton NonExecutive Directors Nicholas Leeming 35    35 35 Andrew Borkowski 35    35 35 Total remuneration Directors interests The interests of the Directors in the shares of the Company are tabled below Directors interests 31 December 2017 31 December 2016 or date of appointment if later Shares Options Shares Options Mike Goddard 5571921  7193565 Dorian Gonsalves 463595 903399 463595 363399 Louise George 56607 607000 35107 175000 Mark Newton 435507  435507 Andrew Borkowski 33754  24544 Nicholas Leeming 24427  24427
A resolution to shareholders to approve the Directors remuneration report will be put forward at the Annual General Meeting.
On behalf of the Board Mike Goddard
10 April 2018 Nicholas Leeming stood down from the Board on 10 April 2018.
30 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Directors report The Directors present their annual report and audited consolidated financial statements of the Group for the financial year ended 31 December 2017.
The Directors of the Company who were in office during the year and up to the date of signing the financial statements are detailed on page 25.
Dividends
The Company paid its interim dividend for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.4p per ordinary share on 27 October 2017.
The Board recommends a final dividend for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.5p 2016 3.4p per share to be paid on 31 May 2018 to all shareholders on the register at the close of business on 20 April 2018 subject to shareholders approval on 29 May 2018.
The exdividend date will be on 19 April 2018.
Future developments The Board continues to deliver growth through the support of the network to promote organic growth the expansion of Belvoir territories and the financial support of franchiseeled acquisitions.
Furthermore the Board is pursuing strategic growth as a multibrand franchising group through the acquisition of other franchised networks building on the Groups strength as a highly regarded franchisor within the residential property sales and lettings sector.
Capital and equity structure Details of the ordinary shares of the Company are shown in note 19 of these financial statements.
Directors indemnity The Group maintains third party Directors and officers liability insurance which gives appropriate cover against any legal action that may be brought against them.
Employees
The Group believes in a policy of equal opportunities.
Recruitment and promotion are undertaken on the basis of merit regardless of gender race age marital status sexual orientation religion nationality colour or disability.
If an employee becomes disabled during the course of their employment adjustments are made where possible to enable such employee to carry on working despite their disability.
Going concern The Group and the Companys financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Directors note that as at 31 December 2017 both the Group and the Company are in a net current liability position of 3731000 and 1366000 respectively.
This reflects the contingent consideration estimated at 4901000 payable to the vendors of Northwood GB Limited which is to be settled in cash or equity as determined by the Company.
In addition a new banking facility with HSBC was entered into in March 2018 which will provide additional funding sufficient to cover the contingent consideration should the Directors decide on a cash settlement.
After consideration of forecasts for at least twelve months from the date of signing of the financial statements and making appropriate enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence and execute its plan for acquisition growth for the foreseeable future.
There are no material uncertainties of which the Directors are aware that may cast doubt on the entitys ability to continue as a going concern by reference to guidance by the Financial Reporting Council on going concern assessment.
Financial and risk management policies Details of the Groups financial and risk management policies are discussed in note 22 of these financial statements.
31 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc The Directors of the ultimate parent company are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the of the ultimate parent companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and parent companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the Governance section confirm that to the best of their knowledge the parent company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and parent company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
Independent auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP has expressed its willingness to continue as auditor.
In accordance with Section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
On behalf of the Board Louise George Chief Financial Officer 10 April 2018 Having developed a multibrand franchise model the Board is looking to build further growth through the introduction of additional propertyrelated services as evidenced by the acquisition of Brook Financial Services.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and the parent company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of the profit or loss of the Group and parent company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRS as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and IFRS as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the parent company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and parent company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and parent company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and parent company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
32 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion Belvoir Lettings PLCs group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 December 2017 and of the groups profit and the groups and the parent companys cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent companys financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the annual report and accounts 2017 the Annual Report which comprise the group and parent company statements of financial position as at 31 December 2017 the group statement of comprehensive income the group and parent company statements of cash flows and the group and parent company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
Our audit approach
Overall group materiality 218500 2016 150000 based on 5% of profit before tax adjusted for nonrecurring exceptional items.
Overall parent company materiality 207500 2016 135000 based on 1% of net assets.
The Group comprises a consolidation of eleven legal entities.
We conducted an audit of the complete financial information of nine legal entities together with additional procedures performed including over the Group consolidation.
The components on which audits of the complete financial information and centralised work was performed accounted for 100% of Group revenue.
Acquisition accounting Group and parent.
Recoverability of franchisee debtors Group.
Impairments of intangibles and goodwill Group.
Exceptional nonrecurring items Group and parent.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Independent auditors report To the members of Belvoir Lettings plc
Audit scope Key audit matters 33 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Acquisition accounting  Group and Parent Refer to the significant judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty in note 1 to the accounts.
Belvoir Lettings plc acquired the share capital of Brook Financial Services Limited in July 2017.
Provisional fair values were attributed to each of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
In addition contingent consideration is due in May 2018 in relation to the prior year acquisition of Northwood GB Limited.
We have assessed the fair values ascribed to the assets and liabilities that were purchased as part of the acquisition of Brook Financial Services Limited.
In particular we challenged managements assessment that there were no acquired intangible assets and found this to be reasonable.
We have reviewed the analysis which supports the contingent consideration due in relation to the Northwood GB Limited acquisition.
For those months which remain a forecast we have challenged managements assumptions in arriving at these results and consider these to be reasonable.
Recoverability of franchisee debtors  Group Refer to the significant judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty in note 1 to the accounts.
Loans to franchisees represent a material balance within the statement of financial position.
The Group assesses the recoverability of these balances and provisions are booked where recoverability of a specific balance is in doubt.
We have assessed the franchisee debtor balance at the year end analysed between current and overdue amounts.
Testing has been performed postyear end to understand which of these amounts have been subsequently paid.
We have assessed franchisees who have had their contract terms amended to allow for payment holidays to understand the circumstances around these revisions.
We have performed an analysis of MSF income against outstanding loan balances to identify franchisees with a comparably high loan amount compared to income.
We have challenged management to understand the factors resulting in such circumstances and the recoverability of these amounts.
We are satisfied with managements assessment of the recoverability of the franchisee balance at the year end.
Impairments of intangibles and goodwill  Group Refer to the significant judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty in note 1 to the accounts.
A significant balance of goodwill and intangible assets exists on consolidation in relation to the Newton Fallowell Group Goodchilds Estate Agents and Lettings Limited Northwood GB Limited and Brook Financial Services Limited and a number of smaller corporate offices.
These assets require assessment at the yearend date to determine if impairment is necessary.
We have reviewed the impairment assessment models prepared by management which include a number of key assumptions including the discount rate and growth rate.
We have provided independent challenge to these assumptions including undertaking a sensitivity analysis.
We have identified no indication of impairment as a result of the models produced by management.
We are satisfied that the assumptions are reasonable.
Exceptional nonrecurring items  Group and Parent Refer to the significant judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty in note 1 to the accounts.
Costs relating to the acquisition of Brook Financial Services Limited the aborted merger with The Property Franchise Group and the restructuring of the Group have been separately disclosed as exceptional items.
We have tested the items that are disclosed as exceptional in the income statement and concluded that they are in accordance with the Groups accounting policy for such items and are appropriately disclosed.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group and the parent company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group is structured with one segment.
The Group financial statements are a consolidation of eleven legal entities within this segment comprising the Groups operating business and centralised functions.
34 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Our audit approach continued How we tailored the audit scope continued In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we identified three legal entities Belvoir Property Management UK Limited Northwood GB Limited and Newton Fallowell Limited which in our view required an audit of their complete financial information due to their financial significance to the Group.
In addition we also conducted the statutory audits of the remaining six nonsignificant legal entities such that the audit work was complete prior to finalisation of the audit of the Group financial statements thereby providing further evidence in support of our Group opinion.
The audits of these nine legal entities together with the additional procedures performed at the Group level including over the Group consolidation gave us the evidence we needed for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Overall materiality 218500 2016 150000.
207500 2016 135000.
How we determined it 5% of profit before tax adjusted for nonrecurring exceptional items.
1% of net assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on the benchmarks used in the annual report profit before tax adjusted for nonrecurring exceptional items is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
Exceptional items have been adjusted for to allow greater comparability in the underlying performance.
We believe that net assets is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the entity given it is non trading and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 2500 and 207500.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 10925 Group audit 2016 7500 and 10375 Parent company audit 2016 6750 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the Directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the Directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups and parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Independent auditors report continued To the members of Belvoir Lettings plc 35 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Reporting on other information continued Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 31 December 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors responsibilities the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Paul Norbury Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors East Midlands 10 April 2018 36 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Group statement of comprehensive income For the financial year ended 31 December 2017
Continuing operations Revenue 2 11299 9940 Cost of sales 3 510 Gross profit 10789 9940 Administrative expenses Nonexceptional 3 6540 6948 Exceptional 4 332 482 6872 7430 Operating profit 3917 2510 Profitloss on disposal of corporate offices 4 6 160 Finance costs 6 192 139 Finance income 6 313 291 Exceptional deemed interest on contingent consideration 4 134 93 Profit before taxation 3910 2409 Taxation 7 948 576 Profit and total comprehensive income for the financial year 2962 1833 Profit for the year attributable to the equity holders of the parent company 2962 1833 Basic earnings per share from continuing operations 9 8.6p 5.7p Adjusted basic earnings per share from continuing operations 9 11.3p 8.8p Adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations 9 10.7p 8.5p The Groups results shown above are derived entirely from continuing operations.
The accompanying notes form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
37 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Statements of financial position As at 31 December 2017
Group Company
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 10 26487 24772 Investments in subsidiaries 11   39533 35314 Property plant and equipment Trade and other receivables 13 3617 4024 30739 29453 39578 35314 Current assets Trade and other receivables 13 2813 2740 4931 8287 Cash and cash equivalents 14 1350 1591 226 16 4163 4331 5157 8303 Total assets 34902 33784 44735 43617
Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 15  4281  4281 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 17 5578 6270 5578 6270 Deferred tax 23 1989 2054 8 7567 12605 5586 10551 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 15 6462 2307 5657 2404 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 1tel692 Tax payable 566 849 7894 3848 6523 3096 Total liabilities 15461 16453 12109 13647 Total net assets 19441 17331 32626 29970
Shareholders equity Share capital 1tel336 Share premium 19 12006 10583 12006 10583 Sharebased payments reserve Revaluation reserve 162 162 50 50 Merger reserve 5774 5774 8101 8101 Retained earnings 12550 11948 12072 10924 Total equity 19441 17331 32626 29970 The Company made a profit after tax of 3508000 2016 1063000.
The financial statements on pages 36 to 58 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board on 10 April 2018 and signed on its behalf by Mike Goddard
Registered number The accompanying notes form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
38 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Statements of changes in shareholders equity For the financial year ended 31 December 2017
Notes
Share capital
Sharebased payments reserve
Merger reserve
Total equity Balance at 1 January 2016 305 7379 51 162 5774 12298 14421 Changes in equity Issue of equity share capital 19 31 3204     3235 Sharebased payments 26   25    25 Dividends 8      2183 2183 Transactions with owners 31 3204 25   2183 1077 Profit and total comprehensive income for the financial year      1833 1833 Balance at 31 December 2016 336 10583 76 162 5774 11948 17331 Issue of equity share capital 19 13 1423     1436 Sharebased payments 26   72    72 Dividends 8      2360 2360 Transactions with owners 13 1423 72   2360 852 Profit and total comprehensive income for the financial year      2962 2962 Balance at 31 December 2017 349 12006 148 162 5774 12550 19441
Notes
Share capital
Sharebased payments reserve
Merger reserve
Total equity Balance at 1 January 2016 305 7379 51 50 8101 12044 27830 Changes in equity Issue of equity share capital 19 31 3204     3235 Sharebased payments 26   25    25 Dividends 8      2183 2183 Transactions with owners 31 3204 25   2183 1077 Profit and total comprehensive income for the financial year      1063 1063 Balance at 31 December 2016 336 10583 76 50 8101 10924 29970 Issue of equity share capital 19 13 1423     1436 Sharebased payments 26   72    72 Dividends 8      2360 2360 Transactions with owners 13 1423 72   2360 852 Profit and total comprehensive income for the financial year      3508 3508 Balance at 31 December 2017 349 12006 148 50 8101 12072 32626 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
39 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Statements of cash flows For the financial year ended 31 December 2017
Group Company Operating activities Cash generated from operating activities 20 4612 2946 2183 1331 Tax paid 912 597 Net cash flows generated from operating activities 3700 2349 2183 1331 Investing activities Acquisitions 1854 8005 3647 8000 Working capital and cash introduced by companies acquired 29 243 Deferred and contingent consideration 76 2202 76 2202 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment 12 114 80 52 Disposal of assets 324 797 Franchisee loans granted 681 1352 Loans repaid by franchisees 761 938 Finance income 6 313 291 Return of funds from escrow 434  434 Dividends received 25   4445 1800 Net cash flows used ingenerated from investing activities 864 9370 1104 8402 Financing activities Bank loan advance 17  7000  7000 Loan repayments 525 1000 525 Proceeds from share issue  2570  2570 Share placing costs  269  269 Equity dividends paid 8 2360 2183 2360 2183 Finance costs 192 185 192 161 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 3077 5933 3077 6957 Net change in cash and cash equivalents 241 1088 210 114 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the financial year 1591 2679 16 130 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the financial year 14 1350 1591 226 16 The accompanying notes form an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
40 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 1 Accounting policies General information Belvoir Lettings plc is the ultimate parent company of the Group whose principal activity during the year under review was that of selling supporting and training residential property franchises.
Belvoir Lettings plc a public limited company listed on AIM is incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
Registered office The address of the registered office and principal place of business of Belvoir Lettings plc is The Old Courthouse 60A London Road Grantham Lincolnshire NG31 6HR.
Basis of preparation The Group and Company financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention with the exception of the freehold property which has been revalued.
Being listed on AIM the Company is required to present its consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations as adopted by the European Union and with the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
Going concern The Directors note that as at 31 December 2017 both the Group and the Company are in a net current liability position of 3731000 and 1366000 respectively which reflects contingent consideration estimated at 4901000 to be settled in either cash or equity as determined by the Company.
In addition the Group has put in place a new banking facility with HSBC which will provide additional funding sufficient to cover the contingent consideration should the Directors decide on a cash settlement.
After consideration of forecasts and making appropriate enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group and the Company have adequate resources to continue in operational existence and execute their plan for acquisition growth for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts.
There are no material uncertainties of which Directors are aware that may cast doubt on the Group and Companys ability to continue as a going concern by reference to the guidance issued by the Financial Reporting Council on going concern assessment.
Standards adopted for the first time A number of new and revised standards are effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
Adoption of these standards has not had an impact on the Groups financial statements.
Standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards that are not yet effective A number of new standards and amendments to the standards and interpretations are effective for annual periods beginning after 1 January 2018 and have not been applied in preparing these statements.
None of these is expected to have a significant effect on the financial statements of the Group or Company except the following set out below IFRS 9 Financial Instruments is effective for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and impacts the rules relating to the classification measurement and impairment of financial assets.
The Group has performed an impact assessment and does not anticipate a material change to the net assets of the Group upon transition to the new standard.
The Group holds all financial assets with the intention of collecting the contractual cash flows and no indicators have been noted through the assessment performed that contractual terms would fail the solely payments of principal and interest test.
Additionally no material changes are anticipated through moving from the current incurred credit loss model under IAS 39 to the expected credit loss model.
The Group does not apply hedge accounting under IAS 39 so is not impacted by the changes required by IFRS 9.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers which deals with revenue recognition and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the nature amount timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from an entitys contracts with customers.
Revenue is recognised when a customer obtains control of a good or service and thus has the ability to direct the use and obtain the benefits from the good or service.
The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue and related interpretations and is effective for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group has carried out a review of existing contractual arrangements as part of this process to identify the customer contracts the performance obligations the transaction price and when the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Directors anticipate there will be no material impact on the Groups revenue streams as set out in note 2.
IFRS 16 Leases which addresses the definition of a lease recognition and measurement of leases and establishes principles for reporting useful information to users of financial statements about the leasing activities of both lessees and lessors.
The standard is effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
A key change arising from IFRS 16 is that most operating leases will be accounted for on balance sheet for lessees.
The standard replaces IAS 17 Leases and related interpretations.
The Group holds a number of property vehicle and equipment leases which will be recognised as additional tangible fixed assets together with an additional lease liability.
From 1 January 2019 the operating lease charge would be replaced by a depreciation and an interest charge and this is not expected to be materially different.
The Directors are in the process of reviewing contracts to identify any additional lease arrangements that would need to be recognised under IFRS 16.
There are no other new standards amendments to existing standards or interpretations that are not yet effective that would be expected to have a material impact on the Group.
41 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 1 Accounting policies continued Basis of consolidation The Group financial statements include those of the parent company and its subsidiaries drawn up to 31 December 2017.
Subsidiaries are entities over which the Group obtains and exercises control through voting rights.
Income expenditure unrealised gains and intragroup balances arising from transactions within the Group are eliminated.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated unless the transaction provides evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred.
The acquisition of its principal subsidiaries by the Group in prior years was a common control business combination which falls outside the scope of IFRS 3 and the Group therefore developed an accounting policy based on the pooling of interests method.
Under this method the financial statements of the parties to the combination are aggregated and presented as though the combining entities had always been part of the same group.
At the time of the IPO as a result of the pooling of interests method a number of accounting adjustments arose.
The parent company statement of financial position shows a merger reserve of 8101000 and an investment of 12450000.
On a Group basis the investment by Belvoir Lettings plc in Belvoir Property Management UK Limited was restated at the nominal value of shares issued and cash paid rather than at fair value.
This results in a merger reserve with a debit balance of 5774000 in the Group statement of financial position.
Subsequent acquisitions of subsidiaries are dealt with by the acquisition method.
The acquisition method involves recognition at fair value of all identifiable assets and liabilities including contingent liabilities of the subsidiary at the acquisition date regardless of whether or not they were recorded in the financial statements of the subsidiary prior to acquisition.
Acquisitions which include an element of deferred consideration which is contingent on events after the acquisition date are recognised at the date of acquisition based on all information available at that date.
Any subsequent changes to these amounts are recognised through the income statement.
Goodwill is stated after separating out identifiable intangible assets.
Goodwill represents the excess of fair value of consideration transferred over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Acquisitionrelated transaction costs are recorded as an exceptional administrative expense in the Group statement of comprehensive income.
Goodwill is capitalised and reviewed annually for impairment.
Goodwill is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Negative goodwill where the fair value of the assets acquired exceeds the purchase price is recognised immediately after the acquisition in the Group statement of comprehensive income.
Revenue recognition Revenue represents income from management service fees MSF fees from the sale of franchise licences initial franchise fees commission on resales of franchised offices fees generated from corporateowned offices and commission received on financial services.
MSF are invoiced to individual franchisees on a monthly basis in relation to a percentage of their turnover for any given month.
They are recognised in the month in which the income is receivable.
Initial franchise fees are recognised upon signing of the contract as it is at this point that the new franchisee has a legal obligation to make good the terms of the contract.
The initial fees are for the use of the brand along with initial training and support and promotion during the opening phase of the new office.
As such the Group regards this as a separate initial transaction for which it has fulfilled its obligations.
Corporateowned offices are those that are operated directly by the Group and not by franchises.
These corporate offices invoice landlords on a monthly basis and so recognise the income during the period in which the work is carried out.
Corporate revenue also arises from fees on property sales which are recognised by reference to the legal exchange date of the housing transaction as all obligations have been fulfilled at that point.
Commission from financial services is recognised on amounts received on a weekly basis from the Mortgage Advice Bureau on policies written by Brook Financial Services Limited and Newton and Derry Financial Services Limited net of the provision for potential clawback of premiums on cancellation of life policies.
Cost of sales Cost of sales has been introduced following the acquisition of Brook Financial Services Limited.
The costs are attributable to cost of sales as they represent amounts paid to advisors and introducer commission paid to companies in relation to financial services.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are disclosed separately in the financial statements where it is necessary to do so to provide further understanding of the financial performance of the Group.
They are items that are material either because of their size or their nature or that are nonrecurring and are presented within the line items to which they best relate.
42 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 1 Accounting policies continued
Dividend income is recognised when the right to receive payment is established.
Final dividends to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when paid.
Intangible assets In accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations an intangible asset acquired in a business combination is deemed to have a cost to the Group of its fair value at the acquisition date.
The fair value of the intangible asset reflects market expectations about the probability that the future economic benefits embodied in the asset will flow to the Group.
Amortisation charges are included in administrative expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
Amortisation is charged on intangibles with a finite life.
Amortisation begins when the intangible asset is first available for use and is provided at rates calculated to write off the cost of each intangible asset over its expected useful life as follows Trade namesbrands between 10 and 20 years Customer relationships between 10 and 25 years Master franchise agreements  25 years Acquired trade names are identified as separate intangible assets where they can be reliably measured by valuation of future cash flows.
The trade names which have been identified separately are assessed as having a life reflecting their respective trading histories.
Acquired customer relationships are identified as a separate intangible asset as they are separable and can be reliably measured by valuation of future cash flows.
This valuation also assesses the life of the particular relationship which is reassessed annually.
Customer relationship assets are being written off over a remaining life of ten to 25 years.
Acquired franchise master agreements are identified as a separate intangible asset as they are separable and can be reliably measured by valuation of future cash flows.
The life of the relationship is assessed annually.
Master franchise agreements are being written off over a remaining life of 25 years as historical analyses show that on average 4% of franchises will change ownership per annum.
Subsequent to initial recognition intangible assets are stated at deemed cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment charges.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost or revaluation of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Freehold land not depreciated Freehold property 2% straight line on cost Fixtures and fittings 20% to 33% straight line on cost Material residual value estimates and expected useful lives are updated as required but at least annually.
The revaluation reserve reflects a revaluation of the freehold property to market value.
Impairment testing of goodwill other intangible assets and property plant and equipment For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are largely independent cash flows cash generating units.
As a result some assets are tested individually for impairment and some are tested at cash generating unit level.
Goodwill is allocated to those cash generating units that are expected to benefit from synergies of the related business combination and represent the lowest level within the Group at which the management monitors goodwill.
Cash generating units to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment at least annually.
All other individual assets or cash generating units are tested whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets or cash generating units carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell reflecting market conditions and the value in use based on estimated future cash flows from each cash generating unit discounted at a suitable rate in order to calculate the present value of those cash flows.
The data used for impairment testing procedures is directly linked to the Groups latest approved budgets adjusted as necessary to exclude any future restructuring to which the Group is not yet committed.
Impairment losses for cash generating units reduce first the carrying value of any goodwill allocated to that cash generating unit.
Any remaining impairment loss is charged pro rata to the other assets in the cash generating unit.
With the exception of goodwill all assets are subsequently reassessed for indications that an impairment loss previously recognised may no longer exist.
Impairment charges are included in operating costs in the statement of comprehensive income.
43 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 1 Accounting policies continued
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less provision for impairment.
Taxation
Current tax is the tax currently payable based on the taxable profit for the year.
Deferred income taxes are calculated using the liability method on temporary differences at the tax rate that is substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is generally provided on the difference between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities and their tax bases.
However deferred tax is not provided on the initial recognition of goodwill nor on the initial recognition of an asset or liability unless the related transaction is a business combination or affects tax or accounting profit.
Tax losses available to be carried forward as well as other income tax credits to the Group are assessed for recognition as deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided in full with no discounting.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the underlying deductible temporary differences will be able to offset against future taxable income.
Current and deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated at tax rates that are expected to apply to their respective period of realisation provided they are enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognised as a component of tax expense in the statement of comprehensive income except where they relate to items that are charged or credited directly to equity in which case the related deferred tax is also charged or credited directly to equity.
On 1 May 2017 the Group acquired Belvoir Yardley a franchised outlet.
No tax relief is available on either the goodwill or customer lists acquired.
Whilst the initial book value of goodwill is higher than the tax base no deferred liability is accounted for and any subsequent impairments should be treated as permanent differences for tax and have no impact on deferred tax.
The value of the acquired customer lists is amortised over 15 years.
An initial deferred tax liability is recognised and reduced subsequently in line with amortisation creating a deferred tax credit.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents are defined as cash balances in hand and in the bank including shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Operating lease commitments Rentals applicable to operating leases where substantially all of the benefits and risks of ownership remain with the lessor are charged to the statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Client money The Group holds client monies on behalf of landlords in separate bank accounts that do not form part of the financial statements.
Financial assets The Group has financial assets classified as loans and receivables.
The Groups loans and receivables as stated in the statement of financial position comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand and deposits held at call with banks.
Loans and receivables These assets are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of services to franchisees e. of a propertyrelated agency but also incorporate other types of contractual monetary asset.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as significant financial difficulties on the part of the counterparty or default or significant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the difference between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash flows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables which are reported net such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within operating expenses in the statement of comprehensive income.
On confirmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written off against the associated provision.
From time to time the Group elects to renegotiate the terms of trade receivables due from franchisees.
Such renegotiations will lead to changes in the timing of payments rather than changes to the amounts owed and in consequence where material the new expected cash flows are discounted at the original effective interest rate.
Financial liabilities Financial liabilities comprise trade payables borrowings and other shortterm monetary liabilities which are initially recognised at fair value net of transaction costs and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
44 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 1 Accounting policies continued Sharebased employee remuneration The Group operates an enterprise management incentive EMI scheme and issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain Executive Directors and employees.
During the year the Group also introduced the Belvoir Lettings Performance Share Plan 2017 to incentivise retain and reward key Executive Directors.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value so determined is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The level of vesting is reviewed annually and the charge is adjusted to reflect actual and estimated levels of vesting.
The fair value of services received in return for share options granted is measured by reference to the fair value of share options.
The estimate of the fair value of the services received is measured based on the Black Scholes option pricing model.
This model takes into account the following variables exercise price share price at date of grant expected term expected share price volatility riskfree interest rate and expected dividend yield.
Expected volatility is estimated by considering historical average share price volatility.
In addition to the EMI scheme there is an unapproved share option scheme which allows Dorian Gonsalves to take up 163399 shares at the float price of 75p.
Belvoir Lettings plc has the obligation to settle the sharebased payment transaction and as such recognises the award to employees of Belvoir Property Management UK Limited as an equitysettled transaction.
Belvoir Lettings plc does not have a direct investment in Belvoir Property Management UK Limited.
However to reflect the substance of the transaction Belvoir Lettings plc has recognised an investment in Belvoir Property Management UK Limited with a corresponding equity reserve.
This investment is tested for impairment annually.
Equity
Equity comprises the following share capital represents the nominal value of equity share share premium represents the excess over nominal value of the fair value of consideration received for shares net of expenses of the share issue sharebased payments reserve represents the reserve arising from the fair value of the share options charge revaluation reserve represents the accumulated net surplus on revaluation of freehold property merger reserve represents the reserve arising in the Group and Company accounts following the application of merger accounting in the treatment of the reorganisation and flotation of the Group and Company and retained earnings represents retained profits and losses.
Significant judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty The Group makes certain estimates and assumptions regarding the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
In the future actual experience may differ from these estimates and assumptions.
The estimates and assumptions that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Initial recognition useful lives and carrying value of intangible assets The fair value of customer relationships is recognised on each individual acquisition and requires the exercise of management judgement in each case.
Customer relationships are amortised over their useful lives.
Useful lives are based on managements estimates of the period that the assets will generate revenue and are periodically reviewed for continued appropriateness.
Potential impairment of carrying values or changes to estimates can result in significant variations in the carrying value and amounts charged to the statement of comprehensive income in specific periods.
Further details of amortisation policies are given on page 42 and the movement on intangible assets is presented in note 10.
Acquisition accounting On acquisition the assets and liabilities acquired are assessed to determine the fair value to be recognised on consolidation into the
Any contingent consideration subject to certain performance criteria is determined by reference to recent and forecast performance.
In both cases the exercise of management judgement is required.
Recoverability of franchise debtors The recoverability of loans to franchisees is assessed by management and where in doubt a specific provision is booked.
Exceptional nonrecurring items Certain items are judged by management to be of an exceptional nonrecurring nature and as such are reported separately as exceptional items.
45 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 2 Segmental information The Executive Committee of the Board as the chief operating decision maker reviews financial information for and makes decisions about the Groups overall franchising business.
In the year ended 31 December 2017 the Board identified a single operating segment that of franchisor of property agents and related financial services.
The segmental information is therefore the same as that set out in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
The
Directors consider operating profit as the key performance measure.
The reported segment is consistent with the Groups internal reporting for performance measurement and resources allocation.
Management does not report on a geographical basis and no customer represents greater than 10% of total revenue in either of the periods reported.
The Directors believe there to be four material income streams which are management service fees revenue from corporateowned offices fees on the sale or resale of franchise territory fees and commission receivable on financial services and are split as follows Lettings Property sales Total revenue
Management service fees 6634 5405 1244 1026 7878 6431 Corporateowned offices 756 1205 646 1110 1402 2315 7390 6610 1890 2136 9280 8746 Initial franchise fees and other resale commissions 310 368 Financial services acquired in the year 1195 344 Other income restated 11299 9940 For the year ended 31 December 2016 revenue of 344000 previously reported as other income has been reclassified with financial services to reflect the management structure in place at 31 December 2017.
Profit for the financial year The parent company has taken advantage of Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 and has not included its own statement of comprehensive income in these financial statements.
The profit on ordinary activities after taxation of the Company for the year was 3508000 2016 1063000.
3 Cost of sales and administrative expenses
Cost of sales and administrative expenses nonexceptional by nature Staff costs 4013 3764 Depreciation and amortisation 619 592 Marketing 365 459 Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 46 46 Tax compliance services 14 37 Statutory audit of subsidiaries 42 27 Financial due diligence fees  93 Operating lease expenditure 235 444 Other cost of sales and administrative expenses 1716 1486 7050 6948 46 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 4 Exceptional items
A total charge of 460000 2016 735000 in relation to exceptional items in the year arose from Transaction costs on acquisition 87 290 Transaction costs on abortive merger offer 191 Impairment of goodwill  142 Profitloss on disposal of corporateowned offices 6 160 Deemed interest on contingent consideration 134 93 Restructuring costs 54 Tax provision  Directors and employees
Staff costs including Directors Wages and salaries 3506 3301 Social security costs 377 403 Pension costs 58 35 Sharebased payment charge 72 25 4013 3764 The average monthly number of employees during the year was as follows Management and administration 96 112 Key management personnel is defined as the Directors of the Group.
Directors remuneration Directors emoluments 761 675 Social security costs 105 77 Pension costs Executive Directors 822 690 NonExecutive Directors During the year 972000 options 2016 nil over ordinary shares were granted to Directors under the Belvoir Lettings Performance Share Plan and none 2016 none were exercised by Directors under the Companys EMI scheme.
47 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 6 Finance income and costs
Finance costs Bank interest 192 139 Finance income Deposit account interest  6 Interest on franchisee loans 31tel7 Taxation
UK corporation tax at 19.25% 2016 20% Current taxation on profits for the year 920 576 Adjustments in respect of prior years 43 Deferred taxation origination and reversal of temporary differences 15 Total tax charge in the statement of comprehensive income 948 576 Factors affecting the tax charge for the year Profit before taxation 3910 2409 Profit before taxation multiplied by the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.25% 2016 20% 753 481 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 142 91 Adjustment in respect of prior years 43 Remeasurement of deferred tax 2 Capital allowances in excess of depreciation 12 4 Total tax charge in statement of comprehensive income 948 576 The July 2016 Budget Statement announced changes to the UK corporation tax rate which will reduce the main rate of corporation tax to 17% from 1 April 2020.
These changes were substantively enacted on 6 September 2016 and accordingly the deferred tax balance has been calculated using a rate of 17%.
8 Dividends
Final dividend for 2016 3.4p per share paid 31 May 2017 2016 3.4p per share paid 31 May 2016 1172 1039 Interim dividends for 2017 3.4p per share paid 27 October 2017 2016 3.4p per share paid 21 October 2016 1188 1144 Total dividend paid 2360 2183 The Directors propose a final dividend of 3.5p per share totalling 1223000 payable on 31 May 2018.
As this remains conditional on shareholders approval provision has not been made in these financial statements.
48 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 9 Earnings per share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the profit for the financial year by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
Options over ordinary shares and rights of conversion are described in note 26.
The calculation of diluted earnings per share is derived from the basic earnings per share adjusted to allow for the issue of shares under these instruments.
Adjusted earnings per share and diluted adjusted earnings per share are calculated in the same way but having adjusted the profit for the year for exceptional items amortisation of acquired intangibles and the sharebased payment charge.
The 2016 adjusted earnings per share figures have been restated to account for the amortisation of acquired intangibles and the sharebased payment charge.
Restated
Profit for the financial year 2962 1833 Exceptional items 460 735 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 422 333 Sharebased payment charge 72 25 Tax on deductible exceptional items 10 89 Adjusted profit for the financial year 3906 2837 Weighted average number of ordinary shares  basic 34639 32376 Weighted average number of ordinary shares  diluted 36469 33314 Basic earnings per share 8.6p 5.7p Diluted earnings per share 8.1p 5.5p Adjusted basic earnings per share 11.3p 8.8p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 10.7p 8.5p 10 Intangible assets
Brand
Goodwill
Master franchise agreements
Total
Gross carrying amount At 1 January 2016 97 6368 4351 1792 12608 Additions 454 8416 5481 108 14459 Disposals  482  785 1267 At 31 December 2016 551 14302 9832 1115 25800 Additions note 24  2359  74 2433 Disposals  134  367 501 At 31 December 2017 551 16527 9832 822 27732 Amortisation and impairment At 1 January Amortisation for the year 17  283 115 415 Impairment for the year  219   219 Disposals  209  151 360 At 31 December 2016 1tel1028 Amortisation for the year 29  393 73 495 Disposals  219  59 278 At 31 December 2017 48  734 463 1245 Net book value At 31 December 2017 503 16527 9098 359 26487 At 31 December 2016 532 14083 9491 666 24772 On 12 July 2017 the Company acquired Brook Financial Services Limited a specialist mortgage broker.
This generated goodwill of 2321000.
49 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 10 Intangible assets continued Group continued The corporateowned offices Burton Lettings Limited and Belvoir Devizes were sold on 3 March 2017 and 31 March 2017 respectively.
Belvoir Yardley came under corporate ownership between 3 May 2017 and 1 November 2017 when it was resold to a new franchise owner.
After the utilisation of the impairment provision brought forward of 219000 the net effect of these transactions was a profit of 6000.
Goodwill is deemed to have an indefinite useful life.
It is currently carried at cost and tested annually for impairment by reference to the value of the relevant cash generating units CGUs to their recoverable amount.
The Group has defined its CGUs as Northwood Newton Fallowell Group including Goodchilds and Brook Financial Services.
Where the recoverable amount is less than the carrying value an impairment results.
During the year goodwill was tested for impairment with no impairment charge arising.
At
31 December
Disposals
At
31 December Newton Fallowell Group incorporating Goodchilds 5672   5672 Northwood 8373   8373 Brook Financial Services  2321  2321 Corporateowned Belvoir offices 257 38 134 161 Provision for impairment 219  219 Total 14083 2359 85 16527 The recoverable amount of all CGUs has been determined based on a valueinuse calculations.
These calculations use pretax cash flow projections over a period of five years assuming an annual growth rate of 2% followed by a terminal growth rate of 2% 2016 2% discounted at a pretax discount rate of 10% 2016 10% equivalent to the Groups weighted average cost of capital.
Assumptions on sales growth are within those applied in the approved budgets for the upcoming year and strategic projections representing the best estimate of future performance.
The Directors do not consider goodwill to be impaired.
The Directors believe that no reasonably possible change in assumptions will cause the value in use to fall below the carrying value and hence impair the goodwill.
11 Investments Investments in subsidiaries
Cost
At 1 January 2016 22039 Additions 13275 At 31 December 2016 35314 Additions 4219 At 31 December 2017 39533
At 1 January 2016 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2017 Net book value At 31 December 2017 39533 At 31 December 2016 35314 On 12 July 2017 the Company acquired 100% of the share capital of Brook Financial Services Limited for 2236000.
On 31 December 2017 100% of the share capital of Belvoir Property Management UK Limited was transferred from Belvoir Property Solutions Limited to the Company for 1911000.
The remaining addition of 72000 2016 25000 related to the obligation to settle the sharebased remuneration awarded to employees of Belvoir Property Management UK Limited during the four years ended 31 December 2017.
50 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 11 Investments continued Investments in subsidiaries continued As at 31 December 2017 the Company owned 100% of the ordinary share capital and voting rights of the following companies Subsidiary Country of incorporation Principal activity Belvoir Property Solutions Limited England and Wales Holding company Belvoir Property Management UK Limited England and Wales Property sales and letting franchising Newton Fallowell Limited England and Wales Property sales and letting franchising Goodchilds Estate Agents and Lettings Limited England and Wales Property sales and letting franchising Northwood GB Limited England and Wales Property sales and letting franchising Brook Financial Services Limited England and Wales Financial services Newton and Derry Financial Services Limited England and Wales Financial services Claygold Property Limited England and Wales Nontrading Newton and Derry Limited England and Wales Nontrading Belvoir Lettings Cumbria Limited England and Wales Dormant Redwoods Estate Agents Limited England and Wales Dormant Subsidiary of Newton and Derry Limited.
Subsidiary of Belvoir Property Management UK Limited.
Subsidiary of Newton Fallowell Limited.
The registered office address for all subsidiary companies is the same as for the parent company see note 1.
The carrying value of the investments has been considered for impairment and the Directors believe that the carrying value is supportable.
12 Property plant and equipment Group Company
Freehold property
Total
Fixtures and fittings
At 1 January tel1161 1546 Acquisitions   356 356 Additions   80 80 Disposals   524 524 At 31 December tel1073 1458 Acquisitions note 24   20 20 Additions   114 114 55 Disposals   60 60 At 31 December tel1147 1532 55
At 1 January 2016  36 861 897 Acquisitions note 24   200 200 Charge for the year  5 172 177 Disposals   473 473 At 31 December 2016  41 760 801 Acquisitions note 24   5 5 Charge for the year  Disposals   33 33 At 31 December 2017  Net book value At 31 December tel296 635 45 At 31 December tel313 657  51 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 13 Trade and other receivables Group Company
Trade receivables 1149 1156 2 Amounts owed by Group undertakings   4902 8214 Loans to franchisees 1146 897 Other debtors 151 259  18 Prepayments Accrued income 147 120 2813 2740 4931 8287
Loans to franchisees 3617 4024 Trade receivables are stated net of bad debt provisions of 261000 2016 358000.
Loans to franchisees are spread across varying terms and the agreements do not include any collateral on behalf of the franchisees.
Franchise loans and other debtors are stated net of bad debt provisions of nil 2016 nil.
At the year end none 2016 none of the franchise loan repayments were past the due date.
As of 31 December 2017 trade receivables of 859000 2016 913000 were not due.
Ageing of trade and other receivables Past due and impaired Past due and not impaired Of which Not more than three months   227 175 Between three and six months   63 48 Between six months and one year 47   12 More than one year 214 358  tel243 14 Cash and cash equivalents Group Company Cash and cash equivalents 1350 1Trade and other payables Group Company
Trade payables Other taxes and social security 562 585 Accruals and deferred income Other creditors 59 98 Deferred and contingent consideration 4901 1068 4901 1068 Amounts owed to Group undertakings   672 1229 6462 2307 5657 2404
Deferred and contingent consideration  4281  4281 52 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 16 Current portion of longterm borrowings Group Company
Bank loans  term loan 86tel86telAll amounts are short term and their carrying values are considered reasonable approximations of fair value.
17 Longterm borrowings Group Company Long term Bank loans  term loan 5578 6270 5578 6270 5578 6270 5578 6270 Borrowings comprise 6475000 2016 7000000 secured on assets of the Group.
The repayment profile of borrowings is as set out in note 18.
18 Maturity of borrowings and net debt  term loan Group and Company Repayable in less than six months 615 449 Repayable in seven to twelve months 434 444 Current portion of longterm borrowings 1049 893 Repayable in years one to five 5938 6811 Total borrowings 6987 7704 Less interest included 543 742 Total net debt 6444 6962 The bank loan is secured by a fixed and floating charge over the Group assets.
The term loan balance of 6475000 2016 7000000 is repayable in quarterly instalments of 350000 in March 2018 followed by 175000 thereafter with a final payment of 4025000 in March 2021 and bears interest at 2.5% over the LIBOR rate.
53 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 19 Called up share capital 2017 2016 Number 000 Number 000 Group and Company Allotted issued and fully paid Ordinary shares of 1p each 34938606 349 33660160 336 Group and
Number
Nominal share capital
At 1 January 2016 30546763 305 7379 Issue of shares during the year 11 May 2016  share price 114p 818June 2016  share price 112p 2294643 23 2279 At 31 December 2016 33660160 336 10583 Issue of shares during the year 23 January 2017  share price 117p 803July 2017  share price 105p 475162 5 495 At 31 December 2017 34938606 349 12006 20 Reconciliation of profit before taxation to cash generated from operations
Profit before taxation 3910 2409 Depreciation and amortisation charges including impairment 619 602 Sharebased payment charge 72 25 Loss on disposal of corporate offices  302 Deemed interest charge 134 93 Adjustment to deferred consideration  2 Finance costs 192 139 Finance income 313 291 4614 3277 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 176 604 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 178 273 Cash generated from operations 4612 2946
Profit before taxation 3516 1065 Dividend received 4445 1800 Deemed interest 134 93 Adjustment to deferred consideration  2 Finance costs 192 121 Depreciation and amortisation charges 10 Decrease in trade and other receivables 3356 704 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 580 1150 Cash generated from operations 2183 1331 54 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 21 Operating lease commitments Operating lease payments expensed during the year Land and property 126 276 Motor vehicles 90 130 Other Minimum operating lease commitments falling due Within one year Land and property 291 410 Motor vehicles 62 119 Other Between one and five years Land and property 638 977 Motor vehicles 15 63 Other 19 46 672 1086 More than five years Land and property 189 338 Total commitment 1238 1986 22 Financial instruments Capital management policy The Group manages its capital to ensure its operations are adequately provided for as described below.
The principal risks faced by the Group are detailed overleaf.
The Groups objective when managing capital is to safeguard its ability to continue as a going concern and so provide increasing shareholder value.
The Group is meeting this objective through a combination of underlying organic growth and targeted growth by acquisition which will generate regular and increasing returns to shareholders.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to the shareholder comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the statement of changes in equity.
Financial instruments  risk management The Group is exposed through its operations to the following financial risks interest rate risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
In common with all other businesses the Group is exposed to risks that arise from its use of financial instruments.
This note describes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
There have been no substantive changes in the Groups exposure to financial instrument risks its objectives policies and processes for managing those risks or the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise stated in this note.
55 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 22 Financial instruments continued Principal financial instruments The principal financial instruments used by the Group from which financial instrument risk arises are included in the summary below.
Summary of financial assets and financial liabilities by category Group Company Financial assets Trade receivables 1149 1156 2 Other receivables 298 379 4902 8232 Loans to franchisees 4763 4921 Cash and cash equivalents 1350 1591 226 16 7560 8047 5130 8248 Group Company Financial liabilities Trade payables Loans and borrowings 6987 7704 6987 7704 Accruals deferred and other creditors Contingent consideration 4955 5349 4955 5349 12941 13707 12026 13160 Maturity analysis of financial liabilities In less than one year Trade payables Loans and borrowings 1049 893 1049 893 Accruals deferred and other creditors Contingent consideration 4955 937 4955 937 7003 2484 6088 1937 In more than one year Longterm borrowings 5938 6811 5938 6811 Contingent consideration  4412  4412 5938 11223 5938 11223 All of the financial assets and liabilities above are carried in the statement of financial position at amortised cost.
The above amounts reflect the contractual undiscounted cash flows including future interest charges which may differ from carrying values of the liabilities at the reporting date.
General objectives policies and processes The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Groups risk management objectives and policies and whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them it has delegated the authority for designing and operating processes that ensure the effective implementation of the objectives and policies to the Groups finance function.
The Board receives monthly reports through which it reviews the effectiveness of the processes put in place and the appropriateness of the objectives and policies it sets.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups competitiveness and flexibility.
Further details regarding these policies are set out below.
Interest rate risk Interest rate risk arises from the Groups management of interestbearing assets and liabilities.
The Group does not use hedging products to manage interest rate risk but uses treasury products for deposits until such time as required for acquisitions as part of the Groups acquisition strategy.
56 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 22 Financial instruments continued Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a franchisee or a counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
It is Group policy to assess the credit risk of new franchisees before entering contracts.
The highest risk exposure is in relation to loans to franchises and their ability to service their debt.
The Directors have established a credit policy under which each new franchisee is analysed individually for creditworthiness before a franchise is offered.
The Companys review includes external ratings when available and in some cases bank references.
The Group does not consider that it has significant concentration of credit risk.
The credit risk for liquid funds and other shortterm financial assets is considered small.
The substantial majority of these assets are deposited with NatWest.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Groups management of working capital and the finance charges and principal repayments on its debt instruments.
It is the risk that the Group will encounter difficulty in meeting its financial obligations as they fall due.
In order to maintain liquidity to ensure that sufficient funds are available for ongoing operations and future developments the Group monitors forecast cash inflows and outflows on a monthly basis.
Fair values of financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are carried at amortised cost which equates to fair value.
23 Deferred taxation Group Company Balance at 1 January 2054 1001 Acquisition in the year  attributable to intangible assets  1053 Creditedcharged to the income statement 65  8 Balance at 31 December 1989 2054 8 Deferred taxation has been provided as follows Attributable to intangible assets 1972 1972 Accelerated capital allowances 17 82 8 1989 2054 8 Amounts provided in respect of deferred tax are computed at 17% 2016 17%.
There are no temporary differences for which deferred tax balances are recognised.
24 Acquisitions On 12 July 2017 the Company acquired 100% of the equity of Brook Financial Services Limited Brook which trades as an appointed representative of Mortgage Advice Bureau one of the UKs leading networks for mortgage intermediaries.
As part of the Belvoir Group Brook will leverage its expertise to introduce new mortgage products and services across all Group networks increasing the Groups presence in the franchised property sector and opening up additional growth opportunities.
Total consideration was 2236000 satisfied by 1736000 from existing cash resources and the issue of 475162 new ordinary shares in Belvoir to the sole shareholder in Brook.
The transaction met the definition of a business combination and is accounted for using the acquisition method under IFRS 3.
The assets and liabilities overleaf are shown at their book values which were assessed as also being the fair values at acquisition.
In addition Belvoir Yardley came under corporate ownership between 3 May 2017 and 1 November 2017 when it was resold to a new franchise owner during which time it was operated as a corporateowned outlet.
57 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc 24 Acquisitions continued
Yardley
Brook
Total
Intangible assets Customer relationships 74  74 Tangible assets  15 15 Trade and other receivables  257 257 Cash and cash equivalents  106 106 Deferred tax liabilities 13  13 Trade and other payables  463 463 Identifiable net assetsliabilities acquired 61 85 24 Goodwill on acquisition 38 2321 2359 Consideration 99 2236 2335 Consideration settled in cash 99 1736 1835 Consideration settled in shares  500 500 Total consideration 99 2236 2335 The goodwill represents the value attributable to the new businesses and the assembled and trained workforce.
Deferred tax at 17% has been provided on the value of intangible assets defined as customer contracts.
Acquisition costs of 87000 were incurred and charged to exceptional items in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Brook
Revenue 956 Profit before tax 215 If the acquisitions had completed on the first day of the financial year Group revenues would have been 12.4m and Group profit before tax would have been 4.1m.
25 Related party disclosures During the year the Group paid sponsorship fees of 1600 2016 4800 to James Goddard son of Mike Goddard Company Director.
During the year the Group paid fees of 20364 2016 20706 to The Property Ombudsman Limited a company of which Dorian Gonsalves is a director.
The balance outstanding as at 31 December 2017 was nil 2016 nil.
During the year emoluments were paid to three persons each related to different Directors of 76177 2016 73452 nil 2016 2874 and 170 2016 nil.
The amounts paid were commensurate with other employees performing a similar role with a similar level of qualification and experience.
During the year the Directors received the following dividends from their shareholdings 27 October 2017 31 May 2017 21 October 2016 2017 interim 2016 final 2016 interim Mike Goddard 189 247 245 Dorian Gonsalves 16 15 15 Louise George 2 1 1 Mark Newton 14 15 15 Nicholas Leeming 1 1 1 Andrew Borkowski 1 1 1 Total dividends 223 280 278 During the year Belvoir Lettings plc received a dividend of 4.4m 2016 1.8m from its subsidiary companies.
58 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements continued For the financial year ended 31 December 2017 25 Related party disclosures continued At the year end the Company was owedowing the following amounts by subsidiary companies Belvoir Property Solutions Limited  7675 Belvoir Property Management UK Limited 4743 1219 Newton Fallowell Limited 371 431 Northwood GB Limited 159 Brook Financial Services Limited 295 Goodchilds Estate Agents and Lettings Limited 6 108 26 Sharebased employee remuneration The following share options issued were outstanding as at 31 December 2017 Share option scheme
Exercise price
Expiry date Enterprise management incentive 23122015 80000 1.16 3 years 23122025 Enterprise management incentive 24092014 60000 1.32 3 years 24092024 Enterprise management incentive 04072014 495000 1.32 3 years 04072024 Enterprise management incentive 04072014 60000 1.32 3 years 04072024 Unapproved scheme 16022012 163399 0.75 2 years 31122018 Long term incentive plan 31072017 972000 0.01 3 years and 5 months 31072027 Movement in the number of share options was as follows
Number
Share option movement At 1 January 938399 938399 Options granted in the year 972000 Options lapsed in the year 80000 At 31 December 1830399 938399 Exercisable at the end of the year 778399 493399 Options have been valued using the following inputs to the Black Scholes model Expected volatility based on closing prices in the year prior to issue 45% Expected life 3.5 to 4 years Riskfree rate 0.5% Expected dividend yield 6.9% The Group recognised the following expenses relating to equitysettled sharebased transactions Employee benefits note 5 72 25 27 Contingent liabilities Belvoir Lettings plc and its subsidiaries have a crosscompany guarantee which creates a fixed and floating charge on the assets of each company.
As at 31 December 2017 the outstanding contingent liability under this agreement amounted to 6475000 2016 7000000.
59 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of Belvoir Lettings plc the Company will be held at Belvoir Lettings Central Office The Old Courthouse 60A London Road Grantham Lincolnshire NG31 6HR at 11.30 am on 29 May 2018 for the purpose of considering and if thought fit passing the following resolutions.
Resolutions 16 will be proposed as ordinary resolutions and resolutions 79 will be proposed as special resolutions.
Ordinary resolutions To receive the Companys financial statements for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 together with the Directors and the auditors reports thereon.
To declare a final dividend for the financial year ended 31 December 2017 of 3.5p per ordinary share as recommended by the Directors.
To reappoint PwC LLP as auditor of the Company to hold office from the conclusion of this meeting until the conclusion of the next general meeting of the Company at which the Companys accounts are laid.
To authorise the Directors of the Company the Directors to determine the auditors remuneration.
To reappoint Louise George who retires by rotation and offers herself for reelection under Article 71 of the Companys Articles of Association as Director.
To appoint Michael Stoop who having been appointed by the Board since the last Annual General Meeting is required under Article 71 of the Companys Articles of Association to be reelected as Director.
Special resolutions The Directors of the Company be and are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of Section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 as amended the Act to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares in the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company being such shares and such rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company being equity securities on such terms and in such manner as they shall think fit provided that this authority shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities up to a maximum aggregate nominal amount of 116462 being onethird of the nominal value of the Companys share capital at any time unless and to the extent previously renewed revoked or varied by the Company in general meeting during the period from the date hereof until the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or 15 months after the passing of this resolution whichever is earlier provided that the Directors of the Company may make an offer or enter into an agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted offered or otherwise dealt with or disposed of after the expiry of such authority and the Directors of the Company may allot any equity securities after the expiry of such authority in pursuance of any such offer or agreement as if this authority had not expired.
The Directors of the Company be given power pursuant to Sections 570 and 573 of the Act to allot equity securities as defined by Section 560 of the Act of the Company for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by resolution 7 as if Section 561 of the Act did not apply to any such allotment.
This power is limited to the allotment of equity securities up to a maximum aggregate nominal amount of 34939 being equal to 10% of the Companys share capital and otherwise to the allotment of equity securities for cash in connection with a rights issue or other preemptive offer to holders of ordinary shares where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interest of such holders are proportionate as nearly as may be practicable to the respective numbers of ordinary shares held by them but subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors of the Company may deem necessary or expedient to deal with any fractional entitlements or any legal or practical problems under the laws of or the requirements of any regulatory body or any recognised stock exchange in any territory in each case at any time unless the authority conferred by resolution 7 is previously renewed revoked or varied until the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or 15 months after the passing of this resolution whichever is earlier provided that before any such expiry the Directors of the Company may make an offer or enter into an agreement which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after the expiry of such power and the Directors of the Company may allot equity securities after such expiry under this power in pursuance of any such offer or agreement as if this power had not expired.
The power granted by this resolution applies in relation to any sale or shares which in an allotment of equity securities by virtue of Section  of the Act as if in the first paragraph of this resolution the words pursuant to the authority conferred by paragraph 7 of this resolution were omitted.
The authority granted by this resolution shall replace all existing authorities to allot any shares in the Company and to grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares in the Company previously granted to the Directors pursuant to Sections 551 570 and 573 of the Companies Act 2006 save for any existing authorities in respect of options granted to employees.
This resolution authorises the Company to purchase up to approximately 14.99% of its issued ordinary share capital at any time from the date this resolution is passed up to the date of the next Annual General Meeting or 15 months from the date this resolution is passed whichever is the earlier.
The Directors consider it desirable for the proposed general authority to be available.
The Directors have no present intention to make such market purchases but consider it desirable to be given the flexibility to do so by shareholders.
By order of the Board Louise George Company Secretary
Please arrive 15 minutes prior to the start of the meeting.
A member entitled to attend and vote at this meeting is entitled to appoint one or more proxies to attend and vote on his or her behalf.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
Completion and return of a form of proxy does not preclude a member from attending and voting at the meeting in person should he or she wish.
A form of proxy is available on the Companys website site or by request from the Company Secretary and to be valid must be completed and returned so as to reach the registrar of the Company Computershare Investor Services PLC The Pavilions Bridgwater Road Bristol BS99 6ZY United Kingdom together with a letter or power of attorney or written authority if any under which it is signed or a notarially certified or office copy of such power written authority not less than 48 hours before the time fixed for holding the meeting or any adjournment thereof.
As permitted by Regulation 41 of the Uncertified Securities Regulation 2001 members who hold shares in uncertified form must be entered on the Companys register of members by 6.00 pm on 24 May 2018 in order to be entitled to attend andor vote at the meeting in respect of the number of shares registered in their name at such time.
Changes to entries on the register of members after that time will be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend andor vote at the meeting.
Copies of the Directors service contracts will be available for inspection at the registered office of the Company during normal business hours.
Notice of Annual General Meeting Belvoir Lettings plc 60 Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Half year results announced 5 September 2017 Preliminary announcement of full year results 10 April 2018 Final dividend exdividend date 19 April 2018 Annual General Meeting 29 May 2018 Final dividend payment date 31 May 2018 Corporate calendar Board of Directors Mike Goddard
Dorian Gonsalves
Chief Executive Officer
Louise George Chief Financial Officer Mark Newton Executive Director Andrew Borkowski NonExecutive Director Michael Stoop NonExecutive Director Company Secretary Louise George FCA ACIS Registered office The Old Courthouse 60A London Road
Lincolnshire
NG31 6HR Registered number Country of incorporation England and Wales
Nominated advisor and broker Cantor Fitzgerald Europe One Churchill Place Canary Wharf
E14 5RB Independent auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor Donington Court Pegasus Business Park Herald Way East Midlands DE74 2UZ Principal banker HSBC UK plc 26 Clumber Street
NG1 3GA Registrar and transfer office Computershare Investor Services PLC The Pavilions Bridgwater Road
BS99 6ZZ
Browne Jacobson Mowbray House Castle Meadow Road
NG2 1BJ Hamilton Pratt Franchise House 3a Tournament Court Tournament Fields
CV34 6LG Corporate information 61 Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc Keep up to date For more information on our business and all our latest news and press releases simply visit us at site The Estate Agency of the Year Awards ESTAS are determined purely on customer feedback. allAgents Awards for their local areas which are also determined based on customer feedback.
Our awards allAgents Awards Gold Best Franchise in the UK Gold Best Lettings Agent in the UK Silver Best Overall Large Chain in the UK Bronze Best Overall Agent in the UK 144 awards won by individual Northwood offices in their local area The Negotiator Awards Gold Franchise or Network Group of the Year Estate Agency of the Year Awards Silver Best Large Agency Group Six awards won by individual Belvoir offices EA Masters Awards 87 offices across the Group featured in the Best Estate Agents Guide 2017 with three offices appearing in the top 100 Group Belvoir Lettings plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Belvoir Lettings plc The Old Courthouse 60A London Road
Lincolnshire
