Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OPEN
PREPARED every day because bakery products
Every savoury is freshly baked in our shops well trained colleagues provide great service to their customers We have been making
GREAT
We loved rewarding our customers for their loyalty last year and reached the 1 million app downloads milestone OUR BALANCED CHOICE range continues to grow and now accounts for more than 100m of sales We fuel the nation with our great coffee and had recordbreaking sales in 2017
We are when our customers want us to be including from 7am and on Sundays 01 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report We donated 45% more unsold food in 2017 than we did in 2016.
This year well try and give away even more in all of our shops alongside a great discount on all hot drinks for customers using one We launched reusable coffee cups making sure our carbon footprint got smaller again We help customers to make informed choices and introduced nutrition traffic lights to product details on our website to help our customers to eat more vegetables We made a to improve our shops and open new ones to reshape our supply chain to support shop growth 25m to modernise and centralise our systems and processes foodonTHEgo sector on sugar reduction in response to the Governments commitment Weve ambitions to grow to over 2000 shops nationwide
BREAKFAST CLUBS Greggs Foundation celebrated its 30 th anniversary We want to make a positive impact on peoples lives
We are pledge for veg We care about our planet too Playing a key role in the 02 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We stand for great tasting freshly prepared food that our customers can trust at affordable prices and aim to become the customers favourite for foodonthego.
With ownership of our supply chain and ambitions to grow to over 2000 shops nationwide we are in a unique position to make good freshly prepared food accessible to everyone ensuring that Everyday tastes good at Greggs.
Contents
STRATEGIC REPORT Financial highlights 03 Greggs at a glance 04 Chairmans statement 06 Our strategy 08 Chief Executives report 10 Strategy in action 16 Financial review 24 Financial key performance indicators 28 Nonfinancial key performance indicators 30 Risk management 33 Principal risks and uncertainties 36 DIRECTORS REPORT Board of Directors and Secretary 38 Governance report 40 Directors report 46 Audit Committee report 48 Remuneration Committee report 54 Statement of Directors responsibilities 70
Independent auditors report 71 Consolidated income statement 76 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 76 Balance sheets 77 Statements of changes in equity 78 Statements of cashflows 80 Notes to the consolidated accounts 81 Tenyear history 106 Financial calendar IBC Secretary and advisers IBC ABOUT US 03 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic progress 2017 has been another year of strong performance as we continued on our journey to transform Greggs into a winning brand in the foodonthego market.
Weve been busy developing our great product offer to meet customer needs opening more shops in new locations while refurbishing our existing estate and investing in improved customer service.
We made significant progress in the fourth year of our major process and systems investment programme.
We have made a good start with our 100 million supply chain investment programme to increase logistics capacity consolidate our manufacturing operations into centres of excellence to improve product quality and support shop growth allowing us to compete more effectively in the foodonthego market.
The result has been a fourth consecutive year of strong likeforlike sales growth and record profits.
Total sales 960m7.4% 960m7.4% Diluted EPS Companymanaged shop likeforlike LFL sales growth 3.7% 3.7% Ordinary dividend 32.3p4.2% 32.3p4.2% Pretax profit 81.8m1.9% 71.9m4.3% Return on capital employed 26.9% 23.7% Underlying excluding exceptional items Total including exceptional items Detailed calculations of Alternative Performance Measures not otherwise shown in the Income Statement and related notes are detailed on page 106.
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS 04 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 GREGGS AT A GLANCE Becoming the customers favourite for foodonthego Greggs is a strong and trusted brand and we draw on our heritage in fresh bakery to compete successfully in the foodonthego market.
Having made strong progress in recent years we have set the bar higher with our vision and strategic plan reflecting longerterm ambitions and commitment to putting the customer at the heart of our strategy.
Our purpose Our business began in the 1930s serving fresh bakery products to working families in the North East at prices everyone could afford.
Today were just as keen for Greggs to have a positive impact on peoples lives.
With ambitions to grow to over 2000 shops nationwide and ownership of our supply chain we are in a unique position to make good freshly prepared food accessible to everyone.
Our vision In recent years we have shown we can be a winning brand in the foodonthego market and our vision is to become the customers favourite for foodonthe go.
To achieve this we have been working hard to see the business through the eyes of our customers.
We continue to invest in understanding their needs and ensure we have amazing teams in place to deliver the fast and friendly service our customers know and love.
Insight provided by our awardwinning Greggs Rewards app and dedicated customer insight team helps to inform decision making throughout the business and better meet customer needs every day.
Our operations Ownership of our supply chain means that we can make good freshly prepared food accessible to everyone at great value in an extremely competitive market place.
By managing our own logistics operation we can remain focused on the customer delivering what our shops and customers need on time and in full.
Our target market Greggs is a brand with universal appeal and we have been working hard to ensure we understand our customers and evolve our offer in response to their changing needs as we continue our journey to become the customers favourite for foodon thego.
Our market locations As the internet changes the way we shop and foodonthe go eating habits evolve we have built on our existing estate of shops to take Greggs where our customers want us to be.
As a result we can now be found in retail parks shopping centres industrial estates and office parks.
We are also located where our customers need us when travelling with shops in travel hubs roadside locations with parking and now in Drive Thru format.
Through our franchise partnerships we are also in motorway service stations and petrol forecourts.
Investment to reshape our supply chain to support shop growth Investment to modernise and centralise our systems and processes Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Business Model Risks and uncertainties Positive impact
Product quality and safety
Loss of production
Consumer trends
We encourage healthier foodon thego choices
We care about where our ingredients come from
We share our success with the people around us
We aim to use energy efficiently and minimise waste
We are committed to creating a great place to work
Manufacturing Delivery
WHAT WE DO
Work
Travel
Leisure
WHERE WE OPERATE
Value
Convenience
Service
WHAT WE OFFER Turn to page 08 to find out more.
Turn to page 33 to find out more.
Turn to pages 1623 to find out more.
Great tasting freshly prepared food
Best customer experience First class support teams Strategy 06 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Greggs performed well in 2017 delivering further likeforlike sales growth as well as expanding its estate of shops.
This was achieved despite significant inflationary headwinds and alongside continued major investment in line with our strategic plan.
These investments are creating the platform for us to deliver sustainable longterm growth for the benefit of all stakeholders.
Overview
Greggs once again demonstrated the resilience of its people and business model delivering a solid trading and financial performance in the face of increased cost inflation and a strategic change programme.
The development of our products and shop formats has opened up additional opportunities for growth in shop numbers and we expect this expansion to continue in the year ahead.
We are investing significantly in our supply chain to enable this growth whilst continuing to make improvements to our processes and systems that will deliver enhanced capability and efficiency to compete in the fastmoving foodonthego market.
Our people and values In 2017 we began the investment in our supply chain that will enable us to deliver growth whilst remaining competitive in terms of the quality and price of our products.
As I reported last year this involved taking some difficult decisions particularly regarding the organisation of our manufacturing and logistics operations.
We have worked hard over the last year to carry out the necessary changes in line with our values.
There has been much challenge and dialogue but the whole team has worked together with the best interests of the business in mind and I would like to extend my thanks to all involved.
Greggs has a long history of conducting its business in a responsible manner.
We have made great strides in environmental management in recent years and are working with others in our industry to make further improvements.
This includes finding solutions to increase the proportion of packaging that can be recycled and ensuring that more of our surplus food is channelled to those who need it most.
We have a strong reputation for sharing our success with the communities where we operate and direct much of this support through the Greggs Foundation which celebrated its 30 th anniversary in 2017.
Representatives of the Foundation attended a Board meeting in the year to explain how they work with the Company and other partners.
The Foundation makes a real difference to the lives of people in our communities and is given tremendous assistance by staff throughout Greggs.
It is a great charity and one that we are very proud to support.
I would like to thank everyone who has worked for Greggs during the past year and contributed to the positive impact that it has had on all of its stakeholders.
The Board As we announced last year our Retail Director Raymond Reynolds stepped down from the Board at the AGM in May 2017 but remains a key member of the Companys Operating Board in his new role as Property and Business Development Director.
Raymond was a member of the Board for ten years and I would like to thank him for his important contribution throughout that time.
Otherwise the composition of the Board was unchanged in 2017.
We continued to spend a significant amount of time overseeing the major programmes of change that support the Companys strategic plan particularly the investments under way in our internal supply chain.
Other reviews included emerging risk areas including the uncertainties around exiting the European Union and examination of customer preferences and behaviours and our resulting plans.
The Board also visited Northern Ireland in the year to see for itself the progress that Greggs has made establishing a presence there.
It was pleasing to see the same levels of enthusiasm and commitment to doing business the right way that we experience in more established trading areas.
Directors continue to be encouraged to visit different areas of the business and experience it through the eyes of our colleagues and customers.
Investing to create the platform to deliver longterm growth Dividend increased in line with our progressive policy Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report This helps to ensure that NonExecutive Directors contributions to Board discussions are well informed supporting open and constructive dialogue with the management team.
This year I also spent time with an employee panel a particularly helpful experience given the significant changes that we are making in our supply chain.
Further details of the Boards work are included in the Governance and Committee sections of this Annual Report.
Dividend
Our progressive dividend policy targets an ordinary dividend that is two times covered by earnings with any further surplus capital being returned to shareholders.
Our Finance Director Richard Hutton outlines the expected application of the distribution policy in more detail in the financial review.
In line with its progressive dividend policy the Board intends to recommend at the Annual General Meeting a final dividend of 22.0 pence per share 2016 21.5 pence giving a total ordinary dividend for the year of 32.3 pence 2016 31.0 pence an increase of 4.2 per cent.
Looking ahead Greggs continues to demonstrate its resilience in the face of economic uncertainty.
This environment seems unlikely to change in the short term as the UK negotiates its exit from the European Union with the associated risks to consumer confidence and further cost inflation.
We are alive to these risks and working hard to mitigate the possible impacts where we can.
Looking beyond this we remain optimistic about the growth potential for Greggs and are currently investing to support this.
The benefits of our major change programmes are beginning to show and will give us much greater capability and capacity for further growth in the years ahead.
Greggs continues to be a strong business with a great team.
I am confident that we will make further progress in the year ahead.
Ian Durant
27 February 2018 Look closer at our strategy and how its making a positive impact on pages 1623 08 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
TASTING freshly prepared food We provide customers with fast and friendly service fixing issues without a fuss and enjoy making every day a great day by rewarding them for their loyalty.
We are taking our modern shops to where our customers want them to be becoming more and more convenient alongside their busy lives.
We care about our local communities.
We share our success with the people around us choosing to help charities that our customers and people care about.
Thats why we donate at least one per cent of our pretax profits to the Greggs Foundation and fundraise all year round for this fantastic charity.
Since the charity was founded 30 years ago it has given over 26 million to support the local communities that we serve.
Turn to page 19 to find out more.
OUR STRATEGY We work hard to make sure our range meets our customers needs and while our classic favourites cant be beaten there is always something new to excite them.
We offer great value at every time of the day and care about where our ingredients come from.
BEST customer experience Our vision is to become the customers favourite for foodonthego.
Our strategic plan has four pillars and our commitment to having a positive impact on peoples lives is embedded across them all.
We care about the health of our customers and where our ingredients come from.
We publicly commit to encouraging healthier foodonthego choices and are currently working with Public Health England on sugar reduction in response to the Governments commitment to reducing the sugar in our diets.
We also signed the Food Foundations Peas Please pledge.
Our Balanced Choice range now accounts for more than 100 million of sales with each item containing fewer than 400 calories and rated green or amber on the nutrition traffic light system.
Were proud of our commitment to purchasing Fairtrade products and take great care to ensure that the animal products used in our recipes are produced and delivered in a way that avoids the abuse or exploitation of animals.
Our leadership on farm animal welfare has been acknowledged by the Business Benchmark on Farm Animal Welfare by achieving Tier 2.
Turn to page 16 to find out more.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report We have welltrained people providing great service to their colleagues and ultimately our customers and we are always looking to improve the way we do things by investing in firstclass systems.
We stand out from the crowd because we make great quality bakery products ourselves and love to create new things that will excite customers.
We are always looking for ways to be more efficient and to support shop growth.
We care about the environment.
We aim to use energy efficiently and minimise waste because we want to do our bit to reduce the environmental impact from our operations.
We continue to reduce our carbon footprint on an annual basis and we are proud holders of the Carbon Trust Standard in recognition of our work on carbon efficiencies.
We use the money raised by the carrier bag charge to support the important environmental initiatives delivered by both national organisations such as The Rivers Trust Keep Britain Tidy and Surfers Against Sewage as well as grassroots projects.
Turn to page 18 to find out more.
We care about our people.
We are committed to creating a great place to work.
We are strong advocates of equality diversity and inclusion and have committed to the National Equality Standard programme to drive this agenda forward in the years ahead.
Turn to page 16 to find out more.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
In 2017 we delivered another strong performance in challenging economic circumstances as rising inflation impacted both our own costs and customers disposable income.
At the same time we continued to make good progress with our business transformation programme investing in new systems and processes as well as increased capacity and efficiency in our supply chain.
We are successfully developing our product offer to meet customer needs and investing in improved customer service in addition to accelerating growth in shop numbers.
Financial performance Total sales grew to 960.0 million in 2017 up 7.4 per cent.
Within this companymanaged shop likeforlike sales grew by 3.7 per cent.
Underlying operating profit excluding property profits and exceptional items grew by 4.6 per cent to 81.7 million 2016 78.1 million.
Pretax profit including exceptional items fell by 4.3 per cent to 71.9 million.
Market background Economic conditions became more challenging in 2017 with business cost inflation rising significantly due to food ingredient and labour cost increases affecting the entire sector.
We were able to leverage our scale and deliver productivity improvements to mitigate some of these pressures but as expected saw some yearonyear margin slippage.
The market generally saw price inflation returning to the food sector which resulted in a slowdown in disposable income growth for our customers.
Whilst the foodonthego sector remains highly competitive a further year of unbroken growth in likeforlike sales demonstrates the continued relevance and strength of the Greggs brand.
Good growth and further strategic progress Delivering our strategy Greggs is a strong and trusted brand and we draw on our heritage in fresh bakery to compete successfully in the foodonthego market.
Our
We are committed to conducting our business in a responsible manner and in doing so to have a positive impact on peoples lives.
Our strategy has four pillars Great tasting freshly prepared food Greggs products are differentiated by the way we freshly prepare food each day in our shops and by offering outstanding value for good quality great tasting foodonthego.
Total sales up 7.4%
4.6% 11 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report value.
Sales of healthier options including our Balanced Choice range offering fewer than 400 calories and good nutritionals continue to grow as we extend menu choice and take steps to encourage healthier food choices through disproportionate space allocation and promotion in our shops.
Alongside development of our Balanced Choice range we have adopted a proactive approach to supporting the Governments Childhood Obesity Plan and making significant efforts to reduce salt fat and sugar in our products and to encourage greater consumption of vegetables in the diet.
Hot food Hot food is another area of growing customer demand providing foodonthego solutions for all times of the day.
Sales of hot sandwiches and hot soup are growing well and provide a platform for further menu development which we intend will create the opportunity to extend trading in Greggs for longer in the day as our reputation grows.
Good food Customers increasingly care where their food comes from and because we make the majority of our food ourselves we are well placed to deliver food they can trust.
Unlike the majority of our competitors who resell boughtin finished products we are a largescale food manufacturer in our own right dealing at source with base ingredients.
We have invested significantly in recent years gaining independent accreditation for our sourcing and manufacturing credentials and have set out to lead the foodonthego sector in eliminating or reducing unnecessary ingredients at the same time as providing full information to allow customers to make informed choices.
Making good freshly prepared food accessible to all income levels is embedded in our core purpose as a brand with outstanding value meal deals setting us apart from the competition.
Our product strategy has been to nurture and protect our marketleading reputation in longestablished traditional bakery categories adapted to foodonthego whilst developing new reasons to visit Greggs by offering quality and value in new growth areas.
Our traditional categories including fresh baked savoury snacks freshly prepared sandwiches and delicious sweet bakery treats remain our bestselling products and are being supported by strong growth in new categories.
Breakfast
Breakfastonthego continues to grow strongly and Greggs has established a leading position by focusing on offering outstanding value with our breakfast meal deal starting at just 2.
This remains our fastestgrowing part of our trading day and we continue to build increased spend and visit frequency through menu development.
Strategically it plays an important role in diversifying demand patterns making us less reliant on general shopping missions and less sensitive to weather.
Hot drinks Led by coffee at breakfast our reputation for quality value and service in this growth category continues to build enabling us to extend our drinks menu choice.
Hot drinks feature in all of our meal deal offers and it is this outstanding value that differentiates us from our competitors.
Balanced Choice Growing public concern over obesity is driving increased demand for healthier choices in foodon thego.
Greggs has a key role to play in encouraging healthier food choices making good quality freshly prepared food accessible nationwide at outstanding Did you know Breakfast remains the fastestgrowing part of our trading day and we continue to build increased spend and visit frequency through menu development.
Look closer at how we are being more socially responsible on pages 1623 12 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We have a strong pipeline of new shop openings for 2018 and are planning to further accelerate our shop growth aiming to add in the range of 110130 net new shops in the year.
Looking ahead Once again we have a strong pipeline of new product developments planned for the year ahead strengthening traditional product areas and continuing to build our reputation in new growth categories.
Best customer experience As well as offering great tasting great value food Greggs is loved by customers because of our fast and friendly service.
Working in a Greggs shop is very demanding so we rely on our amazing teams to deliver fast friendly service under pressure.
We continue to invest to simplify our processes and increase productivity to release time for service with significant gains last year from our new shop ordering process in addition to a best practice programme that we call The Greggs Way.
Our most loyal customers are signing up in rapidly increasing numbers to our awardwinning Greggs Rewards scheme.
The insight that this provides now includes satisfaction ratings and is helping to inform decisionmaking throughout the business helping us to better meet customer needs every day.
Our shops The key consideration when customers choose where to shop for foodonthego is convenience.
Being within easy reach for customers when they need us is a prerequisite and we are working hard to increase shop numbers in order to provide easy access everywhere.
In 2017 we opened 131 new shops including 45 franchise units and closed 41 growing the estate to 1854 shops trading as at 30 December 2017.
We opened our 202 nd franchise shop and extended our companymanaged shop reach to new territory in Devon in addition to opening further shops in Northern Ireland.
Refurbishment of our shops slowed down last year as we reached the end of our programme to transform our legacy bakery shops to our foodonthego format.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT CONTINUED
We completed 132 refurbishments and franchise partners refurbished a further ten units.
We also successfully developed a new Drive Thru format that will allow us to compete effectively in this type of location as we seek new sites.
We have a strong pipeline of new shop openings for 2018 and are planning to further accelerate our shop growth aiming to add in the range of 110130 net new shops in the year.
In keeping with recent years the majority of these new shops will increase our presence in travel leisure and workcentred catchments.
At the end of 2017 34 per cent of our shop estate was located in these catchment types.
Competitive supply chain In January 2017 we communicated details of the next phase of our major investment programme focused on increasing logistics capacity and consolidating our manufacturing operations into centres of excellence in order to support shop growth.
Once implemented this new supply chain platform will deliver improvements to product quality our competitiveness and alongside systems investment will complete our transformation from traditional bakery to food onthego.
Overall our expansion plans will create thousands of new roles in retail and distribution operations but will result in fewer jobs in manufacturing.
Decisions such as these which impact our people are always difficult but our teams have shown commitment and professionalism throughout these changes and we have been able to agree a way forward on a basis of voluntary redundancy in the majority of cases.
This investment phase is a complicated programme of work which will take until 2020 to complete.
We have made a good start in 2017 completing the transfer of our Edinburgh operations to our Glasgow bakery which has been Number of shops trading as at 30 December 2017 Number of franchise shops opened in 2017 Proportion of estate now located in travel leisure and workcentred catchments 34% 13 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report extended to become a centre of excellence for Yum Yum production and extending our Leeds bakery to create a centre of excellence for cake and muffin manufacturing.
The year ahead will be the peak year for investment in the programme including the creation of our centre of excellence for doughnuts in our Gosforth Park bakery.
Strategic change of this magnitude is always challenging and I am grateful for the commitment of our teams who have been making these changes whilst maintaining service standards to our shops.
First class support teams We have made further significant progress in the fourth year of our major process and systems investment programme.
In 2017 we successfully deployed our largest ever systems roll out replacing our traditional shop ordering with a new central forecasting and replenishment process.
We have already seen benefits in improved product availability for customers and expect to see savings start to come through in lower wastage figures as we become more experienced with the systems capabilities.
In the second half of the year we successfully deployed pilots in both logistics and manufacturing which will be rolled out alongside our supply chain investment programme.
Scoping work has also begun for the remaining SAP support modules with human resources payroll and property management to be implemented in 2018.
Having a positive impact on peoples lives Greggs has a longstanding tradition and reputation as a socially responsible business and as such we want our actions to have a positive impact on peoples lives.
This ambition covers a broad range of stakeholders and in 2017 we made further improvements in all areas and were pleased to achieve an increase to a 4.5 star rating in the Business in the Community CR index in early 2018.
We encourage healthier foodonthego choices As a leading bakery foodonthego retailer we recognise that many of the products we sell are traditional favourites best eaten in moderation.
As such we aim to capture as much of the demand for these products as possible in a highly competitive market but at the same time we are taking steps to encourage customers to see Greggs as a foodonthego retailer selling a variety of products including healthier options.
Our range of Balanced Choice products offers that choice at below 400 calories with good nutritional values and now represents more than 100 million of sales.
We are committed to encouraging customers to make healthier food onthego choices and are taking active steps by offering this range in all of our shops nationwide providing access to all and allocating prominent and disproportionate space to bring these products to customers attention.
Alongside Balanced Choice we are working on sugar reduction in addition to the salt and fat reductions seen in recent years.
Other initiatives include working with New Cross Hospital in Wolverhampton to redesign the retail format of our shop there and the product range to meet the requirements of NHS guidance.
In addition in 2017 we made the Pledge for Veg in partnership with the Food Foundation through which we will help customers to increase their vegetable intake through design of our salads soups and cold sandwiches.
Did you know Our healthier options are increasingly popular  Balanced Choice now accounts for over 100m of sales.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT CONTINUED
We care where our products come from All the tea coffee hot chocolate orange juice apple juice and bananas we sell are certified Fairtrade.
We source our prawns and tuna from sustainable sources and have recently maintained our Tier 2 status despite increased requirements in the Business Benchmark on Farm Animal Welfare.
In our internal supply chain the majority of our manufacturing sites have achieved AA standard on version seven of the BRC Global standard for food safety.
We share our success with the community around us We continue to share our success with the local communities in which we operate.
In 2017 this included increasing the amount of endofday food that we donated to good causes by 45 per cent and continuing to support the work of the Greggs Foundation which celebrated its 30 th anniversary in 2017.
Through the generous support of Greggs and other donors and fundraisers including our staff and customers the Greggs Foundation was able to distribute 3.1 million to support a wide range of initiatives that improve the quality of life in our local communities.
These included the awardwinning Greggs Breakfast Club programme which with support from 80 partners now provides six million free wholesome breakfasts each year to children in over 465 primary schools.
We aim to use energy efficiently and minimise waste We hold the Carbon Trust Standard in recognition of our work on carbon efficiencies and our Environmental Management System is certificated to ISO 14001.
We continue to trial technologies that could help to reduce our carbon footprint even further in the years ahead.
We know that coffee cup recycling is a significant issue and as a responsible business we are working hard to reduce our impact on the environment and do our bit to help find a solution.
We are currently conducting a trial in 20 shops across Manchester and Liverpool city centres to establish feasibility for instore recycling of hot drinks cups.
This will give us the opportunity to ensure we have a robust and effective process in place before potentially rolling out further.
In addition we sell reusable hot drinks cups in all of our shops and offer customers a 20 pence discount when using a reusable cup.
Greggs is also part of the Paper Cup Recycling and Recovery Group and is working with others in the industry towards delivering a longterm nationwide paper cup recycling solution.
We continue to work hard with our suppliers to further improve our hot drink cups to ensure that they are as sustainable as possible.
Reducing the use of plastic in society is another issue where we are trying to play our part.
As a verticallyintegrated business we have a natural advantage in making most of our products ourselves and controlling the way in which they are distributed.
For example we distribute food to our shops using reusable trays and have separation processes behind the scenes to support recycling.
Going forward we aim to reduce further the amount of plastic involved in our processes.
Community
In 2017 we increased the amount of endof day food donations by 45 per cent.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report We are committed to creating a great place to work We pay all of our people more than the National Living Wage including those under the age of 25.
We share ten per cent of our profits with employees and will be sharing a record 9.2 million with our people as a result of our strong performance in 2017.
Our Employee Opinion Survey engagement score has increased by five percentage points over the last two years 81 per cent of our people say they feel committed to Greggs and to helping us achieve our goals.
However we are not complacent and in the year ahead will be working towards achieving the National Equality Standard as part of our commitment to make Greggs an even better place to work.
We are committed to supporting the development of all our colleagues in particular our talented female colleagues as we work towards reducing our gender pay gap which currently stands at 22 per cent.
We have made good progress with this in recent years and at Board level have exceeded government guidelines with 43 per cent of our Board being women.
Further details of all of our actions in these areas are described elsewhere in this annual report.
Outlook for 2018 Whilst the UK consumer outlook remains challenging with industrywide cost pressures expected to moderate but continue in the year ahead we are encouraged by the start to the year.
Companymanaged shop likeforlike sales in the eight weeks to 24 February 2018 have grown by 3.2 per cent and total sales are up 6.2 per cent.
2018 will be the peak year for investment in our supply chain as we create the platforms for further growth.
We also plan to open a record number of new shops as we implement our plan to grow Greggs as a leading foodonthego brand.
Roger Whiteside Chief Executive 27 February 2018 We will be sharing a record 9.2 million with our people due to our strong performance in 2017 81% of our people say they feel committed to Greggs 81% 16 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION We are investing in our future We care about our people and value their opinion We work hard to ensure Greggs is a great place to work and that our people feel valued.
Now in its second year our dedicated employee health and wellness initiative Balanced You which covers four key areas healthy eating and drinking keeping active and physically well healthy social life and good relationships and positive mental wellbeing received a Bronze award from Better Health at Work.
Roger Whiteside signed the Time to Change Employer Pledge illustrating our longterm commitment to raising awareness about the importance of mental health and wellbeing at work and helping to break the culture of silence around mental health.
We are committed to helping improve the health of our customers We believe in offering our customers choice so alongside our traditional favourites youll see a whole host of healthier options including savouries sandwiches salads porridge and soup.
Our Balanced Choice range continues to grow in popularity and now accounts for more than 100 million of sales.
We have made a number of public commitments to highlight that were serious about customer health.
We are currently working with Public Health England on sugar reduction in response to the Governments commitment to reducing the sugar in our diets.
We made a Pledge for Veg in partnership with the Food Foundation which will enable us to help customers increase their vegetable intake through our salads soups and cold sandwiches.
Balanced
Choice
Our Balanced Choice range continues to grow and now accounts for over 100m of sales.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Great tasting freshly prepared food
Responsible sourcing Community Environment People
Best customer experience First class support teams
Sustainability links We aim to donate as much unsold food to charity as we can We have been donating unsold food from shops for many years.
Traditionally our bakeries would team up with larger charities who would collect the unsold food from us and distribute to their own network of smaller charities.
While this process is still in place we have also been working hard to increase the amount of unsold food donated by our shops to local good causes where we can find an outlet.
To this end we ramped up our campaign in 2017.
This involved creating a dedicated application page for unsold food donations on the Greggs Foundation website.
We also have a sign placed prominently in our shops inviting customers to come forward if they know of a good cause that could benefit from unsold food.
The amount of unsold food we donate has increased by 45 per cent in the last 12 months.
We care where our ingredients come from We only buy freerange whole eggs and we are proud to have received Compassion in World Farmings Good Egg award.
Our tuna is caught by pole and line fishing or by using methods without any Fish Aggregating Devices and all of our prawns are from MSC certified sustainable sources.
We only use palmderived fats and oils in our ingredients that are certified as sustainable.
We measure our progress against the Business Benchmark on Farm Animal Welfare and were proud to have moved our rating from Tier 5 to Tier 2 over the last three years.
Were committed to making a positive difference through our commitment to purchasing Fairtrade products.
All the tea coffee hot chocolate sugar sachets orange juice apple juice peppermint tea green tea and bananas we sell are certified Fairtrade.
We were proud to once again be a highstreet partner for Fairtrade Fortnight in 2018.
We are incredibly grateful to Greggs for the delicious support it has provided to our Contact the Elderly groups in Scotland.
The unsold food is welcomed by our tea party groups which meet once a month giving older people who live alone the chance to enjoy a vital lifeline of friendship.
Contact the Elderly relies upon the kindness of the local community to make an immeasurable difference to the lives of older people.
By supporting our work in this way Greggs has played an integral role in this wider community kindness.
Janice Kerr Development Officer at Contact the Elderly
Our customers can what our food is made of 18 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED We care about the environment We have been successful over several years in reducing the carbon footprint of our operations and whilst this programme continues we are now turning our attention towards specific problems such as product packaging.
We have the advantage of selling most of our products freshly prepared in shop and in that way require less packaging than factory food competitors.
Nevertheless we are committed to further reducing the use of plastic in our processes.
Alongside this money raised by the carrier bag charge is being used to support local community environmental projects through the Greggs Foundation and environmental initiatives delivered by national organisations such as The Rivers Trust Keep Britain Tidy and Surfers Against Sewage.
Surfers Against Sewage is delighted to work with Greggs to grow the impact of our work to tackle litter and plastic waste in communities right around the UK.
Together we are inspiring and educating thousands of school children to take action to protect the beaches parks and playgrounds they love and mobilising thousands of beach clean volunteers in every part of the country.
Together we really are making a difference to community spaces.
Hugo Tagholm CEO Surfers Against Sewage We are proud of the Greggs Foundation In 2017 the Greggs Foundation celebrated its 30 th birthday.
In that time through the provision of its five main grant programmes North East core funding grant local community projects fund grant environmental grant hardship fund grant and breakfast clubs the Foundation has donated over 26 million to help improve the quality of life of people in local communities.
Were committed to reducing our annual carbon footprint and achieved a 15% reduction in intensity in 2017.
Were proud holders of the Carbon Trust Standard in recognition of our work on carbon efficiencies.
A reduction of 15% In 2017 we opened 48 new breakfast clubs taking the total number to This means that we are helping to ensure that 28900 children a day thats circa 6 million breakfasts a year are getting the best possible start to their school day with a nutritious breakfast.
Breakfast Clubs Strategic Report Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We support those in need through charitable giving The Greggs Foundation isnt the only charity we support.
We also fundraise for a number of other charities which our people and customers feel passionate about including BBC Children in Need the Poppy Appeal and the Disasters Emergency Committee DEC.
We are also proud supporters of the North of England Childrens Cancer Research charity and are the main sponsor of its annual Childrens Cancer Run.
To date the run has raised over 30 million to fund research into improving recovery rates.
In 2017 we celebrated our 11 th anniversary supporting BBC Children in Need.
During that time our team members and customers have helped raise over 8.5 million for the charity  something we are all incredibly proud of Understanding and rewarding our loyal customers through Greggs Rewards Our awardwinning loyalty scheme Greggs Rewards has had a very successful year and has provided numerous benefits to both our customers and our shop teams.
The app has grown in popularity across the UK throughout the year.
We surpassed the one million customer downloads milestone along with achieving the No 1 slot in the App Store after we helped ease students back into university life with a free Greggs lunch.
We rewarded our customers with a wide variety of their favourite products via the app whilst launching new technology that enables them to instantly rate our products and service after shopping with us.
This information will prove invaluable in helping our shop teams to deliver a great Greggs customer experience every day.
We want our business to have a on peoples lives positive impact 20 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED We are taking Greggs to new areas Convenience is key when it comes to customer choice and as the internet changes the way we shop and our foodonthe go eating habits we have been opening new shops to take Greggs to where our customers want us to be.
In 2017 we accelerated our shop growth opening 131 new shops including 45 franchise shops focused on travel locations reaching a significant milestone as we celebrated our 200 th franchise shop opening.
We opened a new Drive Thru format in Irlam Manchester and we took Greggs to new territory in Devon whilst opening further shops in Northern Ireland.
We are proud to fuel the nation at breakfast time Breakfast remains our fastest growing part of the day and we have established a leading position by offering our customers outstanding value at just 2 for a breakfast deal an offer we are proud to hold for the eighth year running.
We continue to build on our reputation for high quality great tasting good value coffee and increased our hot drinks menu choice with the introduction of flavoured lattes towards the end of the year.
New shops opened in 2017 Franchise shops in travel locations
We are when our customers want us to be including from 7am and on Sundays 21 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report We are making great progress in transforming our supply chain In 2017 we made great progress in our 100 million supply chain investment programme to increase logistics capacity consolidate our manufacturing operations into centres of excellence to improve product quality and support shop growth allowing us to compete more effectively in the foodonthego market.
We completed the transfer of our operations in Edinburgh to our Glasgow bakery which we have extended to create a centre of excellence for Yum Yum production.
We also extended our Leeds bakery to create a centre of excellence for cake and muffin production.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED We are proud of our bakery heritage We are proud of our heritage and our long established traditional bakery categories such as freshly baked savoury snacks freshly prepared sandwiches and delicious sweet bakery treats remain our bestselling products.
Greggs iconic sausage roll remains our number one bestseller.
We love to excite our customers with new reasons to visit Greggs In 2017 we delivered an exciting variety of new products including additions to our hot food range with sales of our hot sandwiches and glutenfree soup growing well.
More products will feature in 2018 as we create new reasons to visit us for foodonthego at all times of the day.
URSELVES for over 75 years We have been making
GREAT 23 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report We are investing to improve our customer service As well as our great tasting great value food our customers love our fast and friendly service.
We have been investing to further improve our customer service by putting simpler processes in place which will help to increase the productivity of our amazing teams.
We believe in equality diversity and inclusion At Greggs we are committed to treating our people equally and ensuring that everyone  no matter what their background race ethnicity or gender  has an opportunity to develop.
We are signatories to the National Equality Standard and are committed to supporting the development of all our colleagues in particular our talented female colleagues as we work towards reducing our gender pay gap.
We have made good progress with this in recent years and at Board level have exceeded Government guidelines with 43 per cent of our Board being women.
81% Our Employee Opinion Survey engagement score has increased by two percentage points over the last two years.
81 per cent of our people say they feel committed to Greggs and to helping us achieve our goals.
21000 24 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW
In 2017 we delivered another good financial performance mitigating the impact of increased cost inflation whilst managing a significant investment programme.
The costs of this programme along with continued growth in our estate were all selffunded from our strong cash flow whilst we also increased dividends to shareholders.
Revenue 960.0 894.2 Operating profit excluding exceptional items and property profits 81.7 78.1 Property profits 0.5 2.2 Operating profit excluding exceptional items 82.2 80.3 Operating margin excluding exceptional items 8.6% 9.0% Finance expense 0.4 0.0 Profit before taxation excluding exceptional items 81.8 80.3 Exceptional items 9.9 5.2 Profit before taxation 71.9 75.1
Total Group sales for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 were 960.0 million 2016 894.2 million an increase of 7.4 per cent.
Sales in companymanaged shops with more than one calendar years trading history likeforlike grew by 3.7 per cent to 817.5 million 2016 788.5 million.
We also saw likeforlike and total sales growth in our franchised shop estate.
Profit
Operating profit before exceptional items was 82.2 million 2016 80.3 million.
This included a 0.5 million contribution from property disposals 2016 2.2 million.
Excluding the impact of property profits from both years the underlying growth in operating profit was 4.6 per cent.
The result reflects strong sales growth in a year when as expected we experienced higher than historical cost inflation.
Another year of good financial performance Pretax profit before exceptional items was 81.8 million 2016 80.3 million.
Including
2016 75.1 million.
Exceptional items In 2016 we commenced the first phase of our major investment programme to reshape our internal supply chain and this has continued throughout 2017.
Activity in 2017 included the relocation of Yum Yum manufacturing to our Glasgow site and expansion of that site to consolidate our distribution activity in Scotland following the closure in May of our Edinburgh bakery.
In addition we consolidated manufacturing of small cakes and muffins at our Leeds bakery and relocated our pizza manufacturing to our Manchester site.
Total Group sales for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 Likeforlike sales in companymanaged shops grew by 3.7% 25 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report In 2017 the total cash impact of exceptional items was a net outflow of 1.9 million 2016 3.8 million cash outflow.
We expect the 2018 cash outflow in respect of exceptional items to be c.
12.5 million.
Operating margin Operating margin before finance expenses and exceptional items was 8.6 per cent 2016 9.0 per cent.
Including exceptional items the operating margin was 7.5 per cent 2016 8.4 per cent.
Gross margin before exceptional items was stable yearonyear at 63.7 per cent 2016 63.7 per cent.
We experienced high levels of food input cost inflation for most of the year but the impact of this on gross margin was partly mitigated by lower costs in our supply chain as a result of site closures.
Including exceptional items gross margin was 62.7 per cent 2016 63.2 per cent.
In an inflationary environment savings from our actions to make the business simpler and more efficient have become even more important.
In
2017 we delivered savings of 9.7 million 2016 7.1 million.
Benefits were achieved through procurement initiatives and as a result of improvements across our retail and supply chain operations.
Cost inflation will continue to be a headwind in 2018 and we will redouble our efforts to mitigate this impact through our efforts to make the business more efficient.
As noted above in 2017 we recognised gains on the disposal of freehold properties totalling 0.5 million 2016 2.2 million.
These were in addition to the property gain on disposal of our Edinburgh site which was treated as exceptional.
Financing charges There was a net financing expense of 0.4 million in the year 2016 0.0 million reflecting the funding position of the defined benefit pension scheme partially offset by interest received and exchange gains.
In the year ahead we expect to incur a financing expense of around 0.2 million relating to the net liability of the pension scheme at the start of the year.
Including related exceptional property gains the total exceptional charge in relation to this programme was 10.1 million in 2017 2016 6.4 million.
After adjustments made for the reversal of prior year exceptional costs the total exceptional charge for the year was 9.9 million 2016 5.2 million comprised as follows Supply chain restructuring redundancy costs 7.4 4.1 transfer of operations 1.3 0.4 propertyrelated 0.5 Total cash costs of supply chain restructuring 9.2 4.5 depreciation and asset writeoffs 1.3 1.9 property disposal gains 0.4 Net supply chain restructuring charge 10.1 6.4 Restructuring of support functions  0.4 Release of prior years exceptional items dilapidations  0.5 other property provisions 0.2 0.9 restructuring of support functions  0.2 Total exceptional items 9.9 5.2 We continue to expect the total exceptional cash costs of our supply chain investment programme excluding any associated property disposal gains to be in the region of 25.0 million.
Our expectation of noncash costs accelerated depreciation and asset writeoffs associated with the programme has reduced to 5.0 million previously 7.0 million.
Total charges so far have totalled 16.5 million and we expect a further 6.0 million in 2018.
A property gain of 0.4 million resulting from the disposal of our Edinburgh site was treated as exceptional in the year because the site closure came as a result of the overall supply chain restructuring programme.
We have now exchanged contracts for the conditional disposal of our vacant Twickenham site.
Should this progress to completion any resultant profit will also be treated as an exceptional gain.
We continue to expect the total proceeds arising from supply chain site disposals to be in line with those anticipated in our investment plan.
Did you know In 2017  we relocated our Yum Yum manufacturing to our Glasgow site.
In addition we consolidated manufacturing of cakes and muffins to our Leeds bakery and relocated our pizza manufacturing to Manchester.
Look closer at the KPIs we use to monitor the performance of the Group against our strategy on page 28 26 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The performance of new shops opened in 2017 was encouraging with sales above the level expected at the time of investment.
Taxation
The Company has a simple corporate structure carries out its business entirely in the UK and all taxes are paid there.
We aim to act with integrity and transparency in respect of our taxation obligations.
Excluding the effect of exceptional items the Groups underlying effective tax rate was 20.7 per cent 2016 22.5 per cent.
The overall tax rate for the year including exceptional items was 20.9 per cent 2016 22.8 per cent.
The yearonyear reduction in the effective rate primarily reflected reductions in the headline rate of corporation tax and settlement of prior year tax computations.
We expect the effective rate for 2018 to be around 21.25 per cent and that the effective rate going forward will continue to be around two per cent above the headline corporation tax rate.
This is principally due to disallowed expenditure such as depreciation on nontaxdeductible qualifying properties and costs of acquisition of new shops.
Earnings per share Diluted earnings per share before exceptional items were 63.5 pence 2016 60.8 pence an increase of 4.4 per cent.
Basic earnings per share before exceptional items were 64.5 pence 2016 62.0 pence.
Including exceptional items diluted earnings per share were 55.7 pence 2016 56.7 pence and basic earnings per share were 56.6 pence 2016 57.8 pence.
Dividend
The Board recommends a final ordinary dividend of 22.0 pence per share 2016 21.5 pence.
Together with the interim dividend of 10.3 pence 2016 9.5 pence paid in October 2017 this makes a total ordinary dividend for the year of 32.3 pence 2016 31.0 pence.
This is covered two times by diluted earnings per share before exceptional items in line with our progressive dividend policy.
Our policy on special distributions is outlined below under Cash flow and capital structure.
Subject to the approval of shareholders at the Annual General Meeting the final dividend will be paid on 18 May 2018 to shareholders on the register on 20 April 2018.
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
Balance sheet Capital expenditure We invested a total of 70.4 million 2016 80.4 million on capital expenditure in the business during 2017 less than we had originally expected due to later phasing of a number of new shop openings and supply chain projects.
The total included 40.8 million for development and maintenance of our retail estate and 4.4 million in respect of IT infrastructure.
Investment in our supply chain of 23.4 million included works at our Glasgow and Leeds bakeries to consolidate production of Yum Yums small cakes and muffins and preparations for further such projects in Manchester and Newcastle in the year ahead.
Depreciation and amortisation in the year was 53.5 million 2016 45.6 million.
2018 will be a year of record investment in the business as we reach the peak of our capital expenditure on consolidation of our manufacturing activities.
This aspect of our investment programme is expected to require around 45 million of capital expenditure in 2018.
We will also continue to grow and diversify our shop estate through the opening of c.90 new companymanaged shops with further openings funded by franchise partners.
Overall we plan capital expenditure of around 95 million in 2018.
There will be further investment to complete our supply chain programme across 2019 and 2020 and the bulk of the work to modernise our IT systems should also complete in this timeframe.
Assuming that we invest to support continued growth of c.100 net shops per year then we expect capital expenditure of c.
95 million in 2019 reducing to c.
80 million in 2020.
Amount invested on capital expenditure in the business during 2017 Return on capital employed excluding exceptionals for 2017 26.9% 27 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Working capital Group net current liabilities decreased to 21.4 million at the end of 2017 2016 28.8 million.
We held higher cash balances at the end of 2017 as a result of delays in the phasing of capital expenditure as noted above.
Inventory levels rose by 2.8 million and receivables rose by 2.7 million in the year.
The 6.5 million increase in current liabilities largely reflected a higher level of restructuring provisions resulting from the changes made to our supply chain in the year.
Pension scheme liability The net liability shown on the balance sheet for the Companys closed defined benefit pension scheme reduced to 7.5 million 2016 22.9 million.
The assets of the scheme performed strongly in 2017  reducing the liability by 8.8 million.
In addition in order to reflect scheme experience an allowance has now been included in the valuation for expected commutation of pensions.
This reduced the liability by 7.0 million.
The scheme underwent a full actuarial revaluation in 2017  which showed no current requirement for Company contributions.
Return on capital We manage return on capital against predetermined targets and monitor performance through our Investment Board where all capital expenditure is subject to rigorous appraisal before and after it is made.
For investments in new shops we target an average cash return on invested capital of 25 per cent with a hurdle rate of 22.5 per cent over an average investment cycle of seven years.
Other investments are appraised using discounted cash flow analysis.
The performance of new shops opened in 2017 was encouraging with sales above the level expected at the time of investment.
New shops opened in 2016 are maturing well and are now above our target for return on investment.
We continue to see particularly strong returns on the relocation of shops within their existing catchments.
We delivered an overall return on capital employed ROCE for 2017 of 26.9 per cent excluding exceptional items 2016 28.1 per cent.
The reduction in ROCE was expected given the level of supply chain investment in the year.
Cash flow and capital structure The net cash inflow from operating activities in the year was 116.9 million 2016 117.6 million.
At the end of the year the Group had net cash and cash equivalents of 54.5 million 2016 46.0 million.
Having taken into account the views of shareholders the Board continues to believe that it is appropriate to maintain a target yearend net cash position of around 40 million to allow for seasonality in our working capital cycle and to protect the interests of all creditors.
Looking forward we intend to maintain our progressive dividend policy and to the extent that we have material surplus capital within the Group the Board would expect to return capital to shareholders likely by way of special dividends.
In 2018 we expect that cash generated will be required to meet the Groups investment plans whilst paying ordinary dividends in line with our policy.
Richard Hutton Finance Director 27 February 2018 Did you know 2018 will be a year of record investment in the business as we reach the peak of our capital expenditure on consolidation of our manufacturing activities.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 3.8% 4.7% 5.2% 7.0% 7.4%tel 41.5tel 4.5% 0.8% 4.7% 4.2% 3.7%tel 7.5% 8.4% 8.7% 6.1% 4.4% 8.6% 9.0% 8.7% 7.2% 5.4%tel The percentage yearonyear change in total sales for the Group adjusted for the impact of a 53week year in 2014.
Reflects the performance of the Group before financing and taxation impacts and the underlying measure excludes any exceptional items arising in the year.
Compares yearonyear cash sales in our companymanaged shops excluding any shops which opened relocated or closed in the current or prior year.
Likeforlike sales growth includes selling price inflation and excludes VAT.
The impact of shop refurbishment is included in likeforlike sales growth.
The calculation of these figures for the current and prior year can be found on page 106.
Shows the operating profit of the Group as a percentage of turnover.
The underlying measure excludes any exceptional items arising in the year.
Total sales growth 7.4% Operating profit 82.2 million Likeforlike sales growth 3.7% Operating margin 8.6% We use eight key financial performance indicators KPIs to monitor the performance of the Group against our strategy The definition of these KPIs and our performance over the last five years is detailed below.
All of the nonGAAP measures detailed can be calculated from the GAAP measures included in the annual accounts or are detailed on page 106.
Commentary on these KPIs is contained within the financial review FINANCIAL KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 29 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report 30.6ptel 116.9tel 70.4tel 23.7% 26.3% 26.8% 19.1% 13.2% 26.9% 28.1% 26.8% 22.4% 16.4%tel Calculated by dividing profit attributable to shareholders by the average number of dilutive outstanding shares.
The underlying measure excludes any exceptional items arising in the year.
Operating profit adjusted for the impact of noncash items and working capital movements.
The total amount incurred in the year on investment in fixed assets.
Calculated by dividing profit before tax by the average total assets less current liabilities for the year.
The underlying measure excludes any exceptional items arising in the year.
The calculation of these figures for the current and prior year can be found on page 106.
Diluted earnings per share pence Net cash inflow from operating activities 116.9 million Capital expenditure 70.4 million Return on capital employed ROCE 26.9%
Including exceptional items Graph keys Look closer at how we measure our progress with nonfinancial KPIs overleaf 30 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KPI Our commitment 2017 targets Status 2018 targets Champion United Nations
Development Goals Customer health We encourage healthier foodonthe go choices Increase sales of Balanced Choice by at least 10 million Implement our Clean Label plan across our savoury and bread products Increase sales of healthier choices by 10% based on 2017 results Reduce sugar by 5% in line with the Governments Childhood Obesity Plan based on 2015
Director
GOOD HEALTH AND WELLBEING 3
We care about where our ingredients come from Engage with the external supply chain to meet our Modern Slavery Policy Obligations Develop a fiveyear strategy for cagefree egg ingredients Maintain our BBFAW Tier 2 Standard in relation to Animal Welfare All of our retail paper and board packaging to be from accredited sustainable materials
Director
RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION
We share our success with the people around us Work with our partners to further extend our Breakfast Club scheme to 440 schools Support the Greggs Foundation to donate more than 2 million through our fundraising activity Evaluate and improve our Environmental Grants Programme Work with Greggs Foundation to maximise its impact Launch a national initiative in Breakfast Club schools to promote good food choices
Director
SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES 11
We aim to use energy efficiently and minimise waste Continue to develop our Environmental Management System to maintain our ISO14001 accreditation across all our operations Continue to review our operational activities to support a reduction of our carbon footprint intensity by a further 1% Increase the amount of unsold food donations by a further 50% based on 2016 results Reduce the amount of singleuse plastics used within our stores and increase the level of segregation and recycling for key packaging types Further reduce our carbon footprint intensity by 2% Increase redistribution of unsold food by 10% compared to 2017 result Property and
Development
Director
CLIMATE
ACTION 13
We are committed to creating a great place to work Drive activities to further improve employee engagement through flexible working Achieve thirdparty accreditation for Balanced You our health and wellbeing programme Successfully deliver our year one action plan to achieve National Equality Standard accreditation in 2019 Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable accidents per hours worked in retail by 5% Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable accidents per hours worked in our supply chain by 10% Further develop and deliver our online development tool across the business to enhance development opportunities for our people Complete the relaunch of our culture and values programme Successfully deliver our 2year action plan following our National Equality Standard Audit in 2017 Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable incidents across our operations by 10% Retail and
Director
REDUCED
INEQUALITIES 10 We continue to integrate social responsibility into our business strategy We continue to report our targets as nonfinancial KPIs under the five areas of focus.
All of our targets and commitments are delivered under the guidance and ownership of Operating Board Champions as illustrated below  with overall ownership by the Chief Executive.
Our Social Responsibility Steering Group is convened by our Company Secretary and meets on a quarterly basis to review progress.
NONFINANCIAL KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS We continue to drive our Balanced Choice range and were pleased to increase our sales by a further 2 million in 2017.
Our operational teams worked extremely hard in identifying new opportunities for unsold food donations in 2017 finding a large number of local community organisations to work with resulting in a 45% increase in the amount of food donations.
We will continue to place our efforts in working with local community groups to find new routes for redistribution as well as further investigating how we could work with any national organisations to further increase donations wherever we can.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Although we missed our stretching target we were proud to see that we reduced the number of reported incidents across our supply chain again by over 5%.
Health and Safety remains a priority across our supply chain especially in light of the transformation work we are in the process of completing within the estate.
More information about our 2017 achievements is available overleaf.
KPI Our commitment 2017 targets Status 2018 targets Champion United Nations
Development Goals Customer health We encourage healthier foodonthe go choices Increase sales of Balanced Choice by at least 10 million Implement our Clean Label plan across our savoury and bread products Increase sales of healthier choices by 10% based on 2017 results Reduce sugar by 5% in line with the Governments Childhood Obesity Plan based on 2015
Director
GOOD HEALTH AND WELLBEING 3
We care about where our ingredients come from Engage with the external supply chain to meet our Modern Slavery Policy Obligations Develop a fiveyear strategy for cagefree egg ingredients Maintain our BBFAW Tier 2 Standard in relation to Animal Welfare All of our retail paper and board packaging to be from accredited sustainable materials
Director
RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION
We share our success with the people around us Work with our partners to further extend our Breakfast Club scheme to 440 schools Support the Greggs Foundation to donate more than 2 million through our fundraising activity Evaluate and improve our Environmental Grants Programme Work with Greggs Foundation to maximise its impact Launch a national initiative in Breakfast Club schools to promote good food choices
Director
SUSTAINABLE CITIES AND COMMUNITIES 11
We aim to use energy efficiently and minimise waste Continue to develop our Environmental Management System to maintain our ISO14001 accreditation across all our operations Continue to review our operational activities to support a reduction of our carbon footprint intensity by a further 1% Increase the amount of unsold food donations by a further 50% based on 2016 results Reduce the amount of singleuse plastics used within our stores and increase the level of segregation and recycling for key packaging types Further reduce our carbon footprint intensity by 2% Increase redistribution of unsold food by 10% compared to 2017 result Property and
Development
Director
CLIMATE
ACTION 13
We are committed to creating a great place to work Drive activities to further improve employee engagement through flexible working Achieve thirdparty accreditation for Balanced You our health and wellbeing programme Successfully deliver our year one action plan to achieve National Equality Standard accreditation in 2019 Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable accidents per hours worked in retail by 5% Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable accidents per hours worked in our supply chain by 10% Further develop and deliver our online development tool across the business to enhance development opportunities for our people Complete the relaunch of our culture and values programme Successfully deliver our 2year action plan following our National Equality Standard Audit in 2017 Continue to drive health and safety engagement to reduce reportable incidents across our operations by 10% Retail and
Director
REDUCED
INEQUALITIES 10 32 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NONFINANCIAL KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS CONTINUED Carbon footprint Our net carbon footprint for the 2017 financial year was 110350 tonnes of carbon dioxide and equivalent gases CO e with an intensity of 115.61 tonnes of CO e per million turnover.
This represents a 15.04 per cent improvement on our 2016 result.
Global GHG emissions data In line with Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 we are reporting on our greenhouse gas GHG emissions as part of our annual strategic report.
Our GHG reporting year is the same as our financial year from 1 January 2017 to 30 December 2017.
We have reported on all of the emission sources which we deem ourselves to be responsible for as required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013.
These sources fall within our operations control and financial boundaries.
We do not have responsibility for any emission sources that are outside of our operational control.
The methodology used to calculate our emissions is based on the UK Governments Environmental Reporting Guidance  and emissions factors from UK Governments GHG Conversion Factors for company reporting.
The 2017 emissions are verified by the Carbon Trust as part of the review of our carbon footprint.
Current reporting year 2017 tonnes of CO Comparison year tonnes of CO Scope 1 Combustion of fuel and operations of facilities 32460 33010 Scope 1 Refrigerants 7222 6041 Scope 2 Electricity purchased for own use including PV generated electricity 70966 82153 GROSS emissions Total Scope 12 CO e emissions 110648 121204 NET emissions Net emissions excluding PV 110350 120824 NET intensity measure Tonnes of CO e per million of turnover adjusted to account for use of renewable energy Emissions for 2016 have been adjusted as refrigerant emissions in 2016 were over reported.
Carbon Trust Standard We measure our direct carbon footprint and in 2016 we were again accredited to hold the Carbon Trust Standard in recognition of our work on carbon efficiencies.
In addition we disclose our GHG emissions through the Carbon Disclosure Project CDP.
Gender of workforce We are proud of our reputation for bringing the best talent through the business regardless of gender and that 71 per cent of our total workforce is female almost half of our management population is female and of the seven Board posts three are held by women.
Female Male Total Board 3 4 7 Senior Managers 58 78 136 Other managers 276 281 557 All employees 15408 6326 21734 Percentage of women on the
43% Percentage of employees who are female 71% 33 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report The Board has ultimate responsibility for ensuring that risks are managed appropriately Our risk management approach We have wellestablished risk management processes embedded within the business which enable us to identify evaluate record and monitor significant risks.
Taking an appropriate level of risk is an inherent part of any business but in doing so we assess the likelihood and impact of each risk arising.
The diagram below sets out our approach and shows the various information flows.
Business Assurance Function
Functional risks
Key strategic risks
New and emerging risks Risk Manager Risk CommitteeOperating Board Main BoardAudit Committee The responsibilities of key participants within the risk management process are summarised below Board of DirectorsAudit Committee Ultimate responsibility for ensuring risks are managed appropriately full annual review of the risk management process regular consideration of key strategic risks and new and emerging risks and robust annual assessment of principal risks as set out on the following page.
Risk CommitteeOperating Board Quarterly detailed discussion of significant risks understanding the business exposure to risk supporting the implementation of the Companys risk management strategy and escalating significant matters to Main Board via the Audit Committee.
Risk Manager Maintaining the corporate risk register supporting the Risk Committee to operate effectively and ensuring adequate insurance is in place as determined by the Main Board.
Business Assurance function Providing independent internal audit coverage of the business reporting findings to Audit Committee oversight of the risk process and support to the whistleblowing process which allows staff to raise matters of concern.
RISK MANAGEMENT 34
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Principal risks and uncertainties These risks are those which the Directors consider to present the most significant threat to the business future development or performance.
Additional risks have been disclosed this year compared with previous statements.
This is in response to guidance from the Financial Reporting Council along with a peer review of the disclosures of other companies operating in the retail environment which has encouraged reporting of a broader range of risks to enhance stakeholder understanding.
As a result we have reported on five additional risks in the current disclosure.
All risks reported in last years statement remain relevant.
Where appropriate the impact of these risks occurring has been considered when developing the scenarios tested as part of the financial viability statement as set out opposite.
Additional risks and uncertainties not presently known to management or deemed less material currently may also have an adverse effect on the business.
Further the exposure to each risk will evolve as we take mitigating actions or as new risks emerge.
The risks set out below provide a snapshot of the position at the date of the annual report.
The risks are described along with the strategic pillars to which they are linked and the movement in net risk level during the year.
They are ranked based on their perceived impact and likelihood taking into account the effectiveness of existing controls i. the net risk faced by the business.
Our principal risks can be mapped to our strategy and categorised as follows Great tasting freshly prepared food Best customer experience
First class support teams Loss of production Product quality Product quality Food scare Food scare Market pressures Business change Cyber and data security Consumer trends Regulatory and compliance Economic climate Management of third party relationships Ability to attractretainmotivate people Impact of Brexit
Strategic risk Operational risk Compliance risk 35 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Viability statement The Directors have assessed the Companys prospects and viability taking into account its current position plans and principal risks.
The Company remains cashgenerative and has no debt other than normal trading liabilities to creditors and the obligations arising under commercial leases and its defined benefit pension scheme.
In assessing the Companys prospects the Board has taken into account the following The Companys strong financial position and cashgenerative nature.
The continued growth of outofhome eating and the alignment of the Companys offer to this growing market.
The potential for further growth in existing markets and investment plans to support this.
The maintenance of a competitive differentiated offer to customers.
Controls over and mitigations of the occurrence of principal risks and uncertainties.
In assessing the Companys viability the Board has considered potential scenarios that have been envisaged to reflect the occurrence of the principal risks that the business faces.
These include threats to its operations such as a loss of production capacity and the occurrence of risks affecting confidence in the Greggs brand.
In carrying out its assessment the Board has reviewed the threeyear operational and financial plan to 2020.
This is the period over which the Board reviews managements business planning and therefore the Board believes that this is the most appropriate timeframe over which to make the viability assessment.
The principal risks to which the Company is exposed ultimately affect the ability of its shops to trade successfully either through an interruption to supply or because of a loss of confidence in the Greggs brand.
A significant loss of sales would be particularly damaging given the Companys vertical integration in that the cost of the internal supply chain cannot be reduced quickly.
In order to stresstest the Companys financial resilience three separate scenarios were created to simulate the impact arising from the occurrence of the following principal risks A branddamaging food scare resulting in a significant oneyear sales reduction followed by gradual recovery of confidence.
In making assumptions the Directors considered real examples of companies in the food sector that had experienced such issues.
The impact of a ten per cent annual sales decline as a result of changing shopping habits or consumer trends.
Temporary loss of production capacity for the Companys iconic pastry savoury products and the consequences for liquidity as capacity is restored.
In each case the Directors reviewed the mitigating actions that would be necessary to protect the Companys liquidity.
These included Temporary suspension of dividend payments in order to preserve cash for operational use including the restoration of customer confidence in the Greggs brand.
Restriction of capital investment to cover only essential maintenance of infrastructure taking into account capital commitments to major investment programmes.
Addition of temporary financing facilities taking into account the Companys borrowing capacity.
Drawing on the Companys insurance arrangements on the occurrence of an insured risk.
The scenarios tested represent more extreme circumstances than the Company has ever experienced.
Based on the results of the analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period of their detailed assessment.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Description Key mitigations Change Links to strategy Loss of production As we move towards more centralised production and national distribution any interruption to production may have a significant impact on our customers.
All of our supply sites have contingency plans in place.
We simulate scenarios and test our recovery processes periodically.
We have identified alternative supply sources for key ingredients and products.
Our property insurers conduct annual site inspections helping us to protect our facilities.
No change Product quality and safety Due to our verticallyintegrated structure and the fact that we freshly prepare food every day in our retail premises we may have a greater exposure to food safety risk than many of our competitors.
Procedures are in place throughout our supply sites and shops to ensure that food safety is maintained.
Compliance is monitored both internally and by regulatory bodies.
No change Food scare We may suffer a loss of trade due to customer confidence being impacted by an external food scare beyond our control.
Most of the products on sale in our shops are made by our staff in our bakeries.
Routine checks are carried out to confirm the integrity of our products and ingredients.
No change
Changing customer habits such as the increasing popularity of online shopping impact on our ability to attract footfall into our shops.
We are progressively diversifying the market segments in which we trade reducing the reliance on shoppers.
This includes opening shops in travel and workplace locations as well as developing our food offer to match the needs of customers outside of general shopping hours.
No change
We continue to implement our strategy of transformation into a foodonthego retailer requiring restructuring capital investment and new systems implementation.
Expected timelines or savings may not be met and there may be disruption to our customers.
We phase our change activity to avoid affecting the Company as a whole wherever possible.
Timelines and forecasts are clearly defined and agreed.
Progress against these is reported on a regular basis to our Operating Board.
No change Cyber and data security As with all businesses our data and systems are exposed to external threats such as hackers or viruses.
These could lead to data breaches or disruption to our operation.
The new General Data Protection Regulation GDPR provides a rigorous control framework with severe penalties for noncompliance.
We actively monitor our networks and systems including conducting regular penetration testing.
Our approach to information security is closely monitored by the Board.
We are working to ensure compliance with the GDPR requirements including data mapping policy development and staff training.
No change
As customers become more concerned about nutrition health and the provenance of food our traditional products may be perceived as less attractive.
The publication of the Governments 25 year Environmental Strategy and growing concern over the environment may give rise to the introduction of additional levies and taxes.
We continue to work on improving the nutrition of our traditional products including a commitment to reduce sugar in line with the Governments Childhood Obesity Strategy.
Our Balanced Choice range provides healthier options and is growing well.
We are working hard to reduce our impact on the environment including reviewing our packaging designs introducing a reusable hot drinks cup and continuing to reduce our carbon intensity.
No change
Following the implementation of new Sentencing Council guidelines large financial penalties could be imposed on the business for breaches of Food Safety or Health and Safety legislation.
Due to the number of stores we operate and the volume of customer transactions we handle on a daily basis we may be exposed to isolated incidents which fall below our expected standards and may expose us to prosecution.
We have a system of controls and monitoring in place and our teams are provided with extensive training on safe processes and procedures.
Our audit processes confirm whether proper procedures are being followed.
New
Economic climate Increased uncertainty about the economy and the outcome of Brexit impacts on consumer confidence.
Wider economic uncertainty and job insecurity may cause consumers to be more cautious with their discretionary spending.
As a leading value brand we take steps to control our costs whilst maintaining the quality of our customer offer.
We closely monitor our competitiveness and are focused on remaining great value for money.
New
Management of third party relationships As our reliance on third parties for services ingredients or business support increases we become more exposed to their business interruption risks.
This could impact on our ability to produce distribute or sell our products.
Our own contingency arrangements consider the implications of key systems or ingredients being unavailable.
All third parties are vetted prior to us engaging with them.
Key supplier relationships are managed by our central procurement team.
New
Ability to attractretain motivate people Market forces and particularly the impact of Brexit may result in a shortage of available workforce.
This may be compounded by the relative complexity of our shop operations compared with other retailers.
We offer attractive remuneration and benefit packages to reward our teams along with training and development opportunities.
We carry out an annual opinion survey to ensure high levels of employee engagement.
We are working to streamline our shop processes and simplify operations for our teams.
As part of our business change programme we are investing in improved recruitment processes.
New
Impact
In addition to the risks relating to the economy and resources highlighted above there is uncertainty regarding the possibility of changes to trading arrangements customs agreement tariffs etc.
This may give rise to increased costs.
Developments continue to be monitored with regular review by our Operating Board.
Contingency arrangements are being considered.
New
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES 37 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Description Key mitigations Change Links to strategy Loss of production As we move towards more centralised production and national distribution any interruption to production may have a significant impact on our customers.
All of our supply sites have contingency plans in place.
We simulate scenarios and test our recovery processes periodically.
We have identified alternative supply sources for key ingredients and products.
Our property insurers conduct annual site inspections helping us to protect our facilities.
No change Product quality and safety Due to our verticallyintegrated structure and the fact that we freshly prepare food every day in our retail premises we may have a greater exposure to food safety risk than many of our competitors.
Procedures are in place throughout our supply sites and shops to ensure that food safety is maintained.
Compliance is monitored both internally and by regulatory bodies.
No change Food scare We may suffer a loss of trade due to customer confidence being impacted by an external food scare beyond our control.
Most of the products on sale in our shops are made by our staff in our bakeries.
Routine checks are carried out to confirm the integrity of our products and ingredients.
No change
Changing customer habits such as the increasing popularity of online shopping impact on our ability to attract footfall into our shops.
We are progressively diversifying the market segments in which we trade reducing the reliance on shoppers.
This includes opening shops in travel and workplace locations as well as developing our food offer to match the needs of customers outside of general shopping hours.
No change
We continue to implement our strategy of transformation into a foodonthego retailer requiring restructuring capital investment and new systems implementation.
Expected timelines or savings may not be met and there may be disruption to our customers.
We phase our change activity to avoid affecting the Company as a whole wherever possible.
Timelines and forecasts are clearly defined and agreed.
Progress against these is reported on a regular basis to our Operating Board.
No change Cyber and data security As with all businesses our data and systems are exposed to external threats such as hackers or viruses.
These could lead to data breaches or disruption to our operation.
The new General Data Protection Regulation GDPR provides a rigorous control framework with severe penalties for noncompliance.
We actively monitor our networks and systems including conducting regular penetration testing.
Our approach to information security is closely monitored by the Board.
We are working to ensure compliance with the GDPR requirements including data mapping policy development and staff training.
No change
As customers become more concerned about nutrition health and the provenance of food our traditional products may be perceived as less attractive.
The publication of the Governments 25 year Environmental Strategy and growing concern over the environment may give rise to the introduction of additional levies and taxes.
We continue to work on improving the nutrition of our traditional products including a commitment to reduce sugar in line with the Governments Childhood Obesity Strategy.
Our Balanced Choice range provides healthier options and is growing well.
We are working hard to reduce our impact on the environment including reviewing our packaging designs introducing a reusable hot drinks cup and continuing to reduce our carbon intensity.
No change
Following the implementation of new Sentencing Council guidelines large financial penalties could be imposed on the business for breaches of Food Safety or Health and Safety legislation.
Due to the number of stores we operate and the volume of customer transactions we handle on a daily basis we may be exposed to isolated incidents which fall below our expected standards and may expose us to prosecution.
We have a system of controls and monitoring in place and our teams are provided with extensive training on safe processes and procedures.
Our audit processes confirm whether proper procedures are being followed.
New
Economic climate Increased uncertainty about the economy and the outcome of Brexit impacts on consumer confidence.
Wider economic uncertainty and job insecurity may cause consumers to be more cautious with their discretionary spending.
As a leading value brand we take steps to control our costs whilst maintaining the quality of our customer offer.
We closely monitor our competitiveness and are focused on remaining great value for money.
New
Management of third party relationships As our reliance on third parties for services ingredients or business support increases we become more exposed to their business interruption risks.
This could impact on our ability to produce distribute or sell our products.
Our own contingency arrangements consider the implications of key systems or ingredients being unavailable.
All third parties are vetted prior to us engaging with them.
Key supplier relationships are managed by our central procurement team.
New
Ability to attractretain motivate people Market forces and particularly the impact of Brexit may result in a shortage of available workforce.
This may be compounded by the relative complexity of our shop operations compared with other retailers.
We offer attractive remuneration and benefit packages to reward our teams along with training and development opportunities.
We carry out an annual opinion survey to ensure high levels of employee engagement.
We are working to streamline our shop processes and simplify operations for our teams.
As part of our business change programme we are investing in improved recruitment processes.
New
Impact
In addition to the risks relating to the economy and resources highlighted above there is uncertainty regarding the possibility of changes to trading arrangements customs agreement tariffs etc.
This may give rise to increased costs.
Developments continue to be monitored with regular review by our Operating Board.
Contingency arrangements are being considered.
New 38 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Ian Durant
Roger Whiteside Chief Executive Richard Hutton FCA Finance Director Allison Kirkby NonExecutive Director
Ian has a background in international finance and commercial management with experience in the retail property hotels and transport sectors.
His career includes leadership roles with the retail division of Hanson and Jardine Matheson HongKong Land Dairy Farm International Thistle Hotels and SeaContainers and as Finance Director of Liberty International.
Roger began his career at Marks and Spencer where he spent 20 years ultimately becoming head of its food business.
He was then one of the founding team of Ocado serving as Joint MD from 2000 to 2004.
From
2004 to 2007 Roger led a successful turnaround as Chief Executive of the Thresher Group offlicence chain before joining Punch Taverns ultimately becoming Chief Executive.
Roger was appointed as Chief Executive of Greggs on 4 February 2013.
Richard qualified as a Chartered Accountant with KPMG and gained career experience with Procter and Gamble before joining Greggs in 1998.
He held a number of roles within the Companys finance function before joining the Board as Finance Director in 2006.
Allison is currently President and CEO of Tele 2 a major European telecoms company.
Prior to Tele 2 where she joined as CFO Allison spent two decades in the FMCG sector at Procter and Gamble in a variety of senior financial and operational roles before moving to the TMT sector first at Virgin Media and then as Group CFO at Shine a division of 21st Century Fox.
Allison is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants.
Appointed since 5 October 2011 17 March 2008 NonExecutive Director until 3 February 2013 13 March 2006 30 January 2013
Yes Not applicable Not applicable Yes External appointments Chairman of Capital and Counties
Chairman of DFS Furniture plc.
Member of the Womens Business Council.
NonExecutive Director of Card Factory plc.
Trustee of Greggs Foundation.
Trustee Director of Business in the
Trustee of The Alnwick Garden Trust.
Director of Secure Value Consulting
Board member of Reach for Change.
Committee membership Chair of Nominations Committee Not applicable Not applicable Chair of Audit Committee Remuneration and Nominations Committee member Board diversity Our Board brings a balance of relevant backgrounds and gender to their discussions.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND SECRETARY 39 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Helena Ganczakowski NonExecutive Director Peter McPhillips NonExecutive Director Sandra Turner NonExecutive and Senior Independent Director Jonathan Jowett Company Secretary and General Counsel
Helena worked for Unilever for 23 years and held senior positions in brand management and marketing including UK Marketing Director and ultimately Head of Global Agencies.
Helena has a PhD in Engineering from the University of Cambridge.
Peter spent most of his executive career in food manufacturing having held a number of executive positions including Divisional Managing Director of Hillsdown Holdings Director of Terranova the chilled foods business demerged from Hillsdown Holdings and ultimately as UK Managing Director of Uniq plc.
More recently Peter was European Chairman of Hain Celestial Group.
Sandra has been involved in the retail sector throughout her career and was employed by Tesco PLC latterly as Commercial Director for Tesco Ireland from 1987 to 2009.
Prior to this she worked in sales and marketing roles for Unilever and Wilkinson Sword.
Jonathan is a lawyer by profession and has held the position of Company Secretary for a number of FTSE 250 and FTSE SmallCap companies.
His previous employers include Avon Cosmetics Limited SSL International plc Wagon plc and Bakkavor Group.
Appointed since 2 January 2014 10 March 2014 1 May 2014 12 May 2010
Yes Yes Yes Not applicable External appointments NonExecutive Director of Croda International Plc and also owner manager of consulting business working with companies ranging from startup businesses to FTSE 100 constituents helping them to develop and implement strategies.
NonExecutive Director of Browns Food Group.
NonExecutive Director of Jacksons Bakery Limited.
NonExecutive Director of Carpetright plc McBride plc and Huhtmaki OYJ.
Member of the British Retail Consortium Policy Board Chair of the Trustees of the Percy Hedley Foundation.
NonExecutive Director of Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.
Committee membership Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committee member Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committee member Chair of Remuneration Committee Audit and Nominations Committee member Secretary to the Board and all its Committees M F Board diversity by gender Board diversity by tenure years
36 years 7 years Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear Shareholder I am pleased to introduce our governance report which follows on pages 41 to 47.
In 2017 the executive team undertook an extensive consultation exercise to explain to our people in more detail what impact our 100 million investment in our supply chain could have on their working lives.
This included shift changes new contractual terms in some instances different and reduced product ranges as we move to create centres of excellence and regrettably some job losses by reason of redundancy as we come to the end of our programme in 2019.
GOVERNANCE REPORT  CHAIRMANS INTRODUCTION
We have enjoyed a period of stability on the Board Following our Board evaluation at the beginning of the year and in anticipation of the planned consultation we decided that we would take the opportunity to find new ways of engaging with our people and listening to their views during a time of significant change.
As a first step in the Autumn Peter McPhillips and I attended a meeting with the Greggs Negotiating Committee which is made up of elected union officials from supply chain and retail.
Having explained our role as NonExecutive Directors we were asked questions about Board decisionmaking and the application of Greggs values the independence of NonExecutive Directors and potential conflicts of interest and the importance of ensuring that the impact of decisions on peoples lives is always given proper consideration.
As part of our Board deliberations we always apply the Companys values in making strategic decisions whilst recognising the necessity for judgement calls to protect our competitiveness and future growth.
At a time when the Government is consulting on changes to the Corporate Governance Code our experience is that there is great value to be had from ensuring that people most affected by Board decisions have the opportunity to make their views known directly to NonExecutive Directors.
The corporate governance statement together with the reports of the Audit and Remuneration Committees on pages 48 to 69 explain how our governance framework operates and how we oversee both the performance of the Company and also the general understanding and application of the values for which Greggs is known.
Leadership and culture are central to this supported by the programme to improve systems and processes together with regular discussion regarding risks and risk management.
The
Board is accountable to shareholders for governance and I have continued to meet with some of our largest shareholders.
In 2017 I was accompanied by Helena Ganczakowski at those sessions ensuring that our shareholders have access to a broader range of our NonExecutive Directors.
All of our Directors will be seeking reelection at our AGM to be held on 9 May 2018.
We have enjoyed a period of stability on the Board and this reflects the continued enthusiasm of a highperforming management team working well with NonExecutive Directors who bring a balance of relevant backgrounds and gender to Board discussions.
We were delighted to have been recognised in the HamptonAlexander Review published in November 2017 as a top ten FTSE 250 Company for Women on Boards and in Leadership.
I look forward to welcoming as many shareholders as possible to our AGM.
Ian Durant
27 February 2018 41 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report The Company is subject to the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
The edition of the Code issued in April 2016 applied throughout the 2017 financial year.
This governance report together with information contained elsewhere within the Directors report describes how the relevant principles and provisions of the Governance Code were applied in 2017 and will be relevant to the Company for the 2018 financial year.
The Company has been a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index throughout 2017 and maintains a Premium listing on the London Stock Exchange.
The Board confirms that it was compliant with the Governance Code throughout the year and all of the policies and terms of reference referred to in this report are available on the corporate website at httpcorporate.
The Board
The Chairman chairs the Nominations Committee whose primary function is to consider the blend of skills and experience that the Directors bring to the Board.
This includes independent and objective experience of food retailing and manufacturing finance marketing property and corporate finance to complement the existing skills and experience of the Executive Directors.
The Board meets regularly to discharge its duties.
At these meetings it reviews strategy financial performance against key indicators resources risk management and other matters reserved for the Board.
Whilst executive responsibility for running the Companys business rests ultimately with the Chief Executive the NonExecutive Directors ensure that the strategies proposed by the Chief Executive are fully discussed and critically examined prior to adoption.
During the year the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors individually undertook a number of visits and meetings as part of the daytoday running of the business in order to ensure that they were sufficiently wellversed in operations to facilitate strong support and challenge.
Such visits included meetings with key suppliers production centre visits and getting out into our own shops and those of our competitors accompanied by members of the Operating Board and senior management.
Additionally the Board met in Northern Ireland during the year and was able to experience first hand the directlyrun and franchised shops that have been operating since we first entered the province in 2016.
The Board schedules six meetings per year and meets on an ad hoc basis as required.
Attendance at scheduled meetings held during the year is recorded in the table below where the number of meetings actually attended are shown with the number of meetings that the individual could have attended.
Meeting attendance Main Board
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Number of meetings held Ian Durant Roger Whiteside Richard Hutton Helena Ganczakowski Allison Kirkby Peter McPhillips Sandra Turner Raymond Reynolds Did you know We were recognised in the
Review published in November 2017 as a top ten FTSE 250 company for women on Boards and in Leadership.
Raymond Reynolds stepped down from the Board following the AGM in May 2017.
GOVERNANCE REPORT 42 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED All Directors are invited to attend the Audit Committee and the Chief Executive attends the Remuneration and Nomination
The business conducted at Committee meetings is reported by the respective Chair at subsequent Board meetings.
In addition the NonExecutive Directors meet formally twice each year and from time to time as required.
Board modus operandi The Board has a policy on the separation of the roles of the Chairman and the Chief Executive.
The Chairman sets the agenda for Board meetings in accordance with a specific Schedule of Matters Reserved policy which is reviewed and approved annually and ensures that the Board is supplied in a timely manner with information in a form and of a quality appropriate to enable it to discharge its duties.
The Board considers that it effectively leads and controls the Company.
All Directors take decisions objectively and in the interests of the Company.
The NonExecutive Directors scrutinise the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives and monitor the reporting of performance.
All Directors receive induction training on joining the Board and regularly update and refresh their knowledge through reading attendance on relevant courses andor activities outside the Company.
In a change from previous practice and following Raymond Reynolds stepping down from the Board it was agreed that additional operating information would be made available to NonExecutive Directors in the expectation that this would add further colour to the debate and discussion at Board meetings.
Consequently Board papers now include a summary of activity by each Operating Board director together with a fuller and more detailed report attached should NonExecutive Directors wish to explore further any matter being reported.
Members of the Operating Board are invited to attend Board meetings on a rolling rota in order to participate in the Boards discussion on business performance and key issues.
This process also affords senior managers the opportunity to bring matters to the attention of the Board.
During the year the Board received regular updates including Developments on the two main strategic projects being the implementation of SAP  and the 100 million investment in our supply chain.
Business performance in Northern Ireland.
The implications of Brexit.
The Gender Pay Gap report.
Sentencing Council guidelines in relation to regulatory convictions.
Customer insight competitor activity marketing and category plans.
Wage negotiations and people issues.
Food safety and health and safety.
The Board sets itself a Rolling Agenda which facilitates agenda planning for scheduled meetings across the year.
In this way the Board monitors its activities and ensures that it is operating effectively.
Diversity
The Board believes it is in the best interests of the Company to bring more women through to the top levels of the organisation and as a result of this belief a programme launched in 2012 to encourage women to strive for the most senior positions in the business.
Our
The progress that the Board has made in its diversity policy was recognised by the HamptonAlexander Review published in November 2017 when we were recognised as a top ten FTSE 250 Company for Women on Boards and in Leadership.
Succession and development The Board is satisfied that a process is in place for orderly succession to the Board and to positions of senior management so as to maintain an appropriate balance of skills and experience within the Company and on the Board.
The Chief Executive meets with the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors on a regular basis in order that succession and development plans can be drawn up for Executive Directors and members of the Operating Board.
All Directors are able to receive training and to take independent professional advice at the expense of the Company.
They also have direct access to the Company Secretary who is responsible for advising the Board on all governance matters.
Evaluation
The performance of the Board its Committees and of all Directors is evaluated annually by a formal and rigorous process.
Later in 2018 the Board will be conducting its second externallyfacilitated evaluation.
In anticipation of this more detailed review for 2017 the Board conducted its own evaluation which consisted of a questionbased review which resulted in a series of themes that were debated at a Board meeting.
The emerging themes included a review of our risk disclosures looking forward on Board Succession planning harvesting best practice from NonExecutive Director experience on other boards and considering how to engage better with stakeholders in meeting Companies Act S172 obligations.
Consequently it was agreed that specific actions should include a NonExecutive Director attending a Risk Committee meeting and the creation of a stakeholder engagement data map for subsequent review by the Board.
As a key part of the ongoing evaluation process the Chairman also meets with the NonExecutive Directors at least annually without the Executive Directors present and also has onetoone sessions with every member of the Board.
The Senior Independent Director meets the NonExecutive Directors annually without the Chairman present to appraise the Chairmans performance.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Election and reelection of Directors The Board has resolved that in line with Governance Code provision B.7.1 all Directors will be subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
Following recommendation by the Nominations Committee all of the NonExecutive Directors who will offer themselves for reelection at the Annual General Meeting are considered by the Board to be independent in character and judgement and to be free from any business or other relationship or circumstance which is likely to affect or to interfere with the exercise of their independent judgement.
The NonExecutive Directors chaired by the Senior Independent Director have also specifically considered the Chairmans commitment to the Company in light of his Chairmanships of two other FTSE 250 Companies.
The NonExecutive Directors had noted that the Chairman had stepped down from the Boards of two other FTSE 250 companies in September 2016.
The review included an assessment of his ongoing engagement with the business evidenced by his numerous shop manufacturing and distribution centre visits and meeting with the Greggs Negotiating Committee see page 40 his one off meetings with members of the Operating Board and his ongoing dialogue with exemployees key stakeholders industry experts and facetoface meetings with shareholders.
The NonExecutive Directors also considered the potential risk and mitigants of the Chairman not being available to the Greggs Board in a situation which might demand more of his time and attention.
The conclusion drawn was that the Chairman evidences a very high level of commitment to Greggs plc which is not affected by his roles with other companies and the NonExecutive Directors would encourage all shareholders to support his reappointment as Chairman.
Board Committees The Board delegates some of its activities to the following committees each of which has written terms of reference which are available on the Companys website.
The Company Secretary acts as secretary to and is generally in attendance at each of these committees and each of the committees is provided with sufficient resources to undertake its duties.
The Audit Committee currently consists of four independent NonExecutive Directors Allison Kirkby Chair Helena Ganczakowski Peter McPhillips and Sandra Turner.
The Committee met four times in the year and a fuller report on its activities is set out on pages The Remuneration Committee currently consists of four independent NonExecutive Directors Sandra Turner Chair Helena Ganczakowski Allison Kirkby and Peter McPhillips.
The Committees main duties which it discharged during the year are detailed within the Directors remuneration report which is set out on pages 54 to 69 of this annual report.
Shareholders approved the current Remuneration Policy at the AGM held on 19 May 2017 and this is included on pages 56 and 57 for the sake of expediency.
The Chairmans fees are reviewed annually and set by the Executive Directors following the general policy of everyone in the Company receiving the same basic level of pay award.
The Nominations Committee currently comprises Ian Durant Chairman and all of the NonExecutive Directors.
The Committees main functions which it discharged during the year are to review the balance and constitution of the Board to advise the Board as to whether Directors should be nominated for reelection by the members and to approve and manage the process for setting the specification for all Board appointments identifying candidates who meet that specification and making recommendations to the Board on the basis of merit and compliance with objective criteria in respect of all new Board appointments.
In recruiting additional Directors the Nominations Committee defines the role and uses external consultants to assist in identifying suitable candidates from which the Committee selects a short list and conducts interviews.
The final candidate is then subject to formal recommendation by the Committee and approval by the Board.
The Nominations Committee did not seek external consultancy support during 2017.
Following appointment new Directors are subject to an indepth tailored induction process.
In the case of NonExecutive Directors this includes meeting with members of the Operating Board visiting bakeries shops and offices and being provided with an extensive Board Handbook which contains key information and policies that are relevant to the position.
For new Executive Directors and NonExecutive Directors for whom the appointment is their first to a UKlisted company the induction includes details of the legal duties and obligations of being a Director of the Company.
New NonExecutive Directors are also encouraged to provide formal feedback of their first months on the Greggs Board during a Board meeting.
Risk management
Details of the Companys principal risks and the management of them are set out within the Strategic Report and given on pages 33 to 37 .
The Board confirms that it has reviewed the effectiveness of the system of internal control covering all material controls including financial operational compliance and risk management systems during the year under review and up to the date of approval of the annual report and accounts.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Relations with shareholders The Board ensures that there is effective communication with individual and institutional shareholders through the announcement of regular trading updates as well as general presentations after announcement of the interim and preliminary results and the posting of results on the Companys website.
The Board receives reports on any comments received from shareholders and market analysts following these presentations.
The Chief Executive and the Finance Director carry out extensive engagement with institutional shareholders and market analysts either meeting them as part of Company presentations and briefings individual meetings or on telephone calls.
During the year the Chairman met with two institutional shareholders with significant shareholdings Standard Life Aberdeen plc and MFS Investment Management currently the largest shareholder.
On both occasions the Chairman was accompanied by Helena
The Chairman adopts an ongoing policy of arranging to meet with major shareholders and the NonExecutive Directors are encouraged to attend meetings and events which provide them with the opportunity to engage generally with the investment community.
During the last quarter of 2016 the Remuneration Committee chair had engaged with institutional shareholders representing over 50 per cent of the issued share capital as part of the consultation on the proposed Remuneration Policy which was put to shareholders at the AGM in May 2017.
Following that engagement the Board was pleased to receive the support of 94% of voting shareholders for the revised Remuneration Policy.
The Company Secretary and the Companys Brokers draw the attention of the Board to all relevant shareholder communications.
The
Board also reviews briefings and comments by analysts and shareholders in order to maintain an understanding of market perceptions of the Company.
The Board reviews at each meeting an analysis of the share register noting all significant changes.
The Annual General Meeting AGM is well attended and a short presentation of business performance is given to attendees by the Chief Executive although no nonpublic sensitive information is shared.
The Chairman and the Chairs of the Board Committees are available to answer any issues raised and any newlyappointed Directors being available to meet shareholders.
During informal sessions both before and after the meeting the Chairman and all Directors are available to meet with any of the 60 or so individual private shareholders who are in attendance.
This is in addition to the opportunity given to shareholders to ask questions of the Board during the formal meeting which session is always welcomed by those in attendance.
In 2017 information stalls were set up at the entrance to the meeting informing shareholders of the Companys progress on key social responsibility topics.
At each AGM the balance of proxy votes cast for and against each resolution and the number of abstentions is displayed.
All substantial issues including the receipt of the annual report and accounts are proposed at the AGM as separate resolutions.
All resolutions were strongly supported by shareholders and were determined by poll in accordance with best practice.
The Senior Independent Director is available to shareholders if they have concerns which they have not been able to resolve through the normal channels of the Chairman Chief Executive or Finance Director or for circumstances where such contact would not be appropriate.
The Company provides on its website site a significant amount of information both about its customer offerings in the bakery foodonthego market as well as detailed information on the governance arrangements.
Substantial shareholdings At 27 February 2018 the only notified holdings of substantial voting rights in respect of the issued share capital of the Company which may have altered since the date of such notification without any requirement for the Company to have been informed were Number of shares held
MFS Investment Management 5314697 5.25% Standard Life Aberdeen plc 5036488 4.98% BlackRock Inc.
Accountability audit and going concern The Board acknowledges its responsibility to present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and prospects.
In order to assist the Board to comply with the requirements within the Governance Code the Audit Committee was requested to undertake an assessment of the annual report and to make a recommendation to the Board.
This request has been enshrined within the Audit Committees terms of reference which are available at corporate.
The actions undertaken by the Audit Committee in confirming its advice to the Board included the consideration of a detailed review that has been undertaken by the Head of Business Assurance and reviewing the annual report as a whole to confirm that it presents a fair balanced and understandable assessment.
In considering the advice of the Audit Committee and having reviewed the annual report including the contents of the strategic report on pages 03 to 37 together with the statutory accounts themselves the Board duly considers the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED 45 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report A statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the preparation of accounts is given on page 70.
A statement of auditors responsibilities is given in the report of the auditor on page 75.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the accounts see basis of preparation on page 81.
The Boards viability statement made in accordance with Code provision C.2.2 can be found on page 35.
Policies
Freedom of association At Greggs we recognise the right of all employees to freedom of association and collective bargaining.
Whilst we do not have a formal Freedom of Association policy the Company encourages all its employees in bakeries shops and offices to become and remain members of a union.
Bribery and corruption Greggs has an AntiBribery and Corruption policy which applies to all employees and prohibits the offering giving seeking or acceptance of any bribe in any form to any person or company by acting on its behalf in order to gain an advantage in an unethical way.
Business conduct We have a specific policy that sets out the standards of ethical behaviour that are expected of all employees.
All graded managers and members of the procurement department are required to make an annual confirmation of their compliance with the policy.
Whistleblowing
Our whistleblowing policy creates an environment where employees are able to raise concerns without fears of disciplinary action being taken against them as a result of any disclosure.
Any matters raised are treated in confidence and an independent review will be undertaken where it is appropriate.
The Chair of the Audit Committee is the designated first point of contact for any concerns which cannot be addressed through normal management processes.
Political donations Greggs has a clear policy forbidding political donations or contributions.
This includes financial and inkind contributions made by the Company.
Disclosure of information to the auditor Each of the Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors report confirms that so far as they are individually aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and that they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT Directors and their interests The names of the Directors in office during the year together with their relevant interests in the share capital of the Company at 1 January 2017 and 30 December 2017 are set out in the Directors remuneration report on page 68.
Details of the Directors share options are also set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 66 and 67.
In accordance with provision B.7.1 of the Governance Code all Directors will retire from the Board at the AGM.
Mr.
Raymond
Reynolds stepped down from the Board following the AGM held on 19 May 2017 although he remains a member of the Operating Board.
The Nominations Committee has considered the appropriateness and suitability of each Director standing for election and has recommended to the Board that each individual should be put forward for reelection.
Directors indemnities and conflicts As at the date of this report indemnities are in force under which the Company has agreed to indemnify the Directors to the extent permitted by law in respect of losses arising out of or in connection with the execution of their duties powers or responsibilities as Directors of the Company.
The indemnities do not apply in situations where the relevant Director has been guilty of fraud or wilful misconduct.
Under the authority granted to it in the Companys articles of association the Board has considered carefully any situation declared by any Director pursuant to which they have or might have a conflict of interest and where it considers it appropriate to do so has authorised the continuation of that situation.
In exercising its authority the Directors have had regard to their statutory and other duties to the Company.
Additional information The information set out within the governance report on pages 41 to 45 forms part of the Directors report.
Greenhouse Gas emissions All disclosures concerning the Groups greenhouse gas emissions as required to be disclosed under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 are contained in the nonfinancial KPIs on page 32.
Authority to purchase shares At the AGM on 19 May 2017 the shareholders passed a resolution authorising the purchase by the Company of its own shares to a maximum of 10350000 ordinary shares of 2 pence each.
That authority had not been used as at 30 December 2017.
The authority remains in force until the conclusion of the AGM in 2018 or 8 August 2018 whichever is the earlier.
It is the Boards intention to seek approval at the 2018 AGM for the renewal of this authority.
Takeover directive information Following the implementation of the European Directive on Takeover Bids by certain provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is required to disclose certain additional information in the Directors report.
This information is set out below The Company has one class of share in issue being ordinary shares of 2 pence each.
As at 27 February 2018 there were 101155901 such ordinary shares in issue.
There are no shares in the Company that grant the holder special rights with regard to the control of the Company At general meetings of the Company on a show of hands every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote only and in the case of a poll every shareholder present in person or by proxy has one vote for every share in the capital of the Company held by him or her The Companys articles of association set out the circumstances in which shares may become disenfranchised.
No shareholder is entitled unless the Directors otherwise determine in respect of any share held by him or her to be present or vote at a general meeting either personally or by proxy or to exercise any other right in relation to meetings of the Company in respect of that share in certain circumstances if any call or other sum is payable and remains unpaid if the shareholder is in default in complying with a duly served notice under section  of the CA 2006 or if any shareholder has failed to reply to a duly served notice requiring him or her to provide a written statement stating he or she is the beneficial owner of the shares A notice convening a general meeting can contain a statement that a shareholder is not entitled to attend and vote at a general meeting unless his or her name is entered on the register of members of the Company at a specific time not more than 48 hours before the meeting and if a shareholders name is not so entered he or she is not entitled to attend and vote 47 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Under the Companys articles of association the Directors may in their absolute discretion refuse to register the transfer of a share in certified form in certain circumstances where the Company has a lien on the share provided that the Directors do not exercise their discretion so as to prevent dealings in partly paid shares from taking place on an open and proper basis where a shareholder has failed to reply to a duly served notice under section  CA 2006 or if a transfer of a share is in favour of more than four persons jointly.
In addition the Directors may decline to recognise any instrument of transfer unless it is in respect of only one class of share and is deposited at the address at which the register of members of the Company is held or at such other place as the Directors may determine accompanied by the relevant share certificates and such other evidence as the Directors may reasonable require to show the right of the transferor to make the transfer.
In respect of shares held in uncertificated form the Directors may only refuse to register transfers in accordance with the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001 as amended from time to time Under the Companys code on dealings in securities in the Company persons discharging managerial responsibilities and some other senior executives may in certain circumstances be restricted as to when they can transfer shares in the Company There are no agreements between shareholders known to the Company which may result in restrictions on the transfer of shares or on voting rights Details of significant holders of the Company shares are set out on page 44 Where under an employee share plan operated by the Company participants are the beneficial owners of shares but not the registered owner the voting rights are normally exercised by the registered owner at the direction of the participant The Companys articles of association may only be amended by special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders The Companys articles of association set out how Directors are appointed and replaced.
Directors can be appointed by the Board or by the shareholders in a general meeting.
At each Annual General Meeting any Director appointed by the Board since the last Annual General Meeting must retire from office but is eligible for election by the shareholders.
Furthermore the Board has resolved that in line with Governance Code provision B.7.1 all the Directors will be subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
Under the CA 2006 and the Companys articles of association a Director can be removed from office by the shareholders in a general meeting The Companys articles of association set out the powers of the Directors.
The business of the Company is to be managed by the Directors who may exercise all the powers of the Company and do on behalf of the Company all such acts as may be exercised and done by the Company and are not by any relevant statutes or the Companys articles of association required to be exercised or done by the Company in general meeting subject to the provisions of any relevant statutes and the Companys articles of association and to such regulations as may be prescribed by the Company by special resolution Under the CA 2006 and the Companys articles of association the Directors powers include the power to allot and buyback shares in the Company.
At each Annual General Meeting resolutions are proposed granting and setting limits on these powers The Company is not party to any significant agreements which take effect alter or terminate upon a change in control of the Company following a takeover bid and There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees providing for compensation for loss of office or employment whether through resignation purported redundancy or otherwise that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Details of the Directors service agreements and terms of appointment are set out in the Directors remuneration report on pages 54 to 69.
However provisions in the employee share plans operated by the Company may allow options to be exercised on a takeover.
Employees
Applications for employment of disabled persons are always fully considered bearing in mind the aptitudes of the applicant concerned.
In the event of members of staff being disabled every effort is made to ensure that their employment within the Company continues and that appropriate training is arranged.
It is the policy of the Company that the training career development and promotion of disabled people should as far as possible be identical to that of other employees.
The Directors recognise the importance of good communications and good relations with employees.
A weekly bulletin is sent to all shop staff and quarterly bulletin to all bakery employees.
Significant relationships The Group does not have any contractual or other relationships with any single party which are essential to the business of the Group and therefore no such relationships have been disclosed.
By order of the Board Jonathan D Jowett Company Secretary Greggs plc CRN 27 February 2018 Greggs House Quorum Business Park Benton Lane Newcastle upon Tyne NE12 8BU 48 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT
I am pleased to introduce the report of the Audit Committee for 2017.
The Committee plays an important part in the governance of the Company with its principal activities focused on the integrity of financial reporting quality and effectiveness of internal and external audit risk management and the system of internal control.
I have set out below the main matters considered by the Committee during the year and the conclusions drawn.
We meet formally at key times within our reporting calendar and the agendas for our meetings are designed to cover all significant areas of risk over the course of the year and to provide oversight and challenge to the key financial judgements controls and processes that operate within the Company.
The Committee continues to keep its activities under review in the light of regulatory developments and the emergence of best practice.
Key topics for consideration in 2018 will be the Companys ongoing supply chain investment programme and the associated exceptional charges together with the new General Data Protection Regulation which comes into effect during the year.
Cyber security matters continue to be a priority for the Committee as do the Companys preparations for the implementation of IFRS 16 Leasing at the start of 2019.
Overall I am satisfied that the activities of the Committee enable it to gain a good understanding of the key matters impacting the Company during the year along with oversight of the governance and operation of its key controls and ultimately to draw the conclusions set out in the report below.
Allison Kirkby Chair of the Audit Committee 27 February 2018 The Committee plays an important part in the governance of the Company 49 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report
The Audit Committee is comprised of the following Allison Kirkby Chair Helena Ganczakowski Peter McPhillips Sandra Turner It is the practice of the Company for all independent NonExecutive Directors to serve as members of the Audit Committee.
There have been no changes in the composition of the Committee during 2017.
Training is provided for any new members of the Audit Committee by way of a thorough induction process which includes access to the external auditor the Head of Business Assurance and relevant members of management.
The Directors biographies on pages 38 and 39 detail the Committee members previous experience and demonstrate that they have experience individually in a range of disciplines relevant to Greggs business.
The Board considers that Allison Kirkby has recent and relevant financial experience.
Role and responsibilities The Terms of Reference of the Committee can be accessed at httpcorporate. iteinvestorcentrecorporategovernancecompanydocuments.
The key responsibilities of the Audit Committee are ensuring that the accounting and financial policies of the Company are proper and effective assisting the Board in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities by monitoring the integrity of the accounts and information published by the Company and reviewing significant financial judgements contained in them advising the Board on whether it believes the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy reviewing the internal financial controls and the Groups approach to risk management oversight of whistleblowing arrangements monitoring compliance with the Listing Rules and the recommendations of the Governance Code oversight of the Companys external and internal auditors and reviewing the effectiveness and objectivity of the audit process and reporting to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities.
Meetings during the year The Audit Committee met four times during the year.
Details of Committee members attendance is given on page 41.
The Committee normally invites the Company Chairman the Executive Directors the Head of Business Assurance and the external auditor to attend its meetings.
Time is set aside biannually for discussion with the external auditor and with the Head of Business Assurance in each case in the absence of all Executive Directors.
The Committee also has access to the Companys management team and to its auditor and can seek further professional advice at the Companys cost if required.
The Chair has regular contact with the Finance Director and internal and external auditors in addition to scheduled Committee meetings to ensure that emerging issues are addressed.
She also has access to and in 2017 made contact several times with an audit partner independent of the partner responsible for the audit.
Financial reporting In 2017 the Audit Committee reviewed the 2016 annual report interim results preliminary results announcement and reports from the external auditor on the outcome of their reviews and audits.
During the year and up to the date of this report the Committee considered key accounting issues and judgements and related disclosures in the Groups accounts.
The significant areas of judgement considered by the Committee in relation to the accounts for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 are as follows 50 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED Area of focus Action taken Understanding and treatment of exceptional items The accounts include exceptional items in the current year.
Costs of 9862000 were incurred in 2017 2016 5177000 relating to the restructuring of supply chain operations.
7458000 of this is in respect of redundancy costs 2016 3961000 with the balance relating to assetrelated costs and other contractual obligations.
Assetrelated costs comprise acceleration of depreciation for assets with an expected reduction in useful life as a result of the restructuring and the cost of disposing of assets which are no longer required.
The Committee considered the accounting requirements of IAS1 relating to the separate disclosure of material items of income or expense together with the FRCs guidance on the subject with reference to the costs arising from the decision announced in March 2016 to invest in and reshape the Companys supply chain in order to support future growth.
The Committee ensured that consistent principles were established and agreed with the external auditor early in the process and that reporting was suitably clear.
The
Committee gave careful consideration to the judgements made in the separate disclosure of nonunderlying items both in respect of events occurring in 2017 and also changes in circumstance in respect of provisions relating to events from prior years ensuring that the annual report as a whole presents a balanced view including the presentation of GAAP and nonGAAP measures.
It concluded that separate disclosure should be made of items of expenditure incurred in 2017 related to the supply chain investment programme.
Dilapidations
Dilapidation provisions have been made based on the future expected repair costs required to restore the Groups leased buildings to their fair condition at the end of their respective lease terms where it is considered a reliable estimate can be made.
The balance held in respect of dilapidation provisions at the end of the year was 2956000 2016 3243000.
The Committee reviewed managements assessment of the need for dilapidation provisions together with the movement in the provision during the year and concluded that the principles applied were appropriate.
Accounting for defined benefit pension schemes The determination of the defined benefit obligation depends on the selection of certain assumptions including the discount rate inflation rates and mortality rates.
There was a change in one of the assumptions used during the year in order to more closely align them with those used by the scheme actuary when conducting the triennial valuation.
Allowance has now been made for the commutation of pensions by members on retirement based on the actual scheme experience.
The net liability held in relation to defined benefit pension schemes at the end of 2017 was 7506000 2016 22851000.
Pension scheme liabilities are assessed on behalf of the Company by independent actuaries.
The Committee assessed the underlying assumptions and concluded that they were appropriate and also discussed the appropriateness of the assumptions with the external auditor.
Fair balanced and understandable The Committee is responsible for advising the Board on whether it believes the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable.
The Committee received a report from the Head of Business Assurance who is not involved in the preparation of the annual report and accounts and who conducted an independent review of it.
The following factors were considered during the course of this review ensuring that all the statements are consistent with one another verifying that figures in the narrative sections are consistent with the relevant financial detail identifying any duplication of information ensuring that the disclosure of nonunderlying items is balanced confirming that bad news is included as well as good news and highlighting any inappropriate use of technical language or jargon.
The Audit Committee considered the feedback from this report alongside its own review of the annual report and accounts when making its recommendation to the Board regarding fair balanced and understandable.
Going concern The accounts continue to be prepared on a going concern basis.
Information provided by the Finance Director regarding future financial plans risks and liquidity is presented to the Committee to enable it to determine whether the going concern basis of accounting remained appropriate.
The Committee reviewed and challenged the assumptions used and concluded that the Board is able to make the going concern statement on page 45 of the Directors report.
Viability
Revisions to the UK Corporate Governance Code in 2015 introduced a new requirement for the Board to consider the period over which they are able to conclude that the Company will remain viable having taken into account severe but plausible risks and risk combinations.
On account of this being a relatively new requirement the Committee considered this to be a significant reporting matter.
The Committee reviewed the process undertaken by management to support and allow the Directors to assess the Groups longterm prospects and make its viability statement.
The Committee considered and provided input into the determination of which of the Groups principal risks and combinations thereof might have an impact on the Groups liquidity and solvency.
The Committee reviewed the results of managements scenario modelling and the stress testing of these models.
The
Committee reviewed and challenged the assumptions used and concluded that the Board is able to make the viability statement on page 35 of the strategic report.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report The Committee also considered other key accounting issues and related disclosures in the Groups accounts as follows whether any changes in accounting policy were required following changes in the business or in legislation whether the Companys tax policy remains appropriate the impact of changes in accounting standards and their relevance if any to the Company and reports from the Company Secretary and Finance Director which assess the Companys compliance with the Listing Rules.
Two areas which were previously considered to be significant  accounting for onerous leases and shop asset impairment  are no longer included above as the amounts provided have been utilised to such an extent that they are no longer material.
As a result the Committee does not consider the judgements required to be significant to the accounts.
External audit Assessing external audit effectiveness The Audit Committee discussed and agreed the scope of the audit with the external auditor and agreed their fees in respect of the audit.
The Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the external audit in line with the Financial Reporting Councils Practice aid for audit committees May 2015.
It considered the results of external quality inspections by the Audit Quality Inspection Team on other KPMG clients.
It sought feedback from senior management by way of a detailed questionnaire in respect of the effectiveness of the audit process with particular reference to audit planning and design and audit execution.
The Committee also considered the effectiveness of the audit through the reporting from and communications with the auditor and an assessment of the auditors approach to key areas of judgement and any errors identified during the course of the audit.
The Committee concluded that the audit was effective and that the relationship and effectiveness of the external auditor be kept under review.
Appointing the auditor and safeguards on nonaudit services KPMG has been the Companys auditor for more than 20 years and the transitional rules in the EU Directive require an initial change of audit firms no later than 2020.
Having reappointed KPMG in 2014 following a competitive tender the Committee expects to change audit firms in accordance with the requirements of the EU directive.
The Committee will continue to consider annually whether to conduct an audit tender for audit quality or independence reasons.
The current audit partner is Mick Thompson who has held the role since 2013.
He retires by rotation after the conclusion of the 2017 audit and will be replaced by Nick Plumb.
The Audit Committee confirms that the Company complies with the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory use of Competitive Tender Process and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014.
It is the responsibility of the Committee to monitor the independence and objectivity of the external auditor including the impact of any nonaudit work undertaken by it and its suitability for reappointment.
The Company has a formal policy to ensure that the provision of nonaudit services by the external auditor for nonaudit work does not compromise the auditors independence or objectivity.
It monitors the level and type of nonaudit fees on an annual basis and ensures that the overall level of nonaudit fees remains in line with current ethical guidance governing the accounting profession.
The Audit Committee favours a presumption that nonaudit work will be awarded to a firm other than the audit firm unless there is a good reason to use the auditor.
An annual base plan for nonaudit fees paid to the external auditor is agreed in advance by the Audit Committee.
Expenditure in accordance with this plan can then be committed without further referral to the Audit Committee.
Expenditure that is not included in the agreed plan is subject to strict authority limits and is reviewed by the Committee.
During
2017 in response to the implementation of the EC Audit Directive and Regulation in the UK new providers were appointed in respect of taxation services that had previously been provided by KPMG.
All use of the external auditor for nonaudit work must be reported to and approved by the Committee.
In circumstances where nonaudit fees are significant relative to the audit fee an explanation would be provided in the subsequent Audit Committee
In addition the Audit Committee ensures that the external auditor has its own policies and is subject to professional standards designed to safeguard their independence as auditor.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED The Audit Committee has reviewed whether and is satisfied that the Companys auditor KPMG LLP continues to be objective and independent of the Company.
KPMG LLP did perform nonaudit services during 2017 for the Group but the Audit Committee is satisfied that its objectivity was not impaired by such work.
In 2017 the charge to the income statement in respect of nonaudit fees paid to KPMG LLP and related KPMG operations amounted to 17000 which is 11 per cent of the audit fee for the year and related to audit of turnover statements required by shop landlords and pension scheme audits.
Reappointment of auditor In accordance with Section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG LLP will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
Risk management and internal control Internal control The Committee reviewed the Companys internal control environment to satisfy itself that procedures are in place to ensure that assets are well protected authority levels for expenditure are clear segregation of duties exists and performance is regularly monitored.
Processes are in place to ensure that key controls are being operated and compliance with these processes is the subject of inspection by the Internal Audit team and subsequent review by the Audit Committee.
Whistleblowing
The Companys whistleblowing policy is made available to all employees through the intranet as well as via posters displayed across the business.
This gives information regarding how to raise a concern in strict confidence.
Two reports were made during the year relating to inappropriate management behaviour and product theft.
Both events were reported directly to the Chair of the Audit Committee by telephone or email.
The case of low level theft related to our franchise operation and this was referred to the relevant franchise partner for action.
The issue concerning management behaviour was investigated internally and appropriate action taken by senior management to address the matter.
The outcome of both matters was reported to the Board during the year.
The Companys whistleblowing policy was last subject to a detailed review in 2016 and updated to align with best practice.
The Audit Committee is confident that it remains appropriate and fit for purpose.
Risk management process The Audit Committee undertakes a review of the risk management process in the Group at least annually as set out in its terms of reference.
The process is detailed on page 33 and has been reviewed by the Committee to confirm its appropriateness in light of the risks identified.
The key areas that the Committee has specifically considered are as follows Area of focus Action taken New and emerging risks The Audit Committee considers areas of new and emerging risk which have been identified by the business via the Risk Committee.
It assesses these for completeness and raises any other areas which it believes should be documented within the Companys risk register.
Cyber risk and information security The Companys approach to cyber risk and information security is considered at every Audit Committee meeting by receiving a regular update on activity.
During the year this has included consideration of the Companys preparation for the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR.
The Committee received a training session from the external auditor to enhance their understanding of the new requirements.
Business transformation The Committee has received reports on progress with the Companys transformation programme including supply chain investment and SAP implementation.
Review of principal risks and uncertainties The proposed disclosure of principal risks and uncertainties was prepared by the Risk Committee based on its discussions during the year.
The statement was then considered and approved by the Audit Committee.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Internal audit The work of the internal audit function is set out in more detail within the principal risks and uncertainties statement on pages 33 to 37 of this annual report.
The team is led by the Head of Business Assurance supported by the Risk Manager the Information Security and Compliance Manager and 14 auditors.
The majority of the audit team work across the retail estate to provide assurance over the Companys retail operations.
We have strengthened our resource allocated to information security with a temporary appointment to assist with GDPR preparation.
The Audit Committee approves the annual plan for the team and monitors progress against that plan.
The effectiveness of the internal audit team and its level of resource are reviewed by the Committee at least annually.
This review includes assessing the delivery of the audit plan considering the functions output across the year and evaluating customer feedback received by the team.
Committee effectiveness Each year the Committee reviews critically its own performance assisted by consideration of a series of questions and considers where improvements can be made.
Allison Kirkby Chair of the Audit Committee 27 February 2018 54 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear shareholders I am pleased to present our remuneration report for 2017.
We have continued to be as transparent as possible with this years remuneration report aiming for a report that is easy to read follow and understand.
The report is made up of three key sections This annual Chairs letter.
Our remuneration policy report which sets out a summary of the Directors remuneration policy for all Directors of
This policy was formally agreed at our AGM held on 19 May 2017.
Our annual remuneration report split into two sections that set out how our remuneration policy will be implemented in 2018 and how our remuneration policy was implemented in 2017.
This is an audited section of the report outlining the remuneration of the Companys Executive and Non Executive Directors during the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017.
The annual remuneration report is subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
Remuneration policy We are in year one of a threeyear policy and in developing this policy the Committee was very aware that executive remuneration continues to be a key focus for shareholders as well as being a topic that is regularly discussed in the public domain.
Throughout
2017 the Committee has continued to assess the effectiveness of overall levels of remuneration and continues to review emerging market practice and best practice expectations in line with the business strategy.
The Committee has taken into account a number of reference points both internal and external.
Independent advice was also sought where appropriate from the Committees advisors.
Remuneration structure and philosophy The existing remuneration framework consists of the following elements fixed pay  base salary pension and benefits and variable pay  annual bonus paid in both cash and deferred shares and performance share plan PSP.
The Committee believes that the current structure works well and remains fitforpurpose.
It is simple and consistent with pay outcomes dependent upon performance linked to our business strategy.
It ensures a significant proportion of pay is delivered in shares to provide alignment with investors and incorporates a number of best practice features including a twoyear post vesting holding period for PSP awards.
Since announcing our fiveyear strategic plan in 2013 transforming the business from a traditional bakery into a modern foodonthe goretailer we have delivered excellent operational and financial performance.
In the four years since 2013 our companymanaged likeforlike sales have grown by 17.1 per cent and pretax profit excluding exceptional items has increased by 98 per cent reflecting sales growth combined with significant savings arising from structural changes and investment in better processes and systems.
This is reflected in strong EPS growth averaging 21 per cent p. since 2013.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
The Committee has continued to ensure that executive remuneration is closely aligned to the delivery of Greggs business strategy 55 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Policy report review Our remuneration policy report sets out our policy for the three years from 2017 and was put to a binding vote of shareholders at the AGM on 19 May 2017.
This policy was approved with a majority vote of 93.91 per cent.
Our related amendment to the PSP rules was also approved with a majority vote of 97.14 per cent.
Approval of this policy has ensured that we have strengthened the alignment between Executive Directors and shareholders and kept the team focused on longterm sustainable value creation for our shareholders.
We have reviewed the policy again and are comfortable that it remains appropriate to ensure the team running our business are incentivised going forwards whilst at the same time ensuring the policy is flexible to remain applicable over the remaining two years of the policy period.
Accordingly there are no changes to our policy proposed in 2018.
Performance in 2017 and incentive payments Despite challenging conditions including significant cost headwinds a busy change agenda and the continued major investment in line with our strategic plan the Company has delivered another year of solid performance.
The business has performed well against the stretching financial targets as described in the financial review on pages 24 to 27.
Against the targets set at the beginning of the year for the annual bonus the profit element resulted in 22.54 per cent of the maximum being achieved with 12.53 per cent of the maximum sales performance being achieved.
Despite significant cost challenges facing the business a strong control on costs resulted in 9.25 per cent of the maximum being achieved.
There was a stronger performance in the strategic objectives that were set and we made excellent progress with our technology and supply chain change programme.
This resulted in 100 per cent bonus payment against these strategic elements.
Overall annual bonuses representing 80.4 per cent out of a maximum possible of 125 per cent and 57.9 per cent out of a maximum possible of 90 per cent of salary will be payable to the Chief Executive and Finance Director respectively.
Any element of the bonus earned above 50 per cent of the maximum will be paid in shares and will be subject to a twoyear holding period.
Under the Performance Share Plan awards made in March 2015 are due to vest in March 2018.
These awards are based on EPS growth over the three years to 30 December 2017 and average annual ROCE over the threeyear performance period 2015 to 2017.
EPS has grown by 12.86 per cent and our average annual ROCE was 27.3 per cent which meant that the performance condition was achieved in full.
For the purpose of calculating total remuneration payable we have therefore assumed full vesting of the award.
The Committee is very comfortable that this performance justifies a full vesting level for this award.
Approach for 2018 The salary increase for both the Chief Executive and Finance Director was in line with that of the base increase for the workforce generally and was 2.8 per cent.
Increases to salaries and NonExecutive Directors fees took effect from 1 January 2018.
As part of the Committees ongoing review of best practice and a review of the market the targetsetting process for the annual bonus has been reviewed.
The Committee believes that the nature of the current measures profit sales and strategic objectives remains appropriate and no changes are proposed to the measures or the mix.
Financial targets for these measures for the 2018 annual bonus have been set in line with the financial plan for the business for the year and the rolling fiveyear strategic plan and continue to be stretching.
We will also continue to require any bonus earned over 50 per cent of the maximum to be payable in shares and be subject to a twoyear holding period.
The Committee has reviewed the percentage pay out for on target performance for the profit and sales element of the bonus and has decided to move this to 50 per cent increased from 30 per cent in 2017.
This change recognises the challenging nature of the targets we have set for 2018 and more generally we have a record of setting very demanding targets in the context of prior year performance and market expectations.
We believe this has been demonstrated by the 2017 bonus outcomes as discussed above where outcomes were well below the maximum notwithstanding Greggs strong performance during the year.
We have also been cognisant of wider market practice where a 50 per cent payout for target performance is the norm even in bonus schemes where the maximum opportunity is greater than at Greggs.
The 50 per cent level remains lower than the 60 per cent level which we applied prior to 2017.
Threshold performance will remain at ten per cent pay out.
Due to the commercial sensitivity of the 2018 bonus targets they are not disclosed within this report but will be disclosed retrospectively in next years report.
Under the PSP the Committee has considered the performance conditions and has determined that EPS and ROCE should continue to apply with an equal weighting given to each.
The Committee has ensured that targets have been set for the year ahead which reflect the strategic plan and business outlook over the performance period.
Consequently the ROCE ranges have been increased to ensure that they remain appropriately stretching in light of our business strategy without encouraging undue risk taking.
Concluding remarks I hope that you will find this report transparent clear and informative.
The Committee has continued to ensure that executive remuneration is closely aligned to the delivery of Greggs business strategy as well as remaining relevant to market and best practice.
I look forward to receiving your continued support at this years AGM.
Yours faithfully Sandra Turner Chair of the Remuneration Committee 27 February 2018 56 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
Remuneration policy report This section of our report sets out the summary of the remuneration policy for all Executive and NonExecutive Directors at Greggs.
It explains the purpose and strategy of each element of the package and demonstrates how the policy will incentivise Executive Directors to achieve sustainable longterm growth and value that will best serve the interests of the Company its shareholders its employees and customers.
Our Directors remuneration policy was approved by shareholders at our AGM on 19 May 2017 and became effective for three years from that date.
The policy for the remuneration of the Executive and NonExecutive Directors is set out in the tables below Executive Directors Element Purpose and strategy Operation Maximum opportunity Base salary To attract and retain high calibre individuals in order to promote the longterm success of the business.
Reviewed and set annually in January.
Benchmarked periodically by the Committee against the remuneration levels for executives in similar roles in companies of a comparable size.
Individual performance and contribution is recognised in setting salary levels.
Salaries are paid monthly in cash.
Key reference points for salary increases are market and economic conditions and in line with our values the approach to employee pay throughout the organisation.
Benefits
To support a competitive remuneration package in the marketplace.
Benefits include provision of a company car or cash in lieu private medical health care life assurance and permanent health insurance.
No maximum limit is prescribed particularly as the cost of providing insured benefits fluctuates over time.
However the Committee monitors on an annual basis the overall cost of the benefit provision.
Pension
To support a competitive remuneration package in the marketplace.
Executive Directors can elect to either participate in the Company defined contribution pension scheme up to a cap.
Above the cap Executive Directors receive a salary supplement or take cash in lieu of this contribution paid as a supplement to their salary on a monthly basis.
The Executive Directors are able to make this choice on an annual basis.
The remuneration adjustment is disclosed later in this report.
Up to 22.5% of base salary contribution for the Chief Executive and up to 15% of base salary for other Executive Directors.
Annual bonus including profit share To incentivise achievement of annual targets and objectives consistent with the short to mediumterm strategic needs of the business so as to encourage sustainable growth in the Companys operating profits.
The bonus will be based on a mix of business KPIs with operating profit being the largest component of the mix of metrics and this will not be less than 50% of the overall mix.
Targets for each metric are set in advance and in line with business planning objectives set by the Committee.
Each Executive Director is entitled to participate in the Companys profit sharing scheme available to all employees.
The value of this is then deducted from their annual bonus and is subject to the individual cap.
The Committee will use appropriate underpins for any nonprofit based element of the annual bonus such that payment under these elements may be scaled back potentially to zero at the discretion of the Committee in the event that the operating profit performance for the year is judged to be running significantly below that required for the achievement of the longterm strategy.
Any bonus paid in excess of 50% of the maximum will be payable in shares which after any sales to pay tax and other statutory deductions must be held in the Employee Benefit Trust for two years after receipt.
The dividends payable on deferred bonus shares are paid to the individual as they fall due.
Recovery and withholding provisions allow the Company to recoup annual bonus payments within three years in the event of misstatement of performance error or misconduct where this has led to an overpayment in the view of the Committee.
There is a flexible mechanism which allows the Company to withhold outstanding deferred or future remuneration or recover the overpayment direct from the individual concerned.
Capped at 125% of base salary for the Chief Executive and 90% of base salary for other Executive Directors.
On target performance delivers no more than 60% of the maximum.
No more than 25% of the bonus opportunity is payable under each element for threshold performance.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Element Purpose and strategy Operation Maximum opportunity
Share Plan
To incentivise longterm value creation retention of our talent and ensure alignment of Executive Directors and shareholders interests.
Awards are granted under the PSP annually at the discretion of the Committee.
Performance conditions will be based on an equal split of two different financial measures EPS and ROCE for discrete parts of an award.
Targets will be set for each metric which reflect the strategic plan and business outlook over the respective performance period.
The mix may alter for future awards and or different metrics such as TSR may be used.
Performance will be measured over a threeyear period with an additional mandatory holding period of two years for the vested shares net of tax and other deductions.
Recovery and withholding provisions allow the Company to recoup vested Performance Share awards within three years in the event of misstatement of performance error or misconduct where this has led to an overpayment in the view of the Committee.
There is a flexible mechanism which allows the Company to withhold outstanding deferred or future remuneration or recover the overpayment directly from the individual concerned.
115% of base salary for Chief Executive and 95% of base salary for other Executive Directors 150% of base salary in exceptional circumstances.
Threshold vesting at 25% of the maximum.
Saving Related Share Option
SAYE and SIP To encourage employees at all levels within the Company to understand better and so participate in the growth in value of the Company.
No performance conditions have been attached to options granted pursuant to the Companys SAYE and SIP Schemes which are available for all employees.
The rules of these schemes require that all options granted must be on the same terms.
Executive Directors may enter into a contract to save up to an agreed saving limit in line with all colleagues in the business and HMRC guidelines.
Share retention guidelines To further align the interests of Executive Directors to those of shareholders.
Executive Directors are required to build up a shareholding of 200% of base salary within five years of appointment.
This is achieved through vested awards granted via the PSP and deferred bonus shares.
NonExecutive Directors Element Purpose and strategy Operation Maximum opportunity
Chairman and Directors fees To attract and retain high quality and experienced NonExecutive Chairman and Directors.
The Chairman is paid an allencompassing fee.
NonExecutive Directors are paid a basic fee and the Chairs of the Main Board Committees and the Senior Independent Director SID are paid an additional fee to reflect their additional responsibilities.
Where the SID role is combined with that of chairing a Committee then only one fee is paid.
These fees are reviewed and set annually in December and implemented from 1 January.
NonExecutive Directors are not eligible for pension scheme membership bonus or incentive arrangements.
They are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable business expenses and tax thereon.
They may also receive limited travel or accommodation related benefits in connection with their role as a Director.
There is no prescribed maximum.
Difference in remuneration policy across the Group The remuneration policy for the Executive Directors is designed having regard to the policy for employees across the Group as a whole.
There are differences in salary levels and in the levels of potential reward depending upon seniority and responsibility although a key reference point for executive salary increases is the average increase across the general workforce.
A higher proportion of the Executive Directors remuneration package is delivered through performancerelated pay and in sharebased form which provide a good link to longterm Company performance.
All colleagues with oneyears service or more may participate in the SAYE scheme and in the SIP that are run annually.
Under the SAYE scheme at the end of a threeyear saving period colleagues can buy Greggs shares at a discounted rate.
With the SIP all colleagues may purchase Company shares from pretax salary subject to HMRC limits.
After six months service all colleagues are eligible to participate in the profitsharing scheme in which they share ten per cent of our profits.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
Policy discretion The Committee will operate incentive plans in accordance with their respective rules the Listing Rules and the HMRC limits where relevant.
The Committee consistent with market practice retains discretion over a number of areas relating to the operation and administration of certain plan rules.
These include but are not limited to the following who participates the timing of the grant of award andor payment the size of an award up to planpolicy limits andor a payment discretion relating to the measurement of performance in the event of a change of control or reconstruction determination of a good leaver in addition to any specified categories for incentive plan purposes and the treatment of leavers adjustments required in certain circumstances e. the ability to adjust existing performance conditions for exceptional events so that they can still fulfil their original purpose.
Legacy arrangements For the avoidance of doubt in approving this policy report authority is given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors such as the payment of a pension or the unwinding of legacy share schemes that have been disclosed to shareholders in previous remuneration reports.
Details of any of these payments to former Directors will be set out in the annual report on remuneration as they arise.
Policy on recruitment remuneration The Committee will aim to set a new Executive Directors remuneration package in line with the Companys approved policy at the time of appointment.
The Committee will take into account in arriving at a total package and in considering the quantum for each element of the package the skills and experience of the candidate the market rate for a candidate of that experience as well as the importance of securing the best available candidate.
Annual bonus and PSP awards will not exceed the policy maxima not including any arrangements to replace forfeited deferred pay.
Participation in the annual bonus plan and PSP will normally be prorated for the year of joining.
The Committee may make oneoff additional cash andor sharebased awards as it deems appropriate and if the circumstances so demand to take account of deferred pay forfeited by an Executive Director on leaving a previous employer.
Awards to replace deferred pay forfeited would where possible reflect the nature of awards forfeited in terms of delivery mechanism cash or shares time horizons attributed expected value and performance conditions.
Other payments may be made in relation to relocation expenses and other incidental expenses as appropriate.
Any buyout awards would be made under existing arrangements where possible or as permitted under the Listing Rules.
In the case of an internal appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role would be allowed to pay out according to its terms and any other ongoing remuneration obligations existing prior to appointment would continue.
For the appointment of a new Chairman or NonExecutive Director the fee arrangement would be set in accordance with the approved remuneration policy at that time.
Service contracts and policy on cessation Executive Directors service contracts contain the following remunerationrelated aspects Provision Detailed terms Remuneration  Salary pension and benefits company car or cash allowance private medical health care for the Director permanent health insurance participation in annual bonus and profit share subject to scheme rules participation in longterm incentive schemes or similar arrangements subject to scheme rules and life assurance.
Notice period  Chief Executives contract is terminable on 12 months notice served by either the Company or the Director other Executive Directors service contracts are terminable on 12 months notice served by the Company or by six months notice served by the Director and any future Executive Directors service contracts will be terminable on 12 months notice served by either party.
Termination payment  Payment in lieu of notice equal to any unexpired notice of termination given by either party and payment in lieu shall not include any bonus payment any payment in respect of benefits which the Director would have been entitled to receive and any payment in respect of any holiday entitlement that would have accrued during the period for which the payment in lieu is made.
Details of the circumstances in which the Committee has the ability to exercise discretion with regards to Termination Payments are set out opposite.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report The Companys policy is that current Executive Directors service contracts do not have a specific duration but may be terminated with twelve months notice from the Company and six months notice from the Executive Director.
Any future Executive Directors service contracts will be terminable on 12 months notice served by either party.
Under their service contracts the Executive Directors are entitled to salary pension contributions and benefits for their notice period save where a payment in lieu is to be made.
The Company would seek to ensure that any payment is mitigated by use of phased payments and offset against earnings elsewhere in the event that an Executive Director finds alternative employment during his notice period.
There are no contractual provisions in force other than those set out above that impact any termination payment.
Areas where the Committee can exercise discretion with regards to Termination Payments annual bonus may be payable prorated for that part of the year worked deferred bonus shares must normally be retained in trust until the end of their two year holding period and will be subject to recovery and withholding in the event of misstatement of performance error or misconduct where this has led to an overpayment in the view of the Committee for a period of three years from the payment date any unvested awards held under the PSP will lapse at cessation unless the individual is leaving in good leaver circumstances defined under the plan as death injury illhealth disability redundancy retirement his office or employment being with either a company which ceases to be a Group member or relating to a business or part of a business which is transferred to a person who is not a Group member a change of control or any other reason the Committee so decides.
In these circumstances unvested awards will normally vest at the normal vesting date other than on death or where the Committee decides they should vest at cessation subject to performance conditions being met and scaling back in respect of actual service as a proportion of the total vesting period unless the Committee decides that scaling back is inappropriate.
Vested awards will normally be subject to the mandatory twoyear holding period although the Committee will have discretion to waive this in exceptional circumstances and the Committee may agree to payment of disbursements such as legal costs and outplacement services if appropriate and depending on the circumstances of cessation.
The table below sets out the details of the Executive Directors service contracts Director Date of contract Roger Whiteside 4 February 2013 Richard Hutton 7 April 2006 Raymond Reynolds stepped down from the Main Board on 19 May 2017.
The service contracts are available for inspection during normal business hours at the Companys registered office and are available for inspection at the AGM.
Expected value of the proposed annual remuneration package for Executive Directors The following charts indicate the level of remuneration payable to Executive Directors in 2018 based on policy at minimum remuneration remuneration in line with on target Company performance and the maximum remuneration available.
Chief Executive  Roger Whiteside Minimum On target Stretch 100% 49% 29% 32% 34% 34% 22% PSP Bonus Fixed remuneration Minimum On target Stretch Fixed remuneration salary 549120 549120 549120 pension 123552 123552 123552 benefits 12500 12500 12500 Bonus  411840 686400 Performance Share Plan  315744 631488 Total 685172 1412756 2003060 60 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
Finance Director  Richard Hutton Minimum On target Stretch 100% 54% 25% 30% 31% 39% 21% PSP Bonus Fixed remuneration tel800 Minimum On target Stretch Fixed remuneration salary 313689 313689 313689 pension 40780 40780 40780 benefits 15000 15000 15000 Bonus  169392 282320 Performance Share Plan  149002 298005 Total 369469 687863 949794 Assumptions used in the charts Base salary levels as at 1 January 2018.
The value of taxable benefits is based on the cost of supplying those benefits as disclosed for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017.
BONUS
Minimum remuneration  assumes no award is earned under the annual bonus plan.
On target remuneration  the annual bonus plan assumes the target level is reached for each of the elements 50% of profit total 25% of max potential 50% LFL sales total 10% of max potential Midrange for costs total 5% of max potential Full pay out for strategic elements 10% for each element giving a total 20% of max potential Calculated as 60 per cent of max potential  75 per cent of salary for CEO and 54 per cent of salary for FD Maximum remuneration  assumes full vesting for all elements under the annual bonus plan and therefore full pay out.
Calculated as 125 per cent of salary for CEO and 90 percent of salary for FD.
PSP element is calculated as award percentage of base salary multiplied by the relevant vesting percentage.
Share price movement and dividend accrual have been excluded.
Minimum remuneration  assumes no vesting is achieved under the PSP.
On target remuneration  assumes 50% vesting is achieved and is calculated as 50 per cent of 115 per cent of salary for CEO and 50 per cent of 95 per cent of salary for FD.
Maximum remuneration  assumes full vesting is achieved and is calculated as 100 per cent of 115 per cent of salary for CEO and 100 per cent of 95 per cent of salary for FD.
Terms of appointment of NonExecutive Directors NonExecutive Directors are appointed subject to the Companys articles of association retiring and seeking election at the first AGM after appointment.
Thereafter every Director will be subject to annual reelection by shareholders.
The Nominations Committee advises the Board as to whether Directors should be nominated for reelection.
NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to compensation for early termination of their appointments prior to the date on which they would next be due to offer themselves for election or reelection or if not reappointed at such time.
The following table shows the effective date of appointment for each NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Director Original date of appointment Ian Durant 5 October 2011 Allison Kirkby 30 January 2013 Helena Ganczakowski 2 January 2014 Peter McPhillips 10 March 2014 Sandra Turner 1 May 2014 NonExecutive Directors are appointed on an understanding that the appointment will last for at least six years but without any commitment by either party.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Annual remuneration report Our remuneration policy is simple and consistent with pay outcomes dependent upon performance linked to our business strategy.
It ensures a significant proportion of pay is delivered in shares to provide alignment with investors and incorporates a number of best practice features.
Outlined below are the current Remuneration Committee members Member Meeting attendance Sandra Turner Chair since appointment to the Board 22 Allison Kirkby 22 Helena Ganczakowski 22 Peter McPhillips 22 All members are considered to be independent for the purpose of the UK Corporate Governance code and the Company Secretary acts as Secretary to the Committee.
Responsibility is delegated to the Remuneration Committee to ensure that an effective remuneration policy is in place for the Chief Executive the Chairman and other Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
It is the Committees role to design a policy to ensure that executive remuneration is aligned to the delivery of Greggs business strategy and the alignment between our Executive Directors and shareholders is strengthened whilst taking close account of the business strategy current and emerging market practice and the best practice expectations of institutional shareholders.
The Committee maintains an active dialogue with institutional investors and shareholder representatives and although the Committee does not currently consult with employees on Directors pay policy this is kept under review.
The Committee will give further consideration to this during 2018 in light of the proposed changes to the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Summary of committee activity during 2017 During 2017 the committee has Finalised the review of the remuneration policy.
Discussed and reviewed Directors salaries.
Discussed and reviewed bonus percentage bonus metrics and bonus deferral.
Discussed and reviewed the targets for bonus and PSP for the year ahead.
Approved grants under the share option scheme to senior managers below Operating Board level and the Company SAYE scheme.
Appointed new advisors to the Remuneration Committee.
Structure and content of the remuneration report The Remuneration Report has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Act and The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 the Regulations.
It also meets the requirements of the UK Listing Authoritys Listing Rules.
The Regulations also require our auditor to report to shareholders on the audited information within this remuneration report and to state whether in their opinion the relevant sections have been prepared in accordance with the Act and the Regulations.
The auditors opinion is set out on pages 71 to 75 and we have indicated appropriately the audited sections of this remuneration report.
Remuneration advice The Chief Executive along with Jonathan Jowett Company Secretary and General Counsel Roisin Currie Retail and People Director and Emma Walton Head of People are normally invited to attend the Committee meetings in order to provide advice and support to the Committee.
During the year NBS part of Aon plc supported the Committee.
NBS is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee appointed new advisors Korn Ferry Hay Group in December 2017.
Korn Ferry Hay Group is also a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct.
The Committee reviewed the operating processes in place at NBS and Korn Ferry and is satisfied that the advice it receives is objective and independent.
Fees paid to NBS during the year were 12800.
No fees were paid to Korn Ferry Hay Group during the year.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
Shareholder dialogue The voting outcome from the 2017 Annual General Meeting reflected both strong individual and institutional shareholder support.
Shareholders were asked to approve the 2016 Directors remuneration report our new remuneration policy and an amendment to the PSP and did so as outlined below.
We will continue to engage with shareholders to understand any concerns they may have about our policy and its implementation during the life of the new policy.
Approve the remuneration report Total number of votes % of votes cast For 57539485 95.66% Against 2607460 4.34% Total votes cast excluding votes withheld 60146945 100% Votes withheld 170676 Total votes cast including votes withheld 61185466 Approve the remuneration policy Total number of votes % of votes cast For 57297311 93.91% Against 3717480 6.09% Total votes cast excluding votes withheld 61014791 100% Votes withheld 170676 Total votes cast including votes withheld 61185467 Approve amendment to PSP Total number of votes % of votes cast For 59300511 97.14% Against 1747528 2.86% Total votes cast excluding votes withheld 61048039 100% Votes withheld 137428 Total votes cast including votes withheld 61185467 Votes withheld are not included in the final proxy figures as they are not recognised as a vote in law.
How our remuneration policy will be implemented in 2018  Executive Directors The section below summarises the implementation of our remuneration policy for 2018.
Base salary 2018 The annual base salaries for the Executive Directors were reviewed with effect from 1 January 2018 increases and current salaries are outlined below
Salary as at 1 January 2017 Salary as at 1 January 2018 % increase Roger Whiteside Chief Executive 534163 549120 2.8% Richard Hutton Finance Director 305145 313689 2.8% Increases are in line with the average base salary increase for the workforce as a whole.
Pension contribution 2018 The pension contribution rates both of which are cash in lieu are Roger Whiteside 22.5% Richard Hutton 13% Annual bonus 2018 The annual bonus opportunity for 2018 is outlined below Chief Executive  Maximum opportunity of 125% of base salary.
Bonus in excess of 50% of maximum will be payable in shares deferred for two years.
Finance Director  Maximum opportunity of 90% of base salary.
Bonus in excess of 50% of maximum will be payable in shares deferred for two years.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report The bonus metrics are Measure Profit Sales Strategic objectives Weighting 50% of total 20% of total 30% of total Detail and link to strategy.
Reflects the profit of the Group at an underlying level before tax.
This will be based on meeting and exceeding budget for the year.
Based on companymanaged shop likeforlike sales excluding any additional shops opened during the bonus year.
Detailed below.
The strategic objectives for each bonus cycle are based on measures which will provide a strong link to future value creation.
For the 2018 bonus the three strategic objectives each relating to ten per cent of the bonus opportunity will be i.
Cost savings ten per cent of the measure ii.
Specific project delivery within our change programme regarding processes and systems with two elements measured independently both elements being worth five per cent each.
These measures will be based on delivery of new systems and processes into two of our supply chain operations five per cent payable on each element a total of ten per cent and iii.
Specific project delivery within our programme for supply chain restructuring specifically the transfer and operation of product platforms with three elements measured independently one element being worth five per cent one element being worth three per cent and one element being worth two per cent.
The annual bonus is based on performance against a range of financial and strategic performance measures.
This range of metrics measures achievement of the Companys key operational objectives.
The Committee reviews the key performance indicators KPIs each year and varies them as appropriate to reflect the priorities for the business in the year ahead.
Where appropriate a sliding scale of targets is set for each KPI to encourage continuous improvement or sustained high performance.
There will be an underpin to the sales and strategic objectives elements of the bonus whereby any payment under these elements may be scaled back potentially to zero at the discretion of the Committee if the profit performance for the year is judged to be running significantly below that required for the achievement of the longterm strategy.
Bonus targets for the forthcoming year are considered to be commercially sensitive and so have not been disclosed.
Retrospective disclosure of the targets and performance against them will be made in next years annual report on remuneration.
PSP award 2018 PSP awards will be granted as follows Chief Executive 115% of base salary Executive Directors 95% of base salary Performance conditions will be based on an equal split of two different financial measures EPS and ROCE for discrete parts of an award.
EPS and ROCE are two of our eight strategic KPIs and together provide a rounded assessment of our overall profitability against stretching targets set in line with the strategic plan and business outlook over the performance period.
For these awards the ROCE ranges have been increased to ensure that they remain appropriately stretching in light of our business strategy without encouraging undue risk taking.
The EPS targets require the same level of growth as for last years award albeit the base point from which the growth is measured is higher than last year.
For the 2018 awards the target ranges will be as follows The EPS performance condition will require average annual growth of EPS of 5 per cent to 11 per cent over three financial years measured from the 2017 financial year end.
The ROCE condition will require average annual ROCE over the threeyear performance period 2018 2019 and 2020 to be in the range 25 per cent to 29 per cent.
In both cases 25 per cent of an award will vest on achieving threshold performance and thereafter straightline sliding scales will apply until stretch performance is achieved.
In order to improve alignment of interest between Executive Directors and shareholders a holding period is attached to vested PSP awards granted in the policy period requiring the vested shares to be held net of tax and other deductions for a further two years.
EPS and ROCE are measured excluding exceptional items.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
How our remuneration policy will be implemented in 2018  NonExecutive Directors In order to ensure that no Director is involved in deciding hisher own remuneration the fees payable to NonExecutive Directors are set after consultation with the Chairman by a Committee of the Board consisting only of the Executive Directors.
The fees payable to the Chairman are set by the Remuneration Committee.
These fees are reviewed and set annually in December and implemented from 1 January.
The fees for NonExecutive Directors increased by 2.8 per cent on 1 January 2018 in line with the base award for our whole workforce in 2018.
The NonExecutive Directors are paid an annual base fee which is currently 44639 and additional responsibility fees of 6637 for the role of Senior Independent Director SID or for chairing a Board Committee.
Where the SID role is combined with the role of chairing a Committee then only one fee of 6637 will be paid.
Details of the fees being paid to NonExecutive Directors in 2018 are set out below Name Position Fee Ian Durant Chairman 167815 Allison Kirkby Chair of the Audit Committee 51276 Helena Ganczakowski NonExecutive Director 44639 Peter McPhillips NonExecutive Director 44639 Sandra Turner SID and Chair of the Remuneration Committee 51276 How our remuneration policy was implemented in 2017 audited Total remuneration payable for 2017 The following table presents the remuneration payable for 2017 showing the equivalent figures for 2016 for the Executive Directors.
Salary
Pension contribution including salary in lieu
Annual incentives including profit share
Total remuneration Roger Whiteside 2017 534163 120186 12441 429467 580395 1676652 2016 521135 117255 12408 564780 919948 2135526 Richard Hutton 2017 305145 41067 16203 176642 257870 796927 2016 297702 30582 15298 232297 408734 984613 Raymond Reynolds 104012 15043 6006 60210 230103 415374 2016 265641 32680 14833 207280 364721 885155
The 2017 longterm incentive vesting values are based on the forecast value of the awards due to vest on 26 March 2018.
This value will be trued up in the 2018 report to reflect the actual level of vesting and share price at the vesting date.
The 2016 longterm incentive value has been restated and reflects the actual value of the awards that vested in March 2017 following the estimated value last year.
2 2017 remuneration until date of retirement from the Board on 19 May 2017.
Fees for NonExecutive Directors The fees for NonExecutive Directors were as follows 2017 2016 Ian Durant 163244 159263 Allison Kirkby 49880 48663 Helena Ganczakowski 43424 42365 Peter McPhillips 43424 42365 Sandra Turner 49880 48663 65 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report Annual bonus 2017 The table below outlines the bonus payments to Executive Directors in respect of 2017.
Measure Strategic objective Weighting Entry Target Stretch Actual % All Executive Directors Profit  Profit before tax excluding exceptional items and property profits To deliver profit target 50% 78.0m 80.0m 88.0m 81.7m 22.54% Sales % Companymanaged likeforlike sales To deliver target increase 20% 1.5% 3.0% 4.5% 3.7% 12.53% Strategic  Cost savings 10% 6.0m 10.0m  9.7m 9.25%
3 elements Process and system change delivery 10% Achieved 10.0%
3 elements Supply chain reorganisation 10% Achieved 10.0% Total weighting based on balanced scorecard 100% 64.32% Project milestones.
Bonus achieved for 2017 As % of maximum Roger Whiteside 64.32% Richard Hutton 64.32% Raymond Reynolds 64.32%
1 Reflects bonus earned during period served as Director during 2017.
Criteria
Payment of 10% total Process and system change delivery Forecast and replenishment rollout All companymanaged shops by end of Q3 2017 5.0% Manufacturing pilot Delivered and operational by end of FY2017 2.5% Warehousing pilot Delivered and operational by end of FY2017 2.5% Supply chain reorganisation Increased capability To enable opening of 130 shops 5.0% Transfer of production platform Yum Yum Delivered and operational by end of FY2017 2.5% Transfer of production platform muffin Delivered and operational by end of FY2017 2.5% Any element of the bonus earned above 50 per cent of the maximum will be paid in shares for the Chief Executive and other Executive Directors listed above which after any sales to pay tax and other statutory deductions must be held in the Employee Benefit Trust for two years after receipt.
The number of shares will be calculated by dividing 14.32 per cent of the net bonus by the closing market share value on the date of payment.
Details of the shares awarded in 2017 for the 2016 bonus year are outlined below Director Number of shares awarded Roger Whiteside 11701 Richard Hutton 3008 Raymond Reynolds 2684 Performance Share Plan award for performance over 2015  2017 The PSP award granted in 2015 measured EPS performance by reference to the three financial years to 30 December 2017 and average annual ROCE over the threeyear performance period 2015 to 2017.
The performance targets that were set together with the performance delivered are set out in the table below.
Metric Condition Threshold target Stretch target Actual % vesting Earnings per share 50% Normalised EPS growth of RPI  1% p. to RPI  7% p. over three financial years.
RPI 1% 12.5% vesting RPI 7% 100% vesting RPI 12.86% 50% ROCE 50% Average annual ROCE over the threeyear performance period.
19.0% 12.5% vesting 21.5% 100% vesting 27.3% 50% Total vesting 100% Normalised EPS is the Companys reported earnings per share excluding exceptional items.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
These options will vest on 26 March 2018.
The table below details the impact on share price appreciation on the value of this PSP award.
Executive
Number of shares at grant Value at grant
Number of shares to vest
Value attributable to share price growth Roger Whiteside 44103 456466 100% 44103 580395 123929 Richard Hutton 19595 202808 100% 19595 257870 55062 Raymond Reynolds 17485 180970 100% 17485 230103 49133
1 Based on a share price at grant of 10.350.
2 Based on a threemonth average share price to 31 December 2017 of 13.16.
Performance Share Plan Awards granted during 2017 are as follows Executive Type of award Basis of award granted Share price at date of grant 19 May 2017 Number of shares over which award was granted Face value of award % of face value that would vest at threshold performance Vesting determined by performance over Roger Whiteside nil cost option 115% of salary 10.72 57303 614288 25% Three financial years to 3 January 2020 Richard Hutton 95% of salary 10.72 27041 289879 The target ranges for this award are as follows EPS average annual growth of 5 per cent to 11 per cent over three years from the 2016 financial year end.
Average annual ROCE over the threeyear performance period 2017  2018 and 2019 to be in the range 23 per cent to 27 per cent.
In both cases 25 per cent of the award will vest on achieving threshold performance and thereafter straightline sliding scales will apply until stretch performance is achieved.
A holding period is attached to vested PSP awards requiring the vested shares to be held net of tax for a further two years.
Outstanding Share Awards The following table sets out details of the PSP executive and savingsrelated share options all of which were granted at a nil cost to the Executive Director concerned held by or granted to each Executive Director during the year
1 January number
Exercised number
At
30 December number
Date of grant
Date from which exercisable Expiry date Scheme Roger Whiteside 90191  90191 nil Mar 14 4.9425 Mar 17 Mar 24 PSP 44103    44103 nil Mar 15 10.350 Mar 18 Mar 25 PSP 42560    42560 nil Mar 16 11.020 Mar 19 Mar 26 PSP 57303   57303 nil May 17 10.720 May 20 May 27 PSP 4.65 Apr 14 Jun 17 Nov 17 SAYE 215    215 8.18 Apr 15 Jun 18 Nov 18 SAYE 148    148 8.70 Apr 16 Jun 19 Nov 19 SAYE 169   169 8.07 Apr 17 Jun 20 Nov 20 SAYE 177666 57472 90640  144498 Richard Hutton 40072  40072 nil Mar 14 4.9425 Mar 17 Mar 24 PSP 19595    19595 nil Mar 15 10.350 Mar 18 Mar 25 PSP 18910    18910 nil Mar 16 11.020 Mar 19 Mar 26 PSP 27041   27041 nil May 17 10.720 May 20 May 27 PSP 449  4492   4.65 Apr 14 Jun 17 Nov 17 SAYE 215    215 8.18 Apr 15 Jun 18 Nov 18 SAYE 148    148 8.70 Apr 16 Jun 19 Nov 19 SAYE 169   169 8.07 Apr 17 Jun 20 Nov 20 SAYE 79389 27210 40521  66078 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report
1 January number
Exercised number
At
30 December number
Date of grant
Date from which exercisable Expiry date Scheme Raymond Reynolds 62640  57555 3.56 Apr 09 Apr 12 Apr 19 Exec 12125    12125 nil Apr 12 5.260 Apr 15 Apr 22 PSP 36736    36736 nil Mar 13 4.735 Mar 16 Mar 23 PSP 35757    35757 nil Mar 14 4.9425 Mar 17 Mar 24 PSP 17485    17485 nil Mar 15 10.350 Mar 18 Mar 25 PSP 16873    16873 nil Mar 16 11.020 Mar 19 Mar 26 PSP 24129   24129 nil May 17 10.720 May 20 May 27 PSP 449   449  4.65 Apr 14 Jun 17 Nov 17 SAYE 148    148 8.70 Apr 16 Jun 19 Nov 19 SAYE 169   169 8.07 Apr 17 Jun 20 Nov 20 SAYE 182213 24298 57555 449 148507
The market value on the date of exercise was 10.200 and the resultant gain on exercise was 919948.
The market value on the date of exercise was 10.910 and the resultant gain on exercise was 2811.
The market value on the date of exercise was 10.900 and the resultant gain on exercise was 436785.
The market value on the date of exercise was 11.15 and the resultant gain on exercise was 436842.
Performance conditions have been achieved and the shares remained exercisable.
Options granted under the allemployee SAYE scheme are not subject to performance conditions.
The midmarket price of ordinary shares in the Company as at 30 December 2017 was 13.99.
The highest and lowest midmarket prices of ordinary shares during the financial year were 13.99 and 9.645 respectively.
Legacy defined benefit pension scheme Audited The following table sets out the change in each Directors accrued pension in the Companys defined benefit scheme during the year and his accrued benefits in the scheme at the year end Executive Director Date of birth Date service commenced Accrued annual pension entitlement as at 1 January 2017 Accrued annual pension entitlement as at 30 December Increase in accrued pension entitlement for the year Increase in accrued pension entitlement for the year net of inflation of 1.2% Transfer value of increase in accrued pension entitlement for the year Richard Hutton 3668 1198 18522 18522 Raymond Reynolds 41159 11286 69535 69535
1 The pension entitlement shown is that which would be paid annually on retirement based on service to the end of the year but excluding any statutory increases which would be due after the year end.
2 The inflation rate of 3.2 per cent shown in the table above is that published by the Secretary of State for Social Security in accordance with Schedule 3 of the Pensions Schemes Act 1993.
Cash equivalent transfer value as at 1 January 2017 Cash equivalent transfer value as at 30 December 2017 Increase in the cash equivalent transfer value since January 2017 Richard Hutton 386456 327015 Raymond Reynolds 1669402 1515966
Cash equivalent transfer values have been calculated in accordance with Actuaries Guidance Note GN11 and the increase is stated net of contributions made by the
The transfer values disclosed above do not represent a sum paid or payable to the individual Director.
Instead they represent a potential liability of the pension scheme.
The main features of the defined benefit scheme are Pension at normal retirement age of 160th of members final pensionable salary for each complete year and a proportionate amount for each additional complete month of service from the date of joining the scheme until 5 April 2008 when the scheme was closed to future accrual choice of giving up part of the pension in exchange for a tax free cash sum subject to a limit of 25 per cent of the total value of the members benefits under the scheme pension payable in the event of ill health spouses pension on death and normal retirement at age 65.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED
Chief Executive pay compared to performance The graph below shows a comparison of the total shareholder return for the Companys shares for each of the last nine financial years against the total shareholder return for the companies comprised in the FTSE 250 Index excluding Investment Trusts and the FTSE 350 excluding Investment Trusts.
These indices were chosen for this comparison because they include companies of broadly similar size to the Company.
FTSE 350 excluding investment trusts Greggs FTSE 250 excluding investment trusts
Dec10
Dec09
Dec11
Dec12
Dec13
Dec14
Dec16
Dec17
Dec15 tel400 Remuneration outcomes for Chief Executive over last eight years The table below shows the total remuneration figure for the Chief Executive over the same eightyear period.
The total remuneration figure includes the annual bonus pension and PSPoption awards which vested based on performance in those years.
Total remuneration 767397 707245 635030 1011381 1238248 2462193 2135526 1676652 Bonus % of max potential 56.6% 38.6% 18% 20% 100% 93.7% 86.7% 64.32% PSPoptions % max potential na 0% 78.3% na na 100% 100% 100% This figure includes only the performance related bonus that was achieved in 2013 and not the bonus share award given to the Chief Executive.
Directors shareholding and share interests Audited Details of the shareholdings of each Executive Director as of 30 December 2017 and their interests in shares are detailed below with the percentage holding calculated using the share price at that date
Beneficially owned at 30 December
1 January 2017
PSP awards
Outstanding
30 December Roger Whiteside 195472 135563 143966   512% Richard Hutton 70844 78094 65546   325% Raymond Reynolds 63168 64484 143105  5085 324% Ian Durant 11700 11700    na Allison Kirkby 1600 1600    na Helena Ganczakowski 1100 1072    na Peter McPhillips 1000 1000    na Sandra Turner 1000 1000    na There have been no changes since 30 December 2017 in the Directors interests noted above.
Exit payments or payments to past Directors Audited There were no payments to past Directors in the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017.
No payments for compensation or loss of office were paid to or receivable by any Director.
This includes Raymond Reynolds who did not receive any payments for loss of office following his departure from the Board on 19 May 2017.
He remains employed by Greggs in a different role.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report External directorships Executive Directors may take up one NonExecutive Directorship outside of the Company subject to the Boards approval and provided that such an appointment is not likely to lead to a conflict of interest.
It is recognised that this can support a Directors development and enhance experience as well as benefit the Company.
Executive Directors will be entitled to retain the fees of such an appointment.
Roger Whiteside was appointed as NonExecutive Director of Card Factory plc effective from 4 December 2017.
He retains the fees that he earns.
Relative importance of spend on pay The Committee is aware of the importance of pay across the business and the table below shows the expenditure and percentage change in the overall spend on all colleague costs compared to other key financial indicators.
All colleague costs 357.3 336.9 6.1% Dividends 32.2 30.9 4.2% Retained profit excluding exceptional items 64.9 62.3 4.2% Corporation tax paid 17.6 16.2 8.9% Percentage change in remuneration of Director undertaking role of Chief Executive The table below sets out the percentage change in remuneration for the Chief Executive compared to the wider workforce.
For this purpose the wider workforce is defined as all fulltime head office management colleagues as they too are entitled to receive benefits and annual bonus awards.
2016 to 2017 Chief Executive salary 2.5% benefits 0.3% performance pay 32% Average per colleague salary 4.1% benefits 15% performance pay 6.1% The average employee benefits figure is based on tax year 201516 for 2016 and tax year 201617 for 2016.
At the AGM of the Company to be held on 9 May 2018 an ordinary resolution will be proposed to approve the annual report on remuneration.
This report was approved by the Board on 27 February 2018.
Signed on behalf of the Board Sandra Turner Chair of the Remuneration Committee 27 February 2018 70 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF THE ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the Group and Parent Company accounts in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Parent Company accounts for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group accounts in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Parent Company accounts on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent Company accounts the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant and reliable state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU assess the Group and Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Parent Company and enable them to ensure that its accounts comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of accounts that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a strategic report Directors report Directors remuneration report and corporate governance statement that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of accounts may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement of the Directors in respect of the annual accounts We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the accounts prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the strategic report and Directors report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the issuer and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
We consider the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Roger Whiteside Richard Hutton Chief Executive Finance Director 27 February 2018 71 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Opinions and conclusions arising from our audit Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the accounts of Greggs plc the Company for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 which comprise the consolidated income statement consolidated statement of comprehensive income balance sheets statements of changes in equity statements of cashflows and the related notes including the accounting policies.
In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 30 December 2017 and of the Groups profit for the period then ended the Group accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the Parent Company accounts have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the accounts have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group accounts Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Our audit opinion is consistent with our report to the Audit Committee.
We were appointed as auditor by the Company before 1984.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is for more than the 34 financial years ended 30 December 2017.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and we remain independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities.
No nonaudit services prohibited by that standard were provided.
Overview
Materiality
Group accounts as a whole 4m 2016 3.9m 5% 2016 5% of normalised PBT Risks of material misstatement Group and Parent vs 2016 New Eventdriven Recoverability of property plant and equipment Recurring risks Dilapidation provisions 72 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the accounts and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
We summarise below the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance in arriving at our audit opinion above together with our key audit procedures to address those matters and as required for public interest entities our results from those procedures.
These matters were addressed and our results are based on procedures undertaken in the context of and solely for the purpose of our audit of the accounts as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and consequently are incidental to that opinion and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
The risk Our response Recoverability of property plant and equipment Group and Parent
319.2m 2016 Refer to page 50 Audit Committee report pages 8283 accounting policy and pages 9394 financial disclosures In 2016 the Group announced a largescale investment programme in manufacturing and distribution operations.
The next phase of the supply chain investment programme including the creation of centres of excellence was announced in early 2017.
The consolidation of certain production processes may reduce the useful economic life and recoverable amount of certain assets.
Where assets are considered recoverable but will no longer be used once the programme progresses this may result in the need for accelerated depreciation.
Where the assets are no longer considered recoverable an impairment should be recognised.
Subjective estimate Identifying the affected assets requires fixed assets information which reflects the current location and use of supply chain assets.
There is a risk that all relevant assets may not be appropriately captured or that assets may be provided against which continue to be used elsewhere in the Group.
Determining the period over which to accelerate the depreciation of assets depends on when the assets are expected to be used by the Group.
This is a judgemental assessment of future activities and there is a risk that assets may be depreciated over the incorrect period.
Our procedures included Personnel interviews We obtained a detailed understanding of the progress of this phase of the programme and the forecast business and financial impacts as at the period end Methodology choice We assessed the Groups assumptions around useful economic lives of assets with reference to detailed plans for the programme Site visits We visited a sample of affected supply sites to test that the data used in the Groups assessment reflected the pattern of use and location of assets.
As part of these visits we independently identified affected assets and compared these with those identified by the Group for impairment or accelerated depreciation Test of detail We critically assessed whether all relevant assets had been considered inspected the fixed asset register for assets which may become obsolete and compared these with those assets already provided against Assessing application We challenged the classification of items as exceptional charges for the period and tested that items presented as exceptional were incurred as a result of the programme with reference to internal plans and communications and Assessing transparency We considered the adequacy and accuracy of the related disclosures in the accounts and compliance of the annual report with the rules for alternative performance measures.
Our results We found the Groups assessment of the property plant and equipment balance to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The risk Our response Retail property provisions Group and Parent
Refer to pages 5051 Audit Committee Report pages 81 and 85 accounting policy and page 103 financial disclosures The Group leases the majority of its shops and has circa 1600 shop leases at the end of the period.
Subjective estimate For the majority of shop leases the Group has obligations to restore shops to a certain condition at the end of the lease and provisions may be required for the costs of doing so.
Determining provisions involves estimation of the costs anticipated to make good any alterations to properties and consideration of obligations present in lease agreements.
Both of these factors can vary significantly between shops and whilst the majority of leases contain dilapidation clauses the Group does not always incur costs as a consequence.
We continue to perform procedures over onerous lease provisions.
However following the Groups exit from a number of leases we have not assessed the onerous lease aspect of the provision as one of the most significant risks in our current period audit and therefore it is not separately identified in our report.
Our procedures included Historical comparisons We critically assessed the methodology applied to identify properties which required dilapidation provisions and the reasonableness of estimated costs in the context of Greggs historic experience Test of detail We inspected a sample of the Groups lease agreements to compare the relevant clauses with the Groups approach to provisioning Comparisons We tested whether dilapidation obligations had been provided for by selecting a sample concentrating on known and planned closures or resites of shops Our sector experience We considered specific issues on certain Group properties such as the shops which previously had instore bakeries and critically assessed the impact of these on the likely level of dilapidation costs and Assessing transparency We also considered the adequacy of the Groups disclosures about the degree of estimation involved in arriving at the provisions.
Our results We found the Groups estimated dilapidations provisions to be acceptable 2016 acceptable.
We continue to perform procedures over provisions in respect of restructuring costs.
However as the Groups supply site investment programme has progressed into the next phase this risk has reduced.
We have not assessed this as one of the most significant risks in our current period audit and therefore it is not separately identified in our report.
Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the accounts as a whole was set at 4.0 million 2016 3.9 million determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before tax normalised to exclude exceptional items as disclosed in Note 4 of the accounts of which it represents 5 per cent 2016 5 per cent.
Materiality for the Parent Company accounts as a whole was set at 4.0 million 2016 3.9 million determined with reference to a benchmark of Company profit before tax normalised to exclude exceptional items of which it represents 5 per cent 2016 5 per cent.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected misstatements exceeding 200000 2016 195000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
The Group audit team performed the audit of the Group as if it was a single aggregated set of financial information which covered 100 per cent 2016 100 per cent of total Group revenue Group profit before tax and total Group assets.
The audit was performed using the materiality levels set out above.
The Group team performed procedures on the items excluded from normalised Group profit before tax.
Whole accounts materiality 2016 3.9m The Group audit team performed the audit of the Group as if it was a single aggregated set of financial information.
Misstatements reported to the Audit Committee 2016 195k Profit before tax excluding exceptional items 81.8m 2016 80.3m
4.0m 2016 3.9m Profit before tax Group materiality 74 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors statement included in the accounts page 81 on the use of the going concern basis of accounting with no material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt over the Group and Companys use of that basis for a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the accounts or the related statement under the Listing Rules set out on page 45 is materially inconsistent with our audit knowledge.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the annual report The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the accounts.
Our opinion on the accounts does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our accounts audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the accounts or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and Directors report Based solely on our work on the other information We have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the Directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial period is consistent with the accounts and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Directors remuneration report In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Disclosures of principal risks and longerterm viability Based on the knowledge we acquired during our accounts audit we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in relation to the Directors confirmation within the viability statement on pages 3435 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity the principal risks and Uncertainties disclosures describing these risks and explaining how they are being managed and mitigated and the Directors explanation in the viability statement of how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they considered that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Under the Listing Rules we are required to review the viability statement.
We have nothing to report in this respect.
Corporate governance disclosures We are required to report to you if we have identified material inconsistencies between the knowledge we acquired during our accounts audit and the Directors statement that they consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy or the section of the annual report describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
We are required to report to you if the Corporate Governance Statement does not properly disclose a departure from the 11 provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code specified by the Listing Rules for our review.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company accounts and the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 70 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the accounts including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of accounts that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the accounts as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud other irregularities or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud other irregularities or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the accounts.
The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud or other irregularities is higher than for one resulting from error as they may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal control and may involve any area of law and regulation not just those directly affecting the accounts.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
Irregularities  ability to detect Our audit aimed to detect noncompliance with relevant laws and regulations irregularities that could have a material effect on the accounts.
In planning and performing our audit we considered the impact of laws and regulations in the specific areas of Food Safety and Health and Safety given the industry in which the Group operates.
We identified these areas through discussion with the Directors and other management as required by auditing standards and from our sector experience.
In addition we had regard to laws and regulations in core areas such as financial reporting and company and taxation legislation.
We considered the extent of compliance with those laws and regulations that directly affect the accounts being Food Safety and Health and Safety as part of our procedures on the related accounts items.
For the remaining laws and regulations we made enquiries of Directors and other management as required by auditing standards.
We communicated identified laws and regulations throughout our team and remained alert to any indications of noncompliance throughout the audit.
As with any audit there remained a higher risk of nondetection of irregularities as these may involve collusion forgery intentional omissions misrepresentations or the override of internal controls.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Mick Thompson Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants Quayside House 110 Quayside Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3DX 27 February 2018 76 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Excluding exceptional items
Total
Excluding exceptional items
Total
Revenue 1 960005  960005 894195  894195 Cost of sales 348098 10060 358158 324289 4367 328656 Gross profit 611907 10060 601847 569906 4367 565539 Distribution and selling costs 476215 198 476017 441246 594 441840 Administrative expenses 53517  53517 48315 216 48531 Operating profit 82175 9862 72313 80345 5177 75168 Finance expense 6 368  368 26  26 Profit before tax 36 81807 9862 71945 80319 5177 75142 Income tax 8 16923 1884 15039 18064 915 17149 Profit for the financial year attributable to equity holders of the Parent 64884 7978 56906 62255 4262 57993 Basic earnings per share 9 64.5p 7.9p 56.6p 62.0p 4.2p 57.8p Diluted earnings per share 9 63.5p 7.8p 55.7p 60.8p 4.1p 56.7p CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 2016 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016
Profit for the financial year 56906 57993 Other comprehensive income Items that will not be recycled to profit and loss Remeasurements on defined benefit pension plans 20 15962 18791 Tax on remeasurements on defined benefit pension plans 8 2714 3194 Other comprehensive income for the financial year net of income tax 13248 15597 Total comprehensive income for the financial year 70154 42396 CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 2016 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 77 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
BALANCE SHEETS at 30 December 2017 2016 31 December 2016 Group Parent Company
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 10 14737 14254 14737 14254 Property plant and equipment 11 319195 307363 319788 307956 Investments 12   4987 4987 Deferred tax asset 13 782 1750 1231 2199 334714 323367 340743 329396 Current assets Inventories 14 18688 15934 18688 15934 Trade and other receivables 15 33365 30713 33365 30713 Cash and cash equivalents 16 54503 45960 54503 45960 106556 92607 106556 92607 Total assets 441270 415974 447299 422003
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 17 107126 104924 114933 112731 Current tax liability 18 8714 10426 8714 10426 Provisions 21 12090 6088 12090 6088 127930 121438 135737 129245 Noncurrent liabilities Other payables 19 5127 5599 5127 5599 Defined benefit pension liability 20 7506 22851 7506 22851 Longterm provisions 21 1344 1426 1344 1426 13977 29876 13977 29876 Total liabilities 141907 151314 149714 159121 Net assets 299363 264660 297585 262882
Capital and reserves Issued capital 22 2023 2023 2023 2023 Share premium account 13533 13533 13533 13533 Capital redemption reserve 2tel416 Retained earnings 283391 248688 281613 246910 Total equity attributable to equity holders of the Parent 299363 264660 297585 262882 The accounts on pages 76 to 105 were approved by the Board of Directors on 27 February 2018 and were signed on its behalf by Roger Whiteside Richard Hutton Company Registered Number Page Title at start Content Section at start Balance sheets 78 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 Attributable to equity holders of the Company
Issued
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 3 January 2016 2023 13533 416 248697 264669 Total comprehensive income for the year Profit for the financial year    57993 57993 Other comprehensive income    15597 15597 Total comprehensive income for the year    42396 42396 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Sale of own shares    4063 4063 Purchase of own shares    12398 12398 Sharebased payment transactions 20    1994 1994 Dividends to equity holders 22    30936 30936 Tax items taken directly to reserves 8    5128 5128 Total transactions with owners    42405 42405 Balance at 31 December 2016 2023 13533 416 248688 264660 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 Attributable to equity holders of the Company
Issued
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 January 2017 2023 13533 416 248688 264660 Total comprehensive income for the year Profit for the financial year    56906 56906 Other comprehensive income    13248 13248 Total comprehensive income for the year    70154 70154 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Sale of own shares    5358 5358 Purchase of own shares    11352 11352 Sharebased payment transactions 20    1835 1835 Dividends to equity holders 22    32187 32187 Tax items taken directly to reserves 8    895 895 Total transactions with owners    35451 35451 Balance at 30 December 2017 2023 13533 416 283391 299363 STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 2016 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 Page Title at start Content Section at start Statements of changes in equity 79 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Parent Company 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 Attributable to equity holders of the Company
Issued
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 3 January 2016 2023 13533 416 246945 262917 Total comprehensive income for the year Profit for the financial year 7    57967 57967 Other comprehensive income    15597 15597 Total comprehensive income for the year    42370 42370 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Sale of own shares    4063 4063 Purchase of own shares    12398 12398 Sharebased payment transactions 20    1994 1994 Dividends to equity holders 22    30936 30936 Tax items taken directly to reserves 8    5128 5128 Total transactions with owners    42405 42405 Balance at 31 December 2016 2023 13533 416 246910 262882 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 Attributable to equity holders of the Company
Issued
Share premium
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 January 2017 2023 13533 416 246910 262882 Total comprehensive income for the year Profit for the financial year 7    56906 56906 Other comprehensive income    13248 13248 Total comprehensive income for the year    70154 70154 Transactions with owners recorded directly in equity Sale of own shares    5358 5358 Purchase of own shares    11352 11352 Sharebased payment transactions 20    1835 1835 Dividends to equity holders 22    32187 32187 Tax items taken directly to reserves 8    895 895 Total transactions with owners    35451 35451 Balance at 30 December 2017 2023 13533 416 281613 297585 STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 2016 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 continued Page Title at start Content Section at start 80 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group Parent Company
Operating activities Cash generated from operations see below 134470 133773 134470 133773 Income tax paid 17602 16157 17602 16157 Net cash inflow from operating activities 116868 117616 116868 117616 Investing activities Acquisition of property plant and equipment 68646 74016 68646 74016 Acquisition of intangible assets 3918 6106 3918 6106 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 2171 4698 2171 4698 Interest received tel124 Net cash outflow from investing activities 70144 75300 70144 75300 Financing activities Sale of own shares 5358 4063 5358 4063 Purchase of own shares 11352 12398 11352 12398 Dividends paid 22 32187 30936 32187 30936 Net cash outflow from financing activities 38181 39271 38181 39271 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 8543 3045 8543 3045 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 16 45960 42915 45960 42915 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 16 54503 45960 54503 45960 Cash flow statement  cash generated from operations Profit for the financial year 56906 57993 56906 57967 Amortisation 10 3435 2100 3435 2100 Depreciation 11 50044 43453 50044 43453 Reversal of impairmentimpairment 11 415 488 415 488 Loss on sale of property plant and equipment 2719 2476 2719 2476 Release of government grants 472 472 472 472 Sharebased payment expenses 20 1835 1994 1835 1994 Finance expense Income tax expense 8 15039 17149 15039 17175 Increase in inventories 2754 490 2754 490 Increase in receivables 2652 3066 2652 3066 Increase in payables 4497 11845 4497 11845 Increase in provisions 5920 277 5920 277 Cash from operating activities 134470 133773 134470 133773 STATEMENTS OF CASHFLOWS for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 2016 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016 Page Title at start Content Section at start Statements of cashflows 81 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Significant accounting policies Greggs plc the Company is a company incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The Group accounts consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group.
The results of the associate are not consolidated on the grounds of materiality.
The Parent Company accounts present information about the Company as a separate entity and not about its Group.
The accounts were authorised for issue by the Directors on 27 February 2018.
Both the Parent Company accounts and the Group accounts have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU adopted IFRSs IFRIC interpretations and the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
On publishing the Parent Company accounts here together with the Group accounts the Company is taking advantage of the exemption in s408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present its individual income statement and related notes that form a part of these approved accounts.
The accounts are presented in pounds sterling rounded to the nearest thousand and are prepared on the historical cost basis except the defined benefit pension assetliability which is recognised as plan assets less the present value of the defined benefit obligation.
The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Directors report and strategic report on pages 03 to 70.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows and liquidity position are described in the financial review on pages 24 to 27.
In addition Note 2 to the accounts includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital its financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Group chose not to restate business combinations prior to the IFRS transition date 1 January 2004 as no significant acquisitions had taken place during the previous ten years.
The Groups policy up to and including 1997 was to eliminate goodwill arising upon acquisitions against reserves.
Under IFRS 1 and IFRS 3 such goodwill remains eliminated against reserves.
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently throughout the Group and to all years presented in these consolidated accounts and are unchanged from previous years.
There are no accounting standards amendments or interpretations that have been adopted by the Group since 1 January 2017.
Going concern Directors have reviewed the Companys operational and investment plans for the next 12 months along with the principal risks and uncertainties that could affect these plans or threaten its liquidity.
The key factors likely to affect future performance and the Companys exposure to risks are set out on pages 33 to 37 of the strategic report.
In addition the financial review on pages 24 to 27 sets out the Companys net cash position and continued strong cash generation.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the next 12 months.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the annual report and accounts.
Key estimates and judgements The preparation of financial information in conformity with adopted IFRSs requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts of assets and liabilities income and expenses.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the year in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that year or in the year of revision and future years if the revision affects both current and future years.
Treatment of items as exceptional The accounts for both the current and the prior year include items which are material and unusual in nature and which are considered to be of such significance that they require separate disclosure on the face of the income statement.
These items relate to the decision to invest in and reshape the Companys supply chain in order to support future growth.
Judgement is required in ensuring that only items that relate directly to this activity are separately presented.
Dilapidation provisions Dilapidation provisions have been included in the accounts based on a judgement of the future expected repair costs required under the terms of the lease to restore the Groups leased buildings to their fair condition at the end of their respective lease terms where it is considered a reliable estimate can be made.
These provisions represent the best estimate of the liability at the balance sheet date.
Expectations will be revised each period until the actual liability arises with any difference accounted for in the period in which the revision is made.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS Page Title at start Content Section at start Notes to the consolidated accounts 82 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued b Basis of preparation continued Key estimates and judgements continued Realisable value of property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
For example bakery equipment may be impaired if it is no longer in use andor shop fittings may be impaired if sales in that shop fall.
When a review for impairment is conducted the recoverable amount is estimated based on either valueinuse calculations or fair value less costs of disposal.
Valueinuse calculations are based on managements estimates of future cash flows generated by the assets and an appropriate discount rate.
Consideration is also given to whether the impairment assessments made in prior years remain appropriate based on the latest expectations in respect of recoverable amount.
Where it is concluded that the impairment has reduced a reversal of the impairment is recorded.
The restructuring of supply chain operations in 2017 including the consolidation of production processes gave rise to the need to evaluate the useful lives and realisable values of the assets used in the supply chain.
The key judgements in assessing the recoverable amount for assets used in the supply chain which are included in either land and buildings or plant and equipment within property plant and equipment are determining remaining useful economic lives or how assets would be priced by market participants.
The sensitivities for growth rate discount rate and lease term used in testing shop assets which are included in fixtures and fittings within property plant and equipment for impairment have been considered and are deemed not significant.
For instance a two per cent change in the growth rate would result in no change in the impairment charge.
The useful economic lives of items of property plant and equipment are reviewed if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets are likely to become obsolete before the end of their current estimated life.
If the asset is expected to become obsolete then consideration is given as to the likely remaining life of the asset whether the asset can be reused in some other capacity and whether it has any residual recoverable value.
Depreciation of the asset may be accelerated to take account of all of these judgements.
During the year the consolidation of production processes triggered a reassessment of the remaining useful economic lives of certain assets used in the supply chain.
These assets which previously had useful economic lives of up to ten years are now depreciated on an accelerated basis over a ten to 28month period.
Postretirement benefits The determination of the defined benefit obligation of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme depends on the selection of certain assumptions including the discount rate inflation rate mortality rates and commutation.
Differences arising from actual experience or future changes in assumptions will be reflected in future years.
The key assumptions made for 2017 are given in Note 20.
The consolidated accounts include the results of Greggs plc and its subsidiary undertakings for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017.
The comparative period is the 52 weeks ended 31 December 2016.
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Company.
The Company controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The accounts of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated accounts from the date on which control commences until the date on which control ceases.
Associates are those entities in which the Group has significant influence but not control over the financial and operating policies.
Significant influence is presumed to exist when the Group holds between 20 and 50 per cent of the voting power of another entity.
At the year end the Group has one associate which has not been consolidated on the grounds of materiality see Note 12.
Intragroup balances and any unrealised gains and losses or income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated accounts.
Exceptional items are defined as items of income and expenditure which are material and unusual in nature and which are considered to be of such significance that they require separate disclosure on the face of the income statement.
Any future movements on items previously classified as exceptional will also be classified as exceptional.
Transactions in foreign currencies are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 83 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Groups only intangible assets relate to software and the costs of its implementation which are measured at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Subsequent expenditure is capitalised only when it increases the future economic benefits embodied in the specific asset to which it relates.
All other expenditure is recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Amortisation is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the estimated useful lives of intangible assets from the date that they are available for use.
The estimated useful lives for the current and comparative periods are five years.
Assets in the course of development are recategorised and amortisation commences when the assets are available for use.
Items of property plant and equipment are stated at cost or deemed cost less accumulated depreciation see below and impairment losses see accounting policy k.
The cost of selfconstructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour.
The cost of replacing a component of an item of property plant and equipment is recognised in the carrying amount of the item if it is probable that the future economic benefits embodied within the component will flow to the Group and its costs can be measured reliably.
The carrying value of the replaced component is derecognised.
The costs of the daytoday servicing of property plant and equipment are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Depreciation is provided so as to write off the cost less residual value of each item of property plant and equipment during its expected useful life using the straightline method over the following periods Freehold and long leasehold buildings 40 years Short leasehold properties 10 years or length of lease if shorter Plant machinery equipment vehicles fixtures and fittings 3 to 10 years Freehold land is not depreciated.
Depreciation methods useful lives and residual values if not insignificant are reassessed annually.
These assets are recategorised and depreciation commences when the assets are available for use.
Noncurrent investments comprise investments in subsidiaries and associates which are carried at cost less impairment.
Current investments comprise fixedterm fixedrate bank deposits where the term is greater than three months.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs of completion and selling expenses.
The cost of inventories includes expenditure incurred in acquiring the inventories and direct production labour costs.
Cash and cash equivalents comprises cash balances and call deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of the statement of cash flows.
The carrying amounts of the Group and Companys assets other than inventories and deferred tax assets are reviewed at each balance sheet date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
Impairment reviews are carried out on an individual shop basis unless there are a number of shops in the same location in which case the impairment review is based on the location.
An impairment loss is recognised whenever the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement.
Impairment losses recognised in prior years are assessed at each reporting date and reversed if there has been a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the assets carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation if no impairment loss had been recognised.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 84 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued l Noncurrent assets held for sale Noncurrent assets that are expected to be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use are classified as held for sale.
Immediately before classification as held for sale the assets are remeasured in accordance with the Group and Companys accounting policies.
Thereafter generally the assets are measured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less cost to sell.
Once classified as held for sale assets are no longer depreciated or amortised.
When share capital recognised as equity is repurchased the amount of the consideration paid including directly attributable costs is recognised as a deduction from equity.
Repurchased shares that are held in the employee share ownership plan are classified as treasury shares and are presented as a deduction from total equity.
Dividends are recognised as a liability when the Company has an obligation to pay and the dividend is no longer at the Companys discretion.
All retained earnings are distributable and are the only such reserves.
The Group and Parent Company accounts include the assets and related liabilities of the Greggs Employee Benefit Trust EBT.
In both the Group and Parent Company accounts the shares held by the EBT are stated at cost and deducted from total equity.
Shortterm employee benefits are expensed as the related service is provided.
A liability is recognised for the amount expected to be paid if the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be measured reliably.
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension plans are recognised as an expense in the income statement when they are due.
The Companys net obligation in respect of defined benefit pension plans is calculated by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in return for their service in the current and prior periods that benefit is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any plan assets at bid price is deducted.
The Company determines the net interest on the net defined benefit assetliability for the period by applying the discount rate used to measure the defined benefit obligation at the beginning of the annual period to the net defined benefit assetliability.
The discount rate is the yield at the reporting date on bonds that have a credit rating of at least AA that have maturity dates approximating to the terms of the Companys obligations and that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits are expected to be paid.
Remeasurements arising from defined benefit plans comprise actuarial gains and losses and the return on plan assets excluding interest.
The Company recognises them immediately in other comprehensive income and all other expenses related to defined benefit plans in employee benefit expenses in the income statement.
When the benefits of a plan are changed or when a plan is curtailed the portion of the changed benefit related to past service by employees or the gain or loss on curtailment is recognised immediately in profit or loss when the plan amendment or curtailment occurs.
The calculation of the defined benefit obligation is performed by a qualified actuary using the projected unit credit method.
When the calculation results in a benefit to the Company the recognised asset is limited to the present value of benefits available in the form of any future refunds from the plan or reductions in future contributions and takes into account the adverse effect of any minimum funding requirements.
The share option programme allows Group employees to acquire shares of the Company.
The fair value of share options granted is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured at grant date using an appropriate model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were granted and is spread over the period during which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The amount recognised as an expense is adjusted to reflect the actual number of share options that vest except where forfeiture is only due to share prices not achieving the threshold for vesting.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 85 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Termination benefits are expensed at the earlier of the date at which the Group can no longer withdraw the offer of these benefits and the date at which the Group recognises costs for a restructuring.
If benefits are not expected to be settled wholly within 12 months of the reporting date they are discounted.
A provision is recognised if as a result of a past event the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation that can be estimated reliably and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability.
A provision for restructuring is recognised when the Group has approved a detailed and formal restructuring plan and the restructuring either has commenced or has been announced publicly.
Future operating costs are not provided for.
Provisions for onerous leases are recognised when the Group believes that the unavoidable costs of meeting the lease obligations exceed the economic benefits expected to be received under the lease.
Before a provision is established the Group recognises any impairment loss on the associated assets.
The Group provides for property dilapidations where appropriate based on the future expected repair costs required to restore the Groups leased buildings to their fair condition at the end of their respective lease terms where it is considered a reliable estimate can be made.
Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised as income on receipt of cash or card payment.
Revenue is measured net of discounts promotions and value added taxation.
Franchise sales are recognised when goods are dispatched to franchisees.
Additional franchise royalty fee income generally calculated as a percentage of gross sales income is recognised on an accruals basis in accordance with the relevant agreement.
Preopening capital fitout costs are recharged to the franchisee and represent a key performance obligation of the overall franchise sales agreement.
These recharges are recognised as income on completion of the related fitout.
Wholesale sales are recognised when goods are dispatched to customers.
Amounts received for gift cards or as part of the loyalty programme are deferred.
They are recognised as revenue when the Group has fulfilled its obligation to supply products under the terms of the programme or when it is no longer probable that these amounts will be redeemed.
No adjustment is made to revenue to reflect the fair value of the free items provided under the loyalty scheme as these would be immaterial to the accounts.
The costs of these free items are expensed as the products are provided to the customer.
Government grants are recognised in the balance sheet initially as deferred income when there is a reasonable assurance that they will be received and that the Group will comply with the conditions attaching to them.
Grants that compensate the Group for expenses incurred are recognised in the income statement on a systematic basis in the same periods in which the expenses are incurred.
Grants that compensate the Group for the cost of an asset are recognised in the income statement over the useful life of the asset.
Payments under operating leases are recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Lease incentives received are recognised in the income statement as an integral part of the total lease expense over the term of the lease.
Interest income or expense is recognised using the effective interest method.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 86 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued u Income tax Income tax comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable profit for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Taxable profit differs from profit as reported in the income statement because some items of income or expense are taxable or deductible in different years or may never be taxable or deductible.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable in the future arising from temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used in the calculation of taxable profit.
It is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
The amount of deferred tax recognised is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities using tax rates that are expected to apply when the temporary differences reverse based on rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is not recognised for the following temporary differences the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related deferred tax benefit will be realised.
The Company continuously strives to improve its products and processes through technical and other innovation.
Such expenditure is typically expensed to the income statement as the related intellectual property is not capable of being formalised and does not always have distinguishable research and development phases.
The following standards and amendments to standards which will be relevant to the Group were available for early adoption but have not been applied in these accounts IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective date 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective date 1 January 2018 None of these standards and amendments is expected to have a significant impact on the accounts when they are adopted.
With regard to IFRS 9 the only area of relevance relates to provisions in respect of trade receivables.
Given the immateriality of the Groups provision for bad debts no further analysis will be required.
With regard to IFRS 15 the Group has considered all current revenue streams and concluded that none of them will require any change of treatment under the new standard.
IFRS 16 Leases was adopted by the EU on 31 October 2017.
The effective date for implementation is 1 January 2019.
The Group continues to work on a project to effect this implementation and be in a position to give a quantification of the impact by the end of 2018.
The preferred software solution for the project has been selected and the Group plans to start work on the implementation of this in March 2018.
Segmental analysis The Board is considered to be the chief operating decisionmaker of the Group in the context of the IFRS 8 definition.
In addition to its retail activities the Group generates revenues from franchise and wholesale.
However these elements of the business are not sufficiently significant to be Reportable Segments in the context of IFRS 8.
Products and services  the Group sells a consistent range of fresh bakery goods sandwiches and drinks in its shops.
The Group also provides frozen bakery products to its wholesale customers.
Major customers  the majority of sales are made to the general public on a cash basis.
A small proportion of sales are made on credit to certain organisations including wholesale customers but these are immaterial in a Group context.
Geographical areas  all results arise in the UK.
The Board regularly reviews the revenues of each segment separately but receives information on profits assets and liabilities on an aggregated basis consistent with the Group accounts.
Of the Groups revenue 891778000 2016 835786000 was attributable to the retail segment.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 87 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial risk management Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
Retail sales represent a large proportion of the Groups sales and present no credit risk as they are made for cash or card payments.
The Group does offer credit terms on sales to its wholesale and franchise customers.
In such cases the Group operates effective credit control procedures in order to minimise exposure to overdue debts.
Counterparty risk is also considered low.
All of the Groups surplus cash is held with highlyrated banks in line with Group policy.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group operates with net current liabilities and is therefore reliant on the continued strong performance of the retail portfolio to meet its shortterm liabilities.
This is a wellestablished and proven business model.
Any increase in shortterm liquidity risk can be mitigated by reducing capital expenditure.
The model has been tested in various scenarios for the Groups viability statement which is included in the strategic report on page 81.
The Group had significant cash resources at the year end.
Market risk Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates interest rates and equity prices will affect the Groups income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments.
Market risk is not significant and therefore sensitivity analysis would not be meaningful.
Currency risk The Group has no regular transactions in foreign currency although there are occasional purchases mainly of capital items denominated in foreign currency.
Whilst certain costs such as electricity and wheat can be influenced by movements in the US dollar actual contracts are priced in sterling.
In respect of those key costs which are volatile such as electricity and flour the price may be fixed for a period of time in line with Group policy.
All such contracts are for the Groups own expected usage.
Interest rate risk The Group has low exposure to interest rate risk.
Interest only arises on its bank deposits and overdrafts and the defined benefit pension scheme liability.
Net financial expense in the year was 368000 2016 26000.
Equity price risk The Group has no equity investments other than its subsidiaries and associate.
As disclosed in Note 20 the Groups defined benefit pension scheme has investments in equityrelated funds.
Capital management The Board defines capital as the equity of the Group.
The Group has remained net cash positive with funding requirements met by cash generated from retail operations.
The Board considers that it is not currently appropriate to take on structural debt given the inherent leverage of the leasehold shop estate and working capital requirements.
The Boards policy on dividend levels is to pursue a progressive dividend policy that pays due regard to the growth of earnings per share over the medium term the cashgenerative nature of the business and the continuing determination to deliver value to shareholders.
The Board would expect to return any material level of surplus capital to shareholders likely by way of a special dividend.
The Board reserves the option to purchase its own shares in the market dependent on market prices and surplus cash levels.
The trustees of the Greggs Employment Benefit Trust also purchase shares for future satisfaction of employee share options.
Financial instruments Group and Parent Company All of the Groups surplus cash is invested as cash placed on deposit or fixedterm deposits.
The Groups treasury policy has as its principal objective the achievement of the maximum rate of return on cash balances whilst maintaining an acceptable level of risk.
Other than mentioned below there are no financial instruments derivatives or commodity contracts used.
Financial assets and liabilities The Groups main financial assets comprise cash and cash equivalents and fixedterm deposits.
Other financial assets include trade receivables arising from the Groups activities.
Other than trade and other payables the Group had no financial liabilities within the scope of IAS 39 as at 30 December 2017 2016 nil.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 88 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial risk management continued Financial instruments continued Fair values The fair value of the Groups financial assets and liabilities is not materially different from their carrying values.
Financial assets and liabilities comprise principally of trade receivables and trade payables and the only interest bearing balances are the bank deposits and borrowings which attract interest at variable rates.
Interest rate credit and foreign currency risk The Group has not entered into any hedging transactions during the year and considers interest rate credit and foreign currency risks not to be significant.
Profit before tax Profit before tax is stated after chargingcrediting Amortisation of intangible assets 3435 2100 Depreciation on owned property plant and equipment 50044 43453 Reversal of impairmentimpairment of owned property plant and equipment 415 488 Loss on disposal of fixed assets 2719 2476 Release of government grants 472 472 Payments under operating leases  property rents 50933 48335 Research and development expenditure 325 325 Auditors remuneration Audit of these accounts 154 150 Audit of pension schemes accounts 8 10 Other services  tax advisory  3 All other services 9 15 Amounts paid to the Companys auditor in respect of services to the Company other than the audit of the Companys accounts have not been disclosed as the information is required instead to be presented on a consolidated basis.
Exceptional items Cost of sales Supply chain restructuring  redundancy 7458 3028 gain on property disposal 403 depreciation and asset writeoff 1245 1852 transfer of operations 1302 44 property related 458 Prior year items  dilapidations  557 10060 4367 Distribution and selling Supply chain restructuring  redundancy  1108 transfer of operations  356 Prior year items  property related 198 870 Administrative expenses Restructuring of support functions  391 Prior year items  redundancy  175 Total exceptional items 9862 5177 Supply chain restructuring This charge arises from the decisions announced in 2016 and 2017 to invest in and reshape the Companys supply chain in order to support future growth.
In 2017 the costs relate to the sale of one bakery site including the gain on disposal redundancy costs relating to the consolidation of production processes accelerated depreciation and other contractual obligations that arise as a result of this consolidation.
In 2016 the costs related to the closure of three bakery sites and included redundancy and other employmentrelated costs asset writeoffs impairment and transfer and other contractual obligations that arose as a result of the closure of the sites.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 89 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Restructuring of support functions This charge related to redundancy costs arising from the restructuring of bakery administration and payroll functions.
Prior year items These relate to the movement on costs treated as exceptional in prior years and arise from the settlement of various property and redundancy transactions.
Personnel expenses The average number of persons employed by the Group including Directors during the year was as follows
Number
Management 711 720 Administration 461 464 Production 2988 3028 Shop 17389 16369 21549 20581 The aggregate costs of these persons were as follows
Wages and salaries 321872 301105 Compulsory social security contributions 22535 22022 Pension costs  defined contribution plans 20 11258 11886 Equitysettled transactions including employers NI costs 20 2575 1873 358240 336886 In addition to wages and salaries the total amount accrued under the Groups employee profit sharing scheme is contained within the main cost categories as follows Cost of sales 2395 2289 Distribution and selling costs 5710 5458 Administrative expenses 1106 1056 9211 8803 For the purposes of IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures key management personnel comprises the Directors and the members of the Operating Board and their remuneration was as follows Salaries and fees 2956 2597 Taxable benefits 93 94 Annual bonus including profit share 1350 1608 Postretirement benefits 352 298 Sharebased payments 933 1136 5684 5733 During the year the Company further considered the requirements of IAS 24 and decided that the definition of key management personnel should be extended to include the Operating Board.
The figures for 2016 have been restated to reflect this wider definition.
The following amounts are disclosed in accordance with Schedule 5 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
Aggregate Directors remuneration 1820 2653 Aggregate amount of gains on exercise of share options 1374 1982 3194 4635 The number of Directors in the defined contribution pension scheme and in the defined benefit pension scheme during the year was two 2016 two.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 90 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Finance expense
Interest income on cash balances 46 173 Foreign exchange gainloss 203 49 Net interest related to defined benefit obligation 20 617 150 Profit attributable to Greggs plc Of the Group profit for the year 56906000 2016 57967000 is dealt with in the accounts of the Parent Company.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 from presenting its own income statement.
Income tax expense Recognised in the income statement
Exceptional items
Excluding exceptional items
Total
Current tax Current year 18902 1756 17146 18716 767 17949 Adjustment for prior years 1256  1256 946  946 17646 1756 15890 17770 767 17003 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 457 128 585 342 148 490 Reduction in tax rate    239  239 Adjustment for prior years 266  266 397  397 Total income tax expense in income statement 16923 1884 15039 18064 915 17149 Reconciliation of effective tax rate The tables below explain the differences between the expected tax expense calculated at the UK statutory rate of 19.25 per cent 2016 20 per cent and the actual tax expense for each year for both the total tax expense and the underlying tax expense excluding the effect of exceptional items.
Total tax expense tel Profit before tax 71945 75142 Income tax using the domestic corporation tax rate 19.25% 13849 20.0% 15028 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1.20% 882 0.9% 697 Nontaxdeductible depreciation 2.00% 1425 2.1% 1554 Loss on disposal of nontaxdeductible assets 0.45% 328 0.1% 93 Impact of reduction in deferred tax rate 0.10% 77 0.4% 326 Adjustment for prior years 2.10% 1522 0.7% 549 Total income tax expense in income statement 20.90% 15039 22.8% 17149 Underlying excluding exceptional items tel Profit before tax 81807 80319 Income tax using the domestic corporation tax rate 19.25% 15748 20.0% 16064 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1.10% 882 0.9% 697 Nontaxdeductible depreciation 1.75% 1425 1.8% 1473 Loss on disposal of nontaxdeductible assets 0.40% 328 0.1% 80 Impact of reduction in deferred tax rate 0.10% 62 0.4% 299 Adjustment for prior years 1.90% 1522 0.7% 549 Total income tax expense in income statement 20.70% 16923 22.5% 18064 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 91 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
A reduction in the rate of corporation tax from 19 per cent to 17 per cent with effect from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
Any timing differences which reverse before 1 April 2020 will do so at 19 per cent and any timing differences which exist at 1 April 2020 will reverse at 17 per cent.
Tax recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity
Deferred tax
Total
Debitcredit
Relating to equitysettled transactions  895 895 5128 Relating to defined benefit plans  remeasurement gainslosses  2714 2714 3194 1819 1819 1934 The deferred tax movements in both the current and prior years relating to equitysettled transactions are in respect of sharebased payments and arise primarily as a result of fluctuations in share price in the year and the stage of maturity of existing schemes.
Earnings per share Basic earnings per share Basic earnings per share for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 is calculated by dividing profit attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 as calculated below.
Diluted earnings per share Diluted earnings per share for the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 is calculated by dividing profit attributable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares adjusted for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares which comprise share options granted to employees outstanding during the 52 weeks ended 30 December 2017 as calculated below.
Profit attributable to ordinary shareholders
Exceptional items
Excluding exceptional items
Total
Profit for the financial year attributable to equity holders of the Parent 64884 7978 56906 62255 4262 57993 Basic earnings per share 64.5p 7.9p 56.6p 62.0p 4.2p 57.8p Diluted earnings per share 63.5p 7.8p 55.7p 60.8p 4.1p 56.7p Weighted average number of ordinary shares
Number
Issued ordinary shares at start of year 101155901 101155901 Effect of own shares held 510293 710295 Weighted average number of ordinary shares during the year 100645608 100445606 Effect of share options on issue 1489067 1921344 Weighted average number of ordinary shares diluted during the year 102134675 102366950 Page Title at start Content Section at start 92 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intangible assets Group and Parent Company
Assets under development
Cost
Balance at 3 January 2016 2532 8973 11505 Additions 5961 145 6106 Transfers 7968 7968 Balance at 31 December 2016 16461 1150 17611 Balance at 1 January 2017 16461 1150 17611 Additions 3522 396 3918 Transfers 762 762 Balance at 30 December 2017 20745 784 21529
Balance at 3 January 2016 1257  1257 Amortisation charge for the year 2100  2100 Balance at 31 December 2016 3357  3357 Balance at 1 January 2017 3357  3357 Amortisation charge for the year 3435  3435 Balance at 30 December 2017 6792  6792 Carrying amounts At 3 January 2016 1275 8973 10248 At 31 December 2016 13104 1150 14254 At 1 January 2017 13104 1150 14254 At 30 December 2017 13953 784 14737 Assets under development relate to software projects arising from the investment in new systems platforms.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 93 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Property plant and equipment
Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Assets under construction
Cost
Balance at 3 January 2016 126999 129764 267707 11168 535638 Additions 7710 13446 50724 2435 74315 Disposals 3427 9083 29898  42408 Transfers 9075 2094  11169 Balance at 31 December 2016 140357 136221 288533 2434 567545 Balance at 1 January 2017 140357 136221 288533 2434 567545 Additions 7606 10246 40586 8037 66475 Disposals 2501 10022 22398  34921 Transfers 1748 686  2434 Balance at 30 December 2017 147210 137131 306721 8037 599099
Balance at 3 January 2016 36019 87650 127806  251475 Depreciation charge for the year 2949 11250 29254  43453 Impairment charge for the year 436  624  1060 Impairment release for the year   572  572 Disposals 1423 8409 25402  35234 Balance at 31 December 2016 37981 90491 131710  260182 Balance at 1 January 2017 37981 90491 131710  260182 Depreciation charge for the year 3770 12022 34252  50044 Impairment charge for the year   104  104 Impairment release for the year   519  519 Disposals 1569 9203 19135  29907 Transfers 164 164 Balance at 30 December 2017 40018 93474 146412  279904 Carrying amounts At 3 January 2016 90980 42114 139901 11168 284163 At 31 December 2016 102376 45730 156823 2434 307363 At 1 January 2017 102376 45730 156823 2434 307363 At 30 December 2017 107192 43657 160309 8037 319195 Assets are reviewed for impairment on a regular basis and provision made where necessary.
For shop assets a discounted cashflow is calculated for each shop using historic cashflows including attributable overheads a zero per cent growth rate the Groups cost of capital of ten per cent as an approximation to that for each individual unit and an appropriate assumption regarding the remaining lease term.
The net book value of the relevant assets attributable to the shop is impaired to the extent that the net present value of the cashflows is lower than the net book value.
Supply chain assets are impaired to their estimated recoverable amount which is generally deemed to be nil.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 94 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Property plant and equipment continued Parent Company Land and buildings Plant and equipment
Assets under construction
Cost
Balance at 3 January 2016 127509 130297 268195 11168 537169 Additions 7710 13446 50724 2435 74315 Disposals 3427 9083 29898  42408 Transfers 9075 2094  11169 Balance at 31 December 2016 140867 136754 289021 2434 569076 Balance at 1 January 2017 140867 136754 289021 2434 569076 Additions 7606 10246 40586 8037 66475 Disposals 2501 10022 22398  34921 Transfers 1748 686  2434 Balance at 30 December 2017 147720 137664 307209 8037 600630
Balance at 3 January 2016 36296 87920 128197  252413 Depreciation charge for the year 2949 11250 29254  43453 Impairment charge for the year 436  624  1060 Impairment release for the year   572  572 Disposals 1423 8409 25402  35234 Balance at 31 December 2016 38258 90761 132101  261120 Balance at 1 January 2017 38258 90761 132101  261120 Depreciation charge for the year 3770 12022 34252  50044 Impairment charge for the year   104  104 Impairment release for the year   519  519 Disposals 1569 9203 19135  29907 Transfers 164 164 Balance at 30 December 2017 40295 93744 146803  280842 Carrying amounts At 3 January 2016 91213 42377 139998 11168 284756 At 31 December 2016 102609 45993 156920 2434 307956 At 1 January 2017 102609 45993 156920 2434 307956 At 30 December 2017 107425 43920 160406 8037 319788 Land and buildings The carrying amount of land and buildings comprises Group Parent Company Freehold property 105576 100725 105809 100958 Short leasehold property 1616 1651 1616 1651 107192 102376 107425 102609 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 95 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Investments
Noncurrent investments Parent Company Shares in subsidiary undertakings
Balance at 3 January 2016 31 December 2016 and 30 December 2017 5828
Balance at 3 January 2016 31 December 2016 and 30 December 2017 841 Carrying amount Balance at 3 January 2016 31 December 2016 1 January 2017 and 30 December 2017 4987 The undertakings in which the Companys interest at the year end is more than 20 per cent are as follows Principal activity Address of registered office Proportion of voting rights and shares held Charles Bragg Bakers Limited Nontrading 1 100% Greggs Leasing Limited Dormant 1 100% Thurston Parfitt Limited Nontrading 1 100% Greggs Properties Limited Property holding 1 100% Olivers U.
Limited Dormant 2 100% Olivers U.
Development Limited Nontrading 2 100% Birketts Holdings Limited Dormant 1 100%
Birkett and Sons Limited Nontrading 1 100% Greggs Trustees Limited Trustees 1 100% Solstice Zone A Management Company Limited Nontrading 3 28%
Held indirectly.
1 Greggs House Quorum Business Park Newcastle upon Tyne NE12 8BU.
2 Clydesmill Bakery 75 Westburn Drive Clydesmill Estate Cambuslang Glasgow G72 7NA.
3 The Abbey Preston Yeovil Somerset BA20 2EN.
Solstice Zone A Management Company Limited was not consolidated on the grounds of materiality.
The Companys subsidiary undertakings listed above were all entitled to exemption under subsections 1 and 2 of section 480 of Companies Act 2006 relating to dormant companies from the requirement to have their accounts audited.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following Assets Liabilities Net Property plant and equipment   3837 4695 3837 4695 Employee benefits 4044 6397   4044 6397 Shortterm temporary differences 575 48   575 48 Tax assetsliabilities 4619 6445 3837 4695 782 1750 Page Title at start Content Section at start 96 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Deferred tax assets and liabilities continued Group continued The movements in temporary differences during the year ended 31 December 2016 were as follows Balance at 3 January 2016
Recognised in equity Balance at 31 December Property plant and equipment 5080 385  4695 Employee benefits 8878 547 1934 6397 Shortterm temporary differences 32 16  48 3830 146 1934 1750 The movements in temporary differences during the year ended 30 December 2017 were as follows Balance at 1 January 2017
Recognised in equity Balance at 30 December Property plant and equipment 4695 858  3837 Employee benefits 6397 534 1819 4044 Shortterm temporary differences 48 527  575 1750 851 1819 782 Parent Company Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following Assets Liabilities Net Property plant and equipment   3388 4246 3388 4246 Employee benefits 4044 6397   4044 6397 Shortterm temporary differences 575 48   575 48 Tax assetsliabilities 4619 6445 3388 4246 1231 2199 The movements in temporary differences during the year ended 31 December 2016 were as follows Balance at 3 January
Recognised in equity Balance at 31 December Property plant and equipment 4605 359  4246 Employee benefits 8878 547 1934 6397 Shortterm temporary differences 32 16  48 4305 172 1934 2199 The movements in temporary differences during the year ended 30 December 2017 were as follows Balance at 1 January 2017
Recognised in equity Balance at 30 December Property plant and equipment 4246 858  3388 Employee benefits 6397 534 1819 4044 Shortterm temporary differences 48 527  575 2199 851 1819 1231 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 97 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Inventories
Group and Parent Company Raw materials and consumables 13330 12375 Work in progress 5358 3559 18688 15934 Trade and other receivables Group and Parent Company Trade receivables 11833 12250 Other receivables 4921 4741 Prepayments 16611 13722 33365 30713 At 30 December 2017 trade receivables are shown net of an allowance for bad debts of 24000 2016 46000 arising in the ordinary course of business.
The ageing of trade receivables that were not impaired at the balance sheet date was Group and Parent Company Not past due date 9897 11563 Past due 130 days 1923 149 Past due 3190 days 11 458 Past due over 90 days 2 80 11833 12250 The Group believes that the unimpaired amounts that are past due by more than 30 days are still collectable in full based on historic payment behaviour and extensive analysis of customer credit risk.
Based on the Groups monitoring of customer credit risk the Group believes that no impairment allowance is necessary in respect of trade receivables not past due.
Cash and cash equivalents Group and Parent Company Cash and cash equivalents 54503 45960 Trade and other payables Group Parent Company Trade payables 48207 49482 48207 49482 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings   7807 7807 Other taxes and social security 7378 7143 7378 7143 Other payables 33325 28744 33325 28744 Accruals and deferred income 17748 19087 17748 19087 Deferred Government grants 46tel107126 104924 114933 112731 Page Title at start Content Section at start 98 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Current tax liability The current tax liability of 8714000 in the Group and the Parent Company 2016 Group and Parent Company 10426000 represents the estimated amount of income taxes payable in respect of current and prior years.
Noncurrent liabilities  other payables Group and Parent Company Deferred Government grants 5127 5599 The Group has been awarded five Government grants relating to the extension of existing facilities and construction of new facilities.
The grants which have all been recognised as deferred income are being amortised over the weighted average of the useful lives of the assets they have been used to acquire.
Employee benefits Defined benefit plan Scheme background The Company sponsors a funded final salary defined benefit pension plan the scheme for qualifying employees.
The scheme was closed to future accrual in 2008 and all remaining employees who are still members of the scheme are now members of the Companys defined contribution scheme.
The scheme is administered by a separate Board of Trustees which is legally separate from the Company.
The Trustees are composed of representatives of both the employer and employees.
The Trustees are required by law to act in the interest of all relevant beneficiaries and are responsible for the investment policy with regard to the assets plus the daytoday administration of the benefits.
UK legislation requires that pension schemes are funded prudently.
The last funding valuation of the Scheme was carried out by a qualified actuary as at 6 April 2017 and showed a surplus.
The Company is currently not required to pay contributions into the scheme.
Profile of the scheme The defined benefit obligation includes benefits for former employees and current pensioners.
Broadly twothirds of the liabilities are attributable to deferred members and onethird to current pensioners.
The scheme duration is an indicator of the weighted average time until benefit payments are made.
For the scheme as a whole the duration is approximately 20 years.
Investment strategy The Company and Trustees have agreed a longterm strategy for reducing investment risk as and when appropriate.
This includes a policy to hold sufficient cash and bond assets to cover the anticipated benefit payments for at least the next five years so as to improve the cashflow matching of the schemes assets and liabilities.
Group and Parent Company Defined benefit obligation 122244 131373 Fair value of plan assets 114738 108522 Net defined benefit liability 7506 22851 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 99 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Liability for defined benefit obligations Changes in the present value of the defined benefit obligation are as follows Group and Parent Company Opening defined benefit obligation 131373 102918 Interest cost 3483 3871 Remeasurement gainslosses changes in mortality assumptions 4879 changes in commutation assumptions 7010 changes in financial assumptions 3770 29387 experience 953 699 Benefits paid 5446 4104 122244 131373 Changes in the fair value of plan assets are as follows Group and Parent Company Opening fair value of plan assets 108522 99008 Net interest on plan assets 2866 3721 Remeasurement gains 8796 9897 Benefits paid 5446 4104 Closing fair value of plan assets 114738 108522 The costs charged in the income statement are as follows
Interest expense on net defined benefit liability 617 150 The amounts recognised in other comprehensive income are as follows
Remeasurement gainslosses on defined benefit pension plans 15962 18791 Cumulative remeasurement gains and losses reported in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income since 28 December 2003 the transition date to adopted IFRSs for the Group and the Parent Company are net losses of 24048000 2016 net losses of 40010000.
The fair value of the plan assets is as follows Group and Parent Company Equities  UK 40494 40239 overseas 45329 42740
Absolute return funds 5486 7280 Cash and cash equivalentsother 3635 910 114738 108522 Page Title at start Content Section at start 100 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Employee benefits continued Defined benefit plan continued Liability for defined benefit obligations continued Principal actuarial assumptions expressed as weighted averages Group and Parent Company 2017 2016 Discount rate 2.50% 2.70% Future salary increases na na Future pension increases 1.7%  2.45% 1.7%  2.45% Mortality assumption Mortality in retirement is assumed to be in line with the S2PXA tables using CMI2016 projections and a longterm rate of 1.25 per cent per annum.
Under these assumptions pensioners aged 65 now are expected to live for a further 22.1 years 2016 22.5 years if they are male and 24.0 years 2016 24.5 years if they are female.
Members currently aged 45 are expected to live for a further 23.9 years 2016 24.4 years from age 65 if they are male and for a further 25.5 years 2016 26.5 years from age 65 if they are female.
The sensitivities regarding the principal assumptions used to measure the scheme liabilities are set out below Change in assumption Impact on scheme liabilities Discount rate 0.1% increase 2.6m decrease Inflation 0.1% decrease 1.6m decrease Mortality rates 1 year decrease 5.2m decrease Commutation assumption The assumptions have been reviewed during the year.
In order to reflect the levels of commutation being experienced by the scheme an allowance has now been included in the valuation for commutation.
The assumption adopted is that 90% of deferred members will opt to commute 25% of their pension at retirement.
The commutation factors used for members aged 65 are 14.00 for males and 15.11 for females.
The adoption of this assumption in respect of commutation has resulted in a decrease in the defined benefit obligation of 7010000.
The other demographic assumptions have been set having regard to latest trends in the scheme.
The triennial valuation of the scheme took place in April 2017.
The outcome of that valuation was considered by the Trustees and the Company and no requirement for future contributions was identified.
Defined contribution plan The Company also operates defined contribution schemes for other eligible employees.
The assets of the schemes are held separately from those of the Group.
The pension cost represents contributions payable by the Group and amounted to 11258000 2016 11886000 in the year.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 101 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Sharebased payments  Group and Parent Company The Group has established a Savings Related Share Option Scheme an Executive Share Option Scheme and a Performance Share Plan.
The terms and conditions of the grants for these schemes are as follows whereby all options are settled by physical delivery of shares Date of grant Employees entitled
Number of shares granted Vesting conditions
Executive Share Option Scheme 13 April 2008 Senior employees 457p 618500 Three years service and EPS growth of 35% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 14 April 2009 Senior employees 356p 2012000 Three years service and EPS growth of 37% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Performance Share Plan 3 March 2012 Senior executives nil 248922 Three years service EPS annual compound growth of 38% over RPI over those three years and TSR position relative to an appropriate comparator group 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 16 March 2013 Senior employees 480p 693000 Three years service and EPS growth of 37% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Performance Share Plan 4 March 2013 Senior executives nil 305592 Three years service EPS annual compound growth of 38% over RPI over those three years and TSR position relative to an appropriate comparator group 10 years Savings Related Share Option Scheme 14 April 2013 All employees 414p 699989 Three years service 3.5 years Performance Share Plan 5 March 2014 Senior executives nil 224599 Three years service EPS annual compound growth of 14% over RPI over those three years and average annual ROCE of 15.517% over those three years 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 17 April 2014 Senior employees 500p 598225 Three years service and EPS growth of 14% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Savings Related Share Option Scheme 15 April 2014 All employees 465p 696344 Three years service 3.5 years Executive Share Option Scheme 18 March 2015 Senior employees 1022p 298045 Three years service and EPS growth of 17% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 18a May 2015 Senior employee 1056p 3285 Three years service and EPS growth of 17% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Performance Share Plan 6 March 2015 Senior executives nil 146174 Three years service EPS annual compound growth of 17% over RPI over those three years and average annual ROCE of 1921.5% over those three years 10 years Savings Related Share Option Scheme 16 April 2015 All employees 818p 391979 Three years service 3.5 years Page Title at start Content Section at start 102 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Date of grant Employees entitled
Number of shares granted Vesting conditions
Performance Share Plan 7 March 2016 Senior executives nil 133271 Three years service EPS average annual growth of 28% over RPI over those three years and average annual ROCE of 2227% over those three years 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 19 April 2016 Senior employees 1088p 235857 Three years service and EPS growth of 28% over RPI on average over those three years 10 years Savings Related Share Option Scheme 17 April 2016 All employees 870p 361853 Three years service 3.5 years Performance Share Plan 8 May 2017 Senior executives nil 206404 Three years service EPS average annual growth of 511% over those three years and average annual ROCE of 2327% over those three years 10 years Executive Share Option Scheme 20 April 2017 Senior employees 1033p 246219 Three years service and EPS growth of 511% on average over those three years 10 years Savings Related Share Option Scheme 18 April 2017 All employees 807p 403560 Three years service 3.5 years The number and weighted average exercise price of share options is as follows 2017 2016
Number of options
Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the year 548p 3521408 446p 4033559 Lapsed during the year 848p 165172 662p 106112 Exercised during the year 374p 1318930 324p 1137020 Granted during the year 677p 856183 782p 730981 Outstanding at the end of the year 649p 2893489 548p 3521408 Exercisable at the end of the year 419p 685933 399p 582327 The options outstanding at 30 December 2017 have an exercise price in the range of nil to 10.88 and have a weighted average contractual life of 5.5 years.
The options exercised during the year had a weighted average market value of 11.19 2016 10.93.
The fair value of services received in return for share options granted is measured by reference to the fair value of share options granted.
The estimate of the fair value of the services received is measured based on the BlackScholes model for all Savings Related Share Option Schemes and Executive Share Option Schemes and for Performance Share Plan options granted from 2014 onwards.
The Monte Carlo option pricing model was used for Performance Share Plans granted prior to 2014.
The fair value per option granted and the assumptions used in these calculations are as follows 2017 2016
Share Plan 8 May 2017 Executive Share
Scheme 20 April 2017 Savings Related Share Option Scheme 18 April 2017
Share Plan 7 March 2016 Executive Share
Scheme 19 April 2016 Savings Related Share Option Scheme 17 April 2016 Fair value at grant date 981p 165p 238p 971p 177p 263p Share price 1072p 1033p 807p 1102p 1088p 870p Exercise price nil 1033p 1009p nil 1088p 1087p Expected volatility 30.25% 30.25% 30.09% 29.5% 29.4% 28.8% Option life 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years 3 years Expected dividend yield 2.95% 3.00% 3.07% 2.60% 2.63% 2.66% Riskfree rate 0.17% 0.17% 0.14% 0.55% 0.48% 0.66% NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Employee benefits continued Sharebased payments  Group and Parent Company continued Page Title at start Content Section at start 103 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The expected volatility is based on historical volatility adjusted for any expected changes to future volatility due to publicly available information.
The historical volatility is calculated using a weekly rolling share price for the threeyear period immediately prior to the option grant date.
The costs charged to the income statement relating to sharebased payments were as follows Share options granted in 2013  134 Share options granted in telShare options granted in telShare options granted in telShare options granted in 2017 427 Total expense recognised as employee costs 1835 1994
Group and Parent Company
Onerous
Redundancy
Other
Total
Dilapidations
Onerous
Redundancy
Other
Total
Balance at start of year 3243 1819 1438 1014 7514 3343 2289  1605 7237 Additional provision in the year ordinary 1954 206  1513 3673 1611 690  22 2323 exceptional  10 7349  7359 72  3964  4036 Utilised in year ordinary 940 352  574 1866 426 306  470 1202 exceptional 95 81 1583  1759 209 268 2526  3003 Provisions reversed during the year ordinary 1152 175   1327 586 200  143 929 Balance at end of year 2956 1321 7204 1953 13434 3243 1819 1438 1014 7514 Included in current liabilities 2689 379 7204 1818 12090 2899 866 1438 885 6088 Included in noncurrent liabilities 267 942  135 1344 344 953  129 1426 2956 1321 7204 1953 13434 3243 1819 1438 1014 7514 The provisions at the end of the year relates to ordinary or exceptional activity as follows Ordinary 2619 713  1953 5285 2757 1034  1014 4805 Exceptional 337 608 7204  8149 486 785 1438  2709 2956 1321 7204 1953 13434 3243 1819 1438 1014 7514 The provision for onerous leases is held in respect of leasehold properties for which the Group is liable to fulfil rent and other property commitments for shops from which either the Group no longer trades or for which future trading cash flows are projected to be insufficient to cover these costs.
Amounts have been provided for the shortfall between projected cashflows and property costs up to the lease expiry date or other appropriate estimated date.
Included within the provision is 607000 2016 607000 in respect of possible recourse on leases which have been conditionally assigned.
The provision for redundancy costs arises from the supply chain restructuring described in Note 4.
Other provisions relate predominantly to national insurance costs on future share option exercises.
The majority of all of the provisions are expected to be utilised within four years such that the impact of discounting would not be material.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 104 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Capital and reserves Share capital Ordinary shares
Number
In issue and fully paid at start and end of year  ordinary shares of 2p 101155901 101155901 The holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
Capital redemption reserve The capital redemption reserve relates to the nominal value of issued share capital bought back by the Company and cancelled.
Own shares held Deducted from retained earnings is 28327000 2016 22333000 in respect of own shares held by the Greggs Employee Benefit
The Trust which was established during 1988 to act as a repository of issued Company shares holds 504215 shares 2016 878235 shares with a market value at 30 December 2017 of 7054000 2016 8519000 which have not vested unconditionally in employees.
During the year the Trust purchased 986150 shares for an aggregate consideration of 11352000 and sold 1360170 shares for an aggregate consideration of 5358000.
The shares held by the Greggs Employee Benefit Trust can be purchased either by employees on the exercise of an option under the Greggs Executive Share Option Schemes Greggs Savings Related Share Option Scheme and Greggs Performance Share Plan or by the trustees of the Greggs Employee Share Scheme.
The trustees have elected to waive the dividends payable on these shares.
Dividends
The following tables analyse dividends when paid and the year to which they relate Per share pence Per share pence 2015 final dividend  21.2p 2016 interim dividend  9.5p 2016 final dividend 21.5p 2017 interim dividend 10.3p The proposed final dividend in respect of 2017 amounts to 22.0 pence per share 22142000.
This proposed dividend is subject to approval at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these accounts.
2015 final dividend  21326 2016 interim dividend  9610 2016 final dividend 21768 2017 interim dividend 10419 32187 30936 NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS CONTINUED Page Title at start Content Section at start 105 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Operating leases Noncancellable operating lease rentals are payable as follows
Equipment
Total
Property
Equipment
Total
Less than one year 39751 2005 41756 37896 2057 39953 Between one and five years 90070 2949 93019 82492 3672 86164 More than five years 15866  15866 14230  14230 145687 4954 150641 134618 5729 140347 The Group leases the majority of its shops under operating leases.
The leases typically run for a period of ten years with an option to renew the lease after that date.
Lease payments are generally increased every five years to reflect market rentals.
For a small number of the leases the rental is contingent on the level of turnover achieved in the relevant unit these amounts are immaterial.
The inception of the shop leases has taken place over a long period of time and many date back a significant number of years.
They are combined leases of land and buildings.
It is not possible to obtain a reliable estimate of the split of the fair values of the lease interest between land and buildings at inception.
Therefore in determining lease classification the Group evaluated whether both parts are clearly an operating lease or a finance lease.
Firstly title does not pass for the land or buildings.
Secondly because the rent paid to the landlord for the buildings is increased to market rent at regular intervals and the Group does not participate in the residual value of the land or buildings it is judged that substantially all the risks and rewards of the land and buildings are with the landlord.
Based on these qualitative factors it is concluded that the leases are operating leases.
Capital commitments During the year ended 30 December 2017 the Group entered into contracts to purchase property plant and equipment and intangible assets for 10098000 2016 1268000.
These commitments are expected to be settled in the following financial year.
Related parties Identity of related parties The Group has a related party relationship with its subsidiaries see Note 12 and its Directors and executive officers.
Trading transactions with subsidiaries  Group There have been no transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries or associates during the year 2016 nil.
Trading transactions with subsidiaries  Parent Company Amounts owed to related parties Amounts owed by related parties Dormant subsidiaries 7807 7807 The Greggs Foundation is also a related party and during the year the Company made a donation to the Greggs Foundation of 900000 2016 860000 as well as passing on 697000 2016 715000 raised from the sale of carrier bags and 303000 2016 193000 raised from the sale of products.
The Greggs Foundation holds 300000 shares in Greggs plc and Richard Hutton a Director of Greggs plc is a trustee of the Greggs Foundation.
Transactions with key management personnel Details of Directors shareholdings share options emoluments pension benefits and other noncash benefits can be found in the Directors Remuneration report on pages 54 to 69.
Summary information on remuneration of key management personnel is included in Note 5.
Events after the reporting period As noted in the financial review on page 25 the Company has subsequent to the year end exchanged contracts for the disposal of the vacant Twickenham site.
The disposal is conditional on a number of factors including the application for and successful grant of planning permission none of which are expected to be resolved in the 2018 financial year and therefore this asset continues to be classified as noncurrent.
At this stage the total proceeds arising from supply chain site disposals are still expected to be in line with those anticipated in the investment plan.
Page Title at start Content Section at start 106 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 TENYEAR HISTORY as restated as restated Total sales growth % 7.1% 4.8% 0.6% 5.8% 4.8% 3.8% 5.7% 3.7% 7.0% 7.4% companymanaged shop likeforlike sales growth % 4.4% 0.8% 0.2% 1.4% 2.7% 0.8% 4.5% 4.7% 4.2% 3.7% Earnings before interest and tax EBIT excluding exceptional EBIT margin excluding exceptional items % 7.1% 7.4% 7.9% 7.6% 7.0% 5.4% 7.2% 8.7% 9.0% 8.6% Pretax exceptional chargecredit m 4.3   7.4 1.4 8.1 8.5  5.2 9.9 Profit on ordinary activities including exceptional items Diluted earnings per share excluding exceptional Dividend per share pence Total shareholder return % 22% 29% 11% 13% 6% 1% 70% 87.1% 23.4% 47.4% Return on capital employed 26.2% 25.9% 25.9% 24.4% 21.3% 16.4% 22.4% 26.8% 28.1% 26.9% Number of shops in operation at year end 1409 1419 1487 1571 1671 1671 1650 1698 1764 1854
1 2009 and 2014 were 53 week years impacting on total sales growth for that year and the year immediately following.
2 All years prior to 2009 adjusted to take account of the tenforone share split which took place during 2009.
3 Reestated following the adoption of IAS 19 Revised.
4 Restated to include revenue in respect of franchise fitout costs.
5 Includes a special dividend of 20p.
All of the nonGAAP measures detailed above can be calculated from the GAAP measures included in the annual accounts with the exception of those detailed below.
Calculation of alternative performance measures Likeforlike LFL sales growth  compares yearonyear cash sales in our companymanaged shops excluding any shops which opened relocated or closed in the current or prior year and is calculated as follows Current year LFL sales 817533 777204 Prior year LFL sales 788510 745609 Growth 29023 31595 LFL sales growth percentage 3.7% 4.2% Return on capital employed  calculated by dividing profit before tax by the average total assets less current liabilities for the year.
Underlying
Including
Underlying
Including
Profit before tax 81807 71945 80319 75142 Capital employed Opening 294536 294536 277622 277622 Closing 313340 313340 294536 294536 Average 303938 303938 286079 286079 Return on capital employed 26.9% 23.7% 28.1% 26.3% Page Title at start Content Section at start Tenyear history 107 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start 108 Greggs plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start FINANCIAL CALENDAR
Jonathan D Jowett LL.
Solicitor
Registered office Greggs House Quorum Business Park Newcastle upon Tyne NE12 8BU Registered number
National Westminster Bank Plc 149 High Street
Newcastle upon Tyne NE3 1HA
KPMG LLP Quayside House 110 Quayside Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3DX
UBS
5 Broadgate
EC2M 2QS
2 Gresham Street
EC2V 7QP
Muckle LLP Time Central 32 Gallowgate Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 4BF
Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU SECRETARY AND ADVISERS Announcement of results and dividends Half year Late July Full year Early March
Interim MidOctober Final 18 May 2018 Annual report posted to shareholders Late March Annual General Meeting 9 May 2018 corporate.
