CYBG PLC Registered number  England and Wales ARBN 609 948 281 Australia WE ARE PROUD TO HAVE BEEN SERVING OUR CUSTOMERS AND COMMUNITIES FOR OVER 175 YEARS site Head Ofce 30 St.
Vincent Place
G1 2HL London Ofce Floor 15 The Leadenhall Building 122 Leadenhall Street London EC3V 4AB Registered Ofce 20 Merrion Way Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 8NZ ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 A DIFFERENT WAY OF BANKING A DIFFE REN T WAY OF BANKING ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Whats inside this report Strategic report Group at a glance 2 2017 highlights 3 Chairmans statement 5 Our strategy 6
Chief Executive Officers review 7
How we create value 10 Strategy in action 12 Measuring our performance 14 Environment and market outlook 16 Risk overview 18 Operational review 22 Delivering to our stakeholders 28 Overview of Group results 38 Financial performance review 41
Chairmans letter 50 Board of Directors 52 Executive Leadership Team 60 Corporate governance report 62 Governance and Nomination Committee report 76 Audit Committee report 79 Risk Committee report Statement by the Chair of the Remuneration Committee 94 Directors remuneration report Directors report Risk report Risk report 128 Risk classes Credit risk Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Regulatory compliance and conduct risk Operational risk including people risks 173 Financial crime risk Strategic business and financial performance risk 175 Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC 178 Consolidated financial statements Company financial statements Additional information Measuring financial performance  glossary 250
Abbreviations
Country by country reporting 260 Shareholder information Forwardlooking statements Who we are CYBG PLC is a fullservice bank focused on UK consumers and small and mediumsized enterprises SMEs operating under the Clydesdale Bank Yorkshire Bank and B brands.
We serve nearly three million customers through an omnichannel model of online mobile and telephone banking together with a network of 169 branches and 40 business banking centres located mostly in the UKs economic heartlands of Scotland the north of England and the Midlands.
Certain figures contained in this document including financial information may have been subject to rounding adjustments and foreign exchange conversions.
Accordingly in certain instances the sum or percentage change of the numbers contained in this document may not conform exactly to the total figure given.
The forwardlooking statements disclaimer can be found on page 263.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2 Strategic report Group at a glance Our business is delivered through our key brands CYBG operates through the retail and commercial banks Clydesdale Bank established in 1838 in Glasgow Yorkshire Bank founded in 1859 in Halifax and through the digital banking service B created in 2016.
Our omnichannel model is focused on delivering an improved service across every channel where we serve and support our customers.
Our strong and growing digital offering combined with the branch network contact centre and extensive broker channel provides an enviable position from which to grow our business.
To achieve our objectives we are streamlining our front and back office investing in our digital platform to accelerate the adoption of mobile and online tools and increasing inbranch automation.
Drive sustainable customer growth by investing to broaden the franchise across our target segments and core regions while enhancing the customer experience.
Improve efficiency by making our network operations and organisation more efficient and agile for staff and customers.
Capital optimisation by securing Internal ratingsbased IRB accreditation and deploying our capital to support our business ambitions while balancing risk and reward.
Our significant scale 2.7m customers 32bn loans 28bn deposits 169 retail branches Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2017 highlights Delivering sustainable customer growth 7.5% mortgage lending annual growth 5.9% SME core lending annual growth
NIM
2.27% Improving efficiency 7.4% reduction in underlying costs
First statutory profit in over 5 years statutory profit Strongly capitalised 12.4% Common Equity Tier 1 CET1 ratio Improving returns 7.5% underlying Return on Tangible Equity
Inaugural dividend recommended by the Board pence per share Note the key performance indicators KPIs used by management in monitoring the Groups performance and reflected throughout this section are determined on a combination of bases including statutory regulatory and alternative performance measures as detailed in the Glossary on page 253.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 5 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Strategic report
Chairmans statement
2017 was another year of strong progress for CYBG with good momentum in the execution of the three pillars of our strategic plan  sustainable customer growth efficiency and capital optimisation and with it the successful delivery of our financial targets for 2017.
The hard work of the Board the Executive Leadership Team and all of our colleagues means I am pleased to be able to reiterate our mediumterm guidance with renewed confidence.
The Groups successful delivery this year means that I am pleased to announce that the Board is recommending the payment of our inaugural dividend of 1.0 pence per share.
Since the Initial Public Offering IPO we have talked about being a dividend paying stock and this proposed dividend represents a landmark event in the process of transforming CYBG into a bank that generates and distributes a sustainable return on its equity to shareholders.
The continued delivery of our strategy should help us to build on this firm foundation as we move forward.
As well as their commitment to our customers I am very proud of the way my colleagues support the communities in which we operate.
Almost 7000 volunteering hours were undertaken during 2017 and with matching through our charity foundation we have raised over 5.8m for our charity partner Hospice UK among a number of other initiatives.
Economic conditions in the UK remain muted but for the moment at least stable.
Despite the uncertainty surrounding Brexit negotiations and increased inflation causing real wage deflation we have not seen a deterioration in the quality of our assets and we remain focused on delivering sustainable growth within our prudent risk appetite.
I would like to thank all of our colleagues the Executive Leadership Team and the Board for their continued dedication and commitment to the transformation of CYBG.
I would also like to personally thank Richard Gregory who left the Board in January for his contribution over many years.
Our performance in 2017 represents a significant achievement.
It is only the first step in delivering our threeyear plan.
We therefore remain focused on executing the strategy we outlined at our Capital Markets Day in September 2016 in order to deliver an exceptional customer experience for our personal and SME customers and sustainable returns to our shareholders.
Jim Pettigrew
20 November 2017 I am pleased to report on another year of strong progress for CYBG as we continue to execute our strategy to create the only credible alternative to the big UK banks.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 6 Strategic report Our strategy This means continuing to focus on transforming our culture and being recognised as a leading consumer brand and a great place to work.
Our strategy is simple is working and remains unchanged  our strategic priorities of sustainable customer growth efficiency and capital optimisation are being delivered through a strong customer focused culture a robust change management and investment approach and parallel development of our omnichannel capabilities and all of these within a framework of prudent risk management and governance.
Our primary focus is on building a better organisation for our customers and staff and our organic plan is predicated on continuing to improve the areas of our performance that we can control such as costs efficiency and customer experience improvements.
We will continue to evaluate potential inorganic opportunities to enhance our business provided they are in line with our strategic objectives and create value for our shareholders.
We have established a set of capabilities that gives us significant confidence in our ability to execute should such inorganic opportunities arise.
Our strategic priorities
A deposit first philosophy  secure primary account relationship Acquire customers in key target segments younger more affluent Leverage our third party mortgage broker relationships Agile approach to product development Enhance our SME offering to meet the needs of an underserved marketplace Simplify operational processes Focus on endtoend product profitability Further integration of product and service across channels
Improve our cost structure by delivering Network efficiency through our customer banking transformation Operational efficiency through improved customer service A streamlined lower cost management model More for less through improved central cost management Clear internal accountability for delivery Providing capacity to reinvest in our digital and growth agenda
Secure IRB accreditation for Mortgage book during 2018 Remainder of bank in 2019 Improve capital deployment decisioning and reduce exposure to lower yielding mortgages and SME lending We are committed to delivering a strong customercentric banking proposition in the UK.
Underpinned by omnichannel delivery CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 7 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Whether it is prototyping new technologies opening our first consumer innovation lab Studio B or collaborating with Fintech partners with the development of our new small business elending solution we are building a bank focused on a differentiated customer experience that will put customers more in control of their money.
I am delighted to report that we have maintained momentum in delivering our strategic priorities and commitments and as a result we are delivering significantly improved financial performance have recorded our first statutory profit in over five years and are recommending an inaugural dividend to shareholders.
As the only truly fullservice challenger bank of scale across both Retail and SME in the UK market we have delivered ahead of market growth in both mortgages and SME lending and we remain on track to deliver our commitment to provide up to 6bn of lending to SMEs by the end of 2019.
Our results show improved underlying profit sustainable loan growth a stable margin and improved returns  all achieved in a highly competitive market and a continuing low growth low interest rate environment.
Our cost efficiency programme is also ahead of plan with underlying operating costs coming in at 675m down 7% year on year.
We have also continued to work through our legacy conduct issues and our statutory profit includes the impact of a conduct charge of 58m primarily due to historical payment protection insurance PPI misselling.
CYBG is perfectly placed to disrupt the market we have the size and fullservice Retail and SME capabilities that no other UK challenger bank can offer yet we are smaller and more agile than the complex structures of the big five UK banks.
We are well capitalised have a highquality loan book and prudent risk appetite along with powerful established local brands.
These have now been joined by an innovative brand in B which has broadened our customer demographic and reach outside of our core regions.
We have over 100000 B customers since launch in 2016 and we were proud to receive the FStech Award 2017 for Digital Launch of the Year.
The pace and scale of transformation across our business has been considerable in 2017.
We have kept up our relentless focus on enhancing our customers Strategic report
Chief Executive Officers review
As part of our digital journey over the past year we have introduced straightthrough online account opening Apple and Android Pay as well as piloting an innovative new online SME lending facility through one of our Fintech partnerships.
In addition our migration of our Clydesdale and Yorkshire Bank accounts to our digital platform iB is well advanced and we expect all personal customers to begin migrating to iB on the web by the end of 2017 with SME customers to begin migration onto iB both mobile and web in 2018.
Like other banks and high street retailers we are seeing a shift in the way customers choose to do business with us and more often customers are using telephone internet and mobile channels to do daytoday banking.
As a result the number of transactions which take place in branches is falling with customers increasingly using a branch only when they want to speak with us about a significant life event.
We are constantly reviewing our branch footprint and while a number of branches were closed this year we opened new flagship branches in Edinburgh and Birmingham as part of a broader multiyear strategy to expand our presence in key northern cities.
In April we opened our innovation lab Studio B in London.
Unlike anything else on the high street Studio B enables us to collaborate directly with customers and other interested parties on the design of future banking products and services then showcase and test our best ideas with colleagues customers and members of the public  all within a fully functioning customer banking centre.
While in September we expanded our UK presence into Birmingham with the opening of a next generation B store which as well as being a fully operational branch is also a showcase for customers to experience our digital innovations.
Over the next 12 months I am confident we have both the opportunity and the ability to create a differentiated customer experience that positions us as a progressive forwardlooking organisation able to thrive today tomorrow and in the future delivering on commitments to our customers our people and our shareholders.
Finally I am very grateful to the Chairman the Board and our colleagues for their backing and insight as we continue on our journey.
David Duffy Chief Executive Officer CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 8 Strategic report Highlights of the year
October November December January February March April May June July August September CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 9 OUR FIRST AGM AS A LISTED BUSINESS Our Board and members of our Executive Leadership Team travelled to Australia in January for our first AGM as a listed business.
We fully recognise that a significant proportion of our shareholders are not based in the UK and we believe its important that we are able to speak to people face to face about CYBG and our strategy for growing the business.
The decision to host the AGM in Melbourne was warmly received and well attended  we welcomed more than 250 people to the event and an even wider audience joined via a live webcast.
The overall tone of the event was positive reflecting on the solid progress we have made in our landmark first year.
Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information October November December January February March April May June July August September CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 Strategic report How we create value Simple lowrisk banking model Scale and scope of larger players with the agility of a smaller bank Longestablished franchise in core regional and selected national markets Resilient and strongly capitalised balance sheet with a diverse range of funding sources available Cuttingedge scalable and fullservice digital operating platform positioned for the future Experienced Executive Leadership Team and dedicated colleagues Our core business strengths 2.7m retail and business customers Strong market shares in our core regions of Scotland and the North of England Perfectly positioned to support and benefit from the UK Governments Northern Powerhouse initiative Customer proposition increasingly attracting new customers from our underrepresented demographic segments young and affluent means we can offer our broad customer base We offer a range of simple banking products supported by great customer service a fullservice retail and SME banking proposition
Personal current accounts Savings accounts and term deposits
Personal loans Credit cards
SME
Business current accounts Savings and deposits Term lending
Working capital solutions Payment and transaction services Were making our longest ever free daytoday banking offer available to both startups and switchers.
Because we believe businesses from here should be rewarded for banking here.
Business Banking Offer applies to new business customers with a turnover of less than 2 million switching their main business current account or start ups opening their first account within 12 months of beginning trading.
No charges apply in the 25 month period to cash or cheque deposits and withdrawals Direct Debits or other automated transactions.
Cash limit paid in paid out or exchanged of 250000 per annum.
Charges for Other additional services including the Post Office Change Service and borrowing charges are not part of the free banking offer and highlighed in our business banking tariff.
At the end of the period you will move to our Business Tariff.
Borrowing facilities up to 250000 available subject to status fees apply.
Clydesdale Bank PLC is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority Financial Services Register No.
Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Registered in Scotland No.
SC.
Registered Office 30 St.
Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL.
R6075 EXP APR 18 Business Banking Please note that security over your commercial premises will be required and your property may be repossessed if you do not keep up any repayments on your borrowing.
Any other asset used as security which may include your home will be at risk if you break the agreement and may be sold to repay your debt.
A commercial mortgage is a term loan product.
Terms and Conditions apply.
All lending is subject to status and applicants must be aged 18 or over.
An arrangement fee valuation and security fees will be payable.
Maximum mortgage term 20 years.
The commercial mortgage amount and term o ered will depend on an assessment of your business circumstances.
Taking a capital repayment holiday will increase the total interest charged and the total amount payable over the full term of the commercial mortgage.
Buy or improve your business premises with a commercial mortgage from Clydesdale and Y orkshire Bank when you borrow over 25000.
Y ou can choose a repayment term up to 20 years and even build in a capital repayment holiday of up to 5 years  to help boost your cash  ow.
Give your business room to grow with a commercial mortgage Business Commercial
Yorkshire Bank is a trading name of Clydesdale Bank PLC which is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority Financial Services Register No.
Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Registered in Scotland No.
SC.
Registered O ce 30 St.
Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL.
R6725 EXP NOV 18 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 11 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Omnichannel delivery sitesitesite Digital is at the heart of everything we do Our commitment to digital is preparing us for a radically different banking environment in the future We are investing c.
350m to drive a transformation in our customers experience and at the heart of this investment is our iB digital platform Our methods of working are evolving to become more flexible and allow us to bring our products to market more quickly leveraging existing channels Our products are increasingly designed to be sold across all of our distribution channels We created B our digitalonly brand in 2016 and already have over 100000 customers enabled and driven by our digital capability in whichever way our customers choose to interact with us through our three brands CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 12 Strategic report Strategy in action Our strategic priorities Our progress during FY2017 Change since FY2016 Our KPIs for FY2017 Outlook Our strategy in action Drive sustainable customer growth by investing to broaden the franchise across our target segments and regions while enhancing customer experience Current account growth of 5.3% driven by continued success of B and higher business current account balances Enhancements to our mortgage application process contributed to mortgage growth significantly ahead of market Reinvigoration of our SME franchise drove SME loan drawdowns up 13% Number of digital users up 10% annually  over 40% of B app users from younger more affluent target markets Continuous enhancement to digital functionality straight through online account opening Android Pay for B B on Web paperless statements and Touch ID log in Flagship locations opened as part of an ongoing improvement in our physical network 7.5% Mortgage lending growth 5.9% SME core lending growth 6.0% Loan growth 2.27%
115% Loan to deposit ratio LDR Midsingle digit % customer loan growth in FY2018 LDR below 120% in FY2018 NIM of c.220bps in FY2018 The B brand was extended in April with the addition of a B credit card.
Improve efficiency by making our network operations and organisation more efficient and agile Efficiency programme ahead of schedule Improvements to business banking experience including 80% reduction in time taken to open a business account 40% increase in SME credit application decisions reached in same day We have reduced the time taken from mortgage application to offer by c.50% for all applicants Enterprisewide actions to reduce thirdparty costs have already achieved runrate savings of 27m Transitional Service Agreement TSA programme milestones successfully delivered with 22 out of 29 TSAs now complete Core full time equivalent FTE reduction of 9% in FY2017 Reconfiguration of network with 79 branches closed Designed developed and deployed worldleading robotic solutions across the PPI operation Cumulative run rate savings of 90m since efficiency programme began On track to deliver FY2019 efficiency targets 7.4% Underlying costs year on year Underlying costs 67% Underlying cost to income ratio CIR Underlying cost guidance of below 650m in FY2018 Digital statements were introduced in March to help customers manage their money more conveniently.
Capital optimisation by securing IRB accreditation and exploring opportunities across the asset portfolio Significant improvement in underlying RoTE to 7.5% Defined benefit pension scheme the Scheme closed to future accrual The triennial valuation of the Scheme has also been agreed resulting in a reduced deficit of 290m and no requirement for the Group to increase contributions to the Scheme On track to deliver doubledigit RoTE by FY2019 Recommending inaugural dividend to shareholders IRB waiver application submitted to the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA and overall programme on track IRB modelling development and data assessment improvements ongoing 2.3% pts RoTE year on year 12.4% CET1 ratio 7.5% Underlying RoTE Expecting IRB accreditation for mortgages during 2018 and the remainder of the bank during 2019 CET1 ratio of 1213% Both Clydesdale and Yorkshire Banks launched a mortgage challenge in January offering customers the chance to review their current mortgage in 5 minutes.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 13 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Our strategic priorities Our progress during FY2017 Change since FY2016 Our KPIs for FY2017 Outlook Our strategy in action Drive sustainable customer growth by investing to broaden the franchise across our target segments and regions while enhancing customer experience Current account growth of 5.3% driven by continued success of B and higher business current account balances Enhancements to our mortgage application process contributed to mortgage growth significantly ahead of market Reinvigoration of our SME franchise drove SME loan drawdowns up 13% Number of digital users up 10% annually  over 40% of B app users from younger more affluent target markets Continuous enhancement to digital functionality straight through online account opening Android Pay for B B on Web paperless statements and Touch ID log in Flagship locations opened as part of an ongoing improvement in our physical network 7.5% Mortgage lending growth 5.9% SME core lending growth 6.0% Loan growth 2.27%
115% Loan to deposit ratio LDR Midsingle digit % customer loan growth in FY2018 LDR below 120% in FY2018 NIM of c.220bps in FY2018 The B brand was extended in April with the addition of a B credit card.
Improve efficiency by making our network operations and organisation more efficient and agile Efficiency programme ahead of schedule Improvements to business banking experience including 80% reduction in time taken to open a business account 40% increase in SME credit application decisions reached in same day We have reduced the time taken from mortgage application to offer by c.50% for all applicants Enterprisewide actions to reduce thirdparty costs have already achieved runrate savings of 27m Transitional Service Agreement TSA programme milestones successfully delivered with 22 out of 29 TSAs now complete Core full time equivalent FTE reduction of 9% in FY2017 Reconfiguration of network with 79 branches closed Designed developed and deployed worldleading robotic solutions across the PPI operation Cumulative run rate savings of 90m since efficiency programme began On track to deliver FY2019 efficiency targets 7.4% Underlying costs year on year Underlying costs 67% Underlying cost to income ratio CIR Underlying cost guidance of below 650m in FY2018 Digital statements were introduced in March to help customers manage their money more conveniently.
Capital optimisation by securing IRB accreditation and exploring opportunities across the asset portfolio Significant improvement in underlying RoTE to 7.5% Defined benefit pension scheme the Scheme closed to future accrual The triennial valuation of the Scheme has also been agreed resulting in a reduced deficit of 290m and no requirement for the Group to increase contributions to the Scheme On track to deliver doubledigit RoTE by FY2019 Recommending inaugural dividend to shareholders IRB waiver application submitted to the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA and overall programme on track IRB modelling development and data assessment improvements ongoing 2.3% pts RoTE year on year 12.4% CET1 ratio 7.5% Underlying RoTE Expecting IRB accreditation for mortgages during 2018 and the remainder of the bank during 2019 CET1 ratio of 1213% Both Clydesdale and Yorkshire Banks launched a mortgage challenge in January offering customers the chance to review their current mortgage in 5 minutes.
14 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 After a strong performance during FY2017 I am pleased to reiterate our commitment to our mediumterm financial guidance.
In September 2016 CYBG announced a number of mediumterm financial targets which represented an acceleration of the strategic plan articulated at the time of the Groups demerger and IPO.
Following our strong performance in FY2017 the Board has reiterated its commitment to the Groups strategy and the mediumterm targets.
We outline our mediumterm targets and progress towards them opposite.
Strategic report Measuring our performance Mediumterm financial guidance
5558% CIR by FY2019 We have made good progress in improving the Groups efficiency to date and are currently ahead of schedule in delivery of our FY2019 net cost savings target The next phase of our cost reduction programme will be focused more heavily on procurement and operational efficiency enhancements The Board remains confident in managements ability to deliver a CIR of 5558% by FY2019 Sustainable customer growth Midsingle digit loan growth % CAGR to FY2019 Loan growth of 6% was delivered in FY2017 and we expect to continue a midsingle digit growth trajectory through to 2019 Operational and customer experience improvements will underpin our ability to continue to capture market share in both Retail and SME markets Despite macroeconomic uncertainty in the UK the Board remains confident that CYBG can grow its loan book sustainably and within risk appetite in the current environment
120%
CYBGs LDR of 115% remains comfortably below our internal target of 120% The Board still considers 120% LDR to be an appropriate limit in light of CYBGs continued use of the Term Funding Scheme TFS to support its growth ambitions
1213% CET1 ratio The Groups CET1 ratio of 12.4% remains comfortably within our operating range of 1213% The Board considers a 1213% operating range to be an appropriate range for CYBG prior to IRB accreditation CYBGs capital generation preexceptional charges was positive in FY2017 and demonstrates the capital generation potential of the business as exceptional charges decline in the future
Doubledigit
RoTE by FY2019 FY2017 saw a significant increase in underlying RoTE to 7.5% driven by increased revenue and cost reduction The Board remains confident that CYBG will be able to generate a RoTE of at least 10% by FY2019 Achieving our mediumterm guidance would be a significant achievement given that a doubledigit RoTE would represent a doubling of returns in the space of three years
Clear dividend ambition Recommendation of an inaugural dividend and targeting a 50% payout of earnings over time The Board has recommended an inaugural dividend of 1.0 pence per share in respect of FY2017 The Board will consider the payment of progressive sustainable dividends having regard to the growth opportunities available the ongoing investment in our business and any anticipated changes in capital requirements The Board continues to target a 50% payout of earnings over time after payment of Additional Tier 1 AT1 distributions Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 15 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Mediumterm financial guidance
5558% CIR by FY2019 We have made good progress in improving the Groups efficiency to date and are currently ahead of schedule in delivery of our FY2019 net cost savings target The next phase of our cost reduction programme will be focused more heavily on procurement and operational efficiency enhancements The Board remains confident in managements ability to deliver a CIR of 5558% by FY2019 Sustainable customer growth Midsingle digit loan growth % CAGR to FY2019 Loan growth of 6% was delivered in FY2017 and we expect to continue a midsingle digit growth trajectory through to 2019 Operational and customer experience improvements will underpin our ability to continue to capture market share in both Retail and SME markets Despite macroeconomic uncertainty in the UK the Board remains confident that CYBG can grow its loan book sustainably and within risk appetite in the current environment
120%
CYBGs LDR of 115% remains comfortably below our internal target of 120% The Board still considers 120% LDR to be an appropriate limit in light of CYBGs continued use of the Term Funding Scheme TFS to support its growth ambitions
1213% CET1 ratio The Groups CET1 ratio of 12.4% remains comfortably within our operating range of 1213% The Board considers a 1213% operating range to be an appropriate range for CYBG prior to IRB accreditation CYBGs capital generation preexceptional charges was positive in FY2017 and demonstrates the capital generation potential of the business as exceptional charges decline in the future
Doubledigit
RoTE by FY2019 FY2017 saw a significant increase in underlying RoTE to 7.5% driven by increased revenue and cost reduction The Board remains confident that CYBG will be able to generate a RoTE of at least 10% by FY2019 Achieving our mediumterm guidance would be a significant achievement given that a doubledigit RoTE would represent a doubling of returns in the space of three years
Clear dividend ambition Recommendation of an inaugural dividend and targeting a 50% payout of earnings over time The Board has recommended an inaugural dividend of 1.0 pence per share in respect of FY2017 The Board will consider the payment of progressive sustainable dividends having regard to the growth opportunities available the ongoing investment in our business and any anticipated changes in capital requirements The Board continues to target a 50% payout of earnings over time after payment of Additional Tier 1 AT1 distributions CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 16 The UK economy has remained resilient over the past year despite the uncertain political environment although recent economic data releases suggest that the UK consumer is starting to feel spending pressures heading into 2018.
UK GDP has continued to grow but the rate of growth has started to slow.
The preliminary estimate of GDP growth of 0.4% in the July to September quarter was up slightly from second quarter growth of 0.3% but yearonyear growth reduced to 1.5% down from 1.7% the previous quarter.
In response to this slowing growth the Bank of England BoE has reduced its economic growth forecasts for both 2017 and 2018 to 1.7% and 1.6% respectively.
Other key UK macroeconomic indicators continued to improve in 2017 with unemployment falling to 4.3% which is the joint lowest level since 1975 and the employment rate remaining high at 75.0%.
Inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index CPI has picked up considerably during 2017 and rose to 3.0% in the year to September.
This remains relatively high in comparison to recent years and is above the BoEs target of 2.0%.
As inflation outpaced wage growth real earnings fell by 0.4% in the 3 months to September from the same period in 2016 meaning households will start to feel a squeeze on disposable incomes.
In response to this the BoE increased the base rate by 25 basis points to 0.50% at the Monetary Policy Committee meeting on 2 November 2017 and guided that any future increases would be expected to be at a gradual pace and to a limited extent.
Further base rate increases are expected to be positive for the earnings of UK banks particularly those banks with a high proportion of current account funding including CYBG.
The rate of UK mortgage growth slowed in 2017 with balances up 2.9% in the year to September versus a 3.1% increase in 2016.
This was predominantly due to lower buytolet BTL mortgage lending following stamp duty and tax changes and lower owner occupied growth which has been attributed to uncertainty caused by Brexit.
Mortgage approvals were up 2.4% in comparison to the previous year and housing transactions were down 3.7%.
The outlook for the mortgage market remains muted but broadly solid with pressures from any potential base rate rises UK economic uncertainty and a squeeze on disposable income partially offset by continued government support.
Strategic report Environment and market outlook Growth in UK average house prices overall continued in 2017 up 5% in the year to September.
This continues the strong growth seen since the end of 2013 as a result of resilient economic conditions together with sustained low mortgage rates and government support.
However there is evidence of an emerging divergence now appearing between London and the rest of the country with London prices growing at a slower rate than the rest of the UK.
The outlook for SMEs remains more cautious particularly with regards to Brexit although the CYBG SME Health Check Index showed that the operating environment for Britains small and medium sized businesses improved in the second quarter of 2017 with a number of improvements including increased lending to SMEs and a falling number of business bankruptcies.
The index rose from 46.9 to 58.9 in Q2 2017 which is the highest reading since 2015 although confidence dipped in the quarter.
Confidence will be a key driver of the SME market over the coming period as investment decisions are deferred.
Pricing in the customer deposit market is now beginning to intensify.
In addition to some larger banks aiming to fund their mortgage growth ambitions there is also competition from some of the smaller institutions who have funded recent growth from the TFS and this will need to be replaced with customer funding over time.
Overall the economic environment for CYBG remains broadly supportive of our growth ambitions but uncertainty over future conditions remains.
Financial results CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 17 Regulatory and political environment The Group continues to operate in a demanding regulatory and political climate.
Following the result of the EU referendum in 2016 in March this year the Government formally triggered Article 50 giving notice of the UKs intention to leave the EU.
While formal negotiations are underway between the EU and UK regarding the terms of the UKs exit from the EU the terms of Brexit are still unknown.
In Junes general election the Government lost its majority in Parliament which has added to this uncertainty.
The regulatory environment in which the Group operates continues to develop and the Group is responding to the following key changes General Data Protection Regulation comes into effect on 25 May 2018.
Key changes include a requirement to notify regulators of breaches within 72 hours responding to subject access requests within 30 days and the imposition of financial sanctions of up to 4% of annual global turnover for serious breaches.
The Group has a programme of activity underway to meet the requirements Payment Services Directive 2 PSD2 comes into force on 13 January 2018.
The Group is progressing the necessary developments which include changes to information and transparency requirements on payments new security requirements including strong customer authentication the date for this is still unknown and faster handling of paymentrelated complaints.
In the innovation and competition space two new types of service are brought within the regulation  thirdparty payment instructions from accounts and account aggregation.
The Group is continuing to develop its longterm strategy in this respect the Financial Conduct Authority FCA has implemented a time bar on PPI complaints of August 2019 with a two year consumer communications campaign already launched over 2018 the Group will be taking steps to ensure compliance with ringfencing legislation that takes effect from 1 January 2019.
The Group will achieve compliance with the legislation with no material changes to its business operations or corporate structure and so there will be very little impact on the Groups customers the Competition and Markets Authority CMA retail banking investigation identified a number of adverse effects on competition in the personal and business current account and SME banking markets.
Consequently the CMA introduced a package of remedies designed to address these some of which are now in force.
The remainder will come into effect by summer 2018 with the Group on track to meet these remedies the FCA and PRA have published a number of papers which relate to consumer credit.
While the PRA is focusing on firms asset quality and underwriting practices the FCA is focusing on consumer protection with specific interest in assessing creditworthiness including affordability and the high cost credit market which includes overdrafts.
The FCA has also set out a package of remedies designed to make the credit card market work better and the Group has a project in place to meet a number of the requirements by January 2018 and the remainder by June 2018 the European Commission published a package to amend CRD IV in November 2016.
The amendments cover a variety of areas including Pillar 2 counterparty credit risk trading book market risk large exposures IRRBB the SME supporting factor and support for infrastructure lending the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision BCBS revisions to the standardised approach to credit risk CRSA operational risk and IRB floors are yet to be finalised.
Uncertainty remains around the final shape of these rules.
The strategic intent to pursue IRB accreditation will minimise some of the impacts to the Group of the revised CRSA although those rules will also affect the IRB floors the recovery and resolution regime for UK banks is still being finalised.
The BoE has established a framework on setting the minimum amount of loss absorbing resources MREL banks should hold so they can be resolved when failing.
The
Group has been advised of its interim MREL and has submitted a plan to the BoE on how its market issuance will be phased to reach this.
The PRA has also finalised its rules on ensuring banks critical shared services are able to continue operating while in resolution.
The Group is well placed to comply with these requirements and the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive II MiFID II and Packaged Retail and Insurance Based Investment Products PRIIPs Regulation come into effect in January 2018.
MiFID II imposes significant changes in a number of areas including transparency market structure and transaction reporting.
The PRIIPs Regulation requires firms producing or selling packaged retail investment products and insurancebased investment products to produce key information documents to make it easier for retail investors to compare products.
The Group has a programme in place to implement these requirements.
Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 Strategic report Risk overview Effective management of risk is a key capability for a successful financial services provider and is fundamental to the Groups strategy.
The Group has continued to advance and strengthen its risk management capabilities evolving in line with industry developments and best practice.
The Groups approach to risk Risk exists in every aspect of the Groups business is an integral part of the operating environment and is a core consideration inherent within the Strategic Plan.
The Groups approach to risk management is based on the principle that risk management capability must be embedded across all areas of the Group to be effective.
The Group has a clearly defined strategy in place to monitor manage and mitigate risk and that strategy is defined with the Groups Risk Management Framework RMF.
The risk strategy includes ensuring all principal and emerging risks are identified and assessed that risk appetite is clearly articulated and influences the Groups strategic plan the maintenance of a clearly defined risk culture which emphasises risk management while maintaining independent oversight the need for ongoing analysis of the environment in which the Group operates to proactively address potential risk issues as they arise and a requirement to ensure that appropriate risk processes systems and controls exist to support all colleagues in their decision making.
Integral to the RMF is the Groups process for setting its Risk Appetite.
The Risk Appetite Statement RAS defines the level and types of risk the Group is willing to assume within the boundaries of its risk capacity to achieve its strategic objectives.
Ultimately the RAS provides the definitive view on the broad direction of risk taking activity the Board is comfortable that the Group undertakes and allows decision makers to exercise judgement with greater confidence and speed.
Risk culture The consistent fair treatment of customers is fundamental to the success of the Groups business model and strategy and is underpinned by a risk culture which shapes behaviours and decision making at all levels of the Group.
The interests of customers colleagues shareholders and the communities within which the Group operates are all aligned to deliver the Groups strategic aim of sustainable customer growth.
This is supported by the RMF underpinned by a robust risk framework and independent risk management function driven by the Groups expected behavioural standards and values.
A strong risk culture is founded on a risk management accountability model and formal delegation framework where personal accountability empowers colleagues to take ownership.
It is a consideration in all people management practices particularly performance management.
It is supported by a formal whistleblowing framework that allows colleagues in confidence and anonymously to raise concerns about matters of conduct including inappropriate behaviour and breaches of the Groups Code of Conduct.
Risk Management Framework RMF
The Group identifies and manages risk using the RMF see diagram below which is the totality of systems structures policies processes and people that identify measure evaluate control mitigate monitor and report all internal and external sources of material risk.
The Groups Policy Framework is a key component of the RMF providing structure and governance for the consistent effective management of Policies.
This aligns with the behavioural expectations for all colleagues which form a core part of our performance management approach.
Policy statements and supporting policy standards define the minimum control requirements which must be observed across the Group to manage material sources of risk within risk appetite.
The Group manages risk using a Three Lines of Defence model.
The Three Lines of Defence are the operational Business Units the Risk Management function and Internal Audit.
Control is exercised through a clearly defined delegation of authority with communication and escalation channels throughout the Group.
Risk management
Risk management cycle Risk infrastructure Risk culture Frameworks risk systems policies and standards to manage sources of risk Policy framework Risk appetite framework Strategic planning including risk appetite setting Roles and responsibilities Three Lines of Defence Risk governance Control effectiveness statement Risk reporting and escalation protocols Risk and event classification matrix Risk categorisation Assess control 1.
Identify risks 6.
Report
Risk management
Monitor risks manage events CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 19 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Principal risks are overseen by the dedicated second line risk management function Credit risk is the risk of loss of principal or interest stemming from a borrowers failure to meet contracted obligations to the Group in accordance with the terms agreed.
Credit risk is evident at both a portfolio and transactional level.
How this risk is managed Significant credit risk strategies credit risk appetite and tolerances for credit risk are approved and reviewed by the Board and Boards Risk Committee.
The credit portfolio is closely monitored with actions initiated where required.
Balance sheet and prudential regulation risk covers a number of categories of risk which affect the manner in which the Group can support its customers in a safe and sound manner.
The risks include the need to withstand times of stress for the loss of funding liquidity the impact of restricted access to future sources of deposits funding the impact of providing a defined benefit scheme to colleagues pension and the need to withstand severe unexpected losses capital.
How this risk is managed Liquidity is managed in accordance with standards that are approved by the Board and supported by annual Funding and Contingency Funding Plans.
The Group also completes a formal annual assessment of liquidity adequacy which is shared with the PRA.
The Group completes a formal annual assessment of its capital requirements which is shared with the PRA.
The Groups Pension Risk Management Committee has implemented a range of reforms to benefits to reduce the Groups exposure to Pension Risk.
Regulatory and compliance risk is the risk of failing to identify understand monitor and comply with relevant laws regulations licence conditions supervisory requirements selfregulatory industry codes of conduct and voluntary initiatives.
In doing so the Group risks damaging its relationship with its regulator.
It is also the failure of not keeping regulators informed of relevant issues and not responding effectively to information requests and regulatory reviews.
How this risk is managed Continued and significant Board and senior management focus is directed towards maintaining regulatory compliance.
The Board or Executive Risk Committee approves all material changes to regulatory policy and protocols.
Conduct risk is the risk of undertaking business in a way which is contrary to the interests of our customers resulting in the delivery of inappropriate customer outcomes customer detriment regulatory censure redress costs andor reputational damage.
How this risk is managed The Group has a Conduct Framework with supporting target outcomes and operating principles.
Governance oversight and reporting are in place to ensure those objectives are met.
Operational risk is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes and systems or from external events.
It includes legal risk and operational risks associated with the execution of the strategy.
How this risk is managed The Group has an established Operational Risk Framework to enable identification management and mitigation of operational risks.
Risk categories are used to categorise and facilitate the consistent identification assessment mitigation monitoring and reporting of risks and events.
Financial crime risk is the risk that the Groups products and services will be used to facilitate financial crime against the Group its customers or third parties.
How this risk is managed The Group has an established Financial Crime Framework supporting ongoing management monitoring and mitigation of financial crime risk.
The Group operates zero tolerance for financial crime risk and has a control framework in place to mitigate this risk.
Strategic business and financial performance risk is the risk of significant loss loss of earnings andor damage arising from business decisions that impact the longterm interests of stakeholders or from an inability to adapt to external developments.
How this risk is managed The Board approves and oversees the execution of the Strategic Plan and associated strategic risk following the recommendations of the CEO and Executive Leadership Team.
The Groups risk appetite statement RAS sets out the risks it is able and willing to take to achieve its strategic objectives.
People risk is the risk of not having sufficiently skilled and motivated colleagues who are clear on their responsibilities and accountabilities and who behave in an ethical way.
How this risk is managed Roles responsibilities and performance expectations are defined in role profiles and expanded through objective setting and ongoing performance management.
The quality and continuity of our leadership is reviewed and assessed through succession planning and talent management activity.
20 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STUDIO B OPENS We opened our innovation lab in London during April.
Studio B is a physical manifestation of our digital ambitions and gives us the opportunity to lead the way on innovation and shape the future of our industry.
It allows us to collaborate directly with customers and third parties including Fintechs to solve the banking problems of tomorrow offering insight into the sort of technologies and services that could be available in the future.
We are able to rapidly develop new concepts with consumers in a test and learn environment with the best being deployed across our channels and customers.
October November December January February March April May June July August September Strategic report Highlights of the year 21 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
October November December January February March April May June July August September CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 22
We offer a wide range of current accounts savings accounts and term deposit products for personal and business customers.
At 30 September 2017 the Group had 13.9bn of current account balances 7.7bn of savings account balances and 6.0bn of term deposit balances.
CYBG has a loyal personal current account PCA customer base that represents a stable source of funding and sets us apart from most other challenger banks.
We had approximately 1.8m PCA customers as at 30 September 2017 of which 37% also held savings accounts 14% held CYBG credit cards and 6% held mortgages with us.
Last year we identified key customer demographics in which we are underweight and have targeted growth across younger and more affluent customers.
A key element of our strategy that supports our targeted growth in these demographics is the launch of B our digital banking proposition with current account linked savings account and credit card products that help customers manage their money and plan their savings through the use of customer defined savings pots.
As B develops further features will become available for customers in the future including loans and mortgages.
Bs product offering and advanced functionality has resulted in a marketleading customer experience and at September 2017 B had a Net Promoter Score NPS of over 40.
As a result since its launch in May 2016 B has over 100000 accounts and deposit balances of c.
1bn.
Bs success to date combined with its low cost to serve and nationwide presence means it remains a key element of our customer and deposit strategy.
We made improvements to our PCA proposition during the year including a reduction in the time to open a bank account from 45 minutes when opened within a branch and 12 days on phone down to 20 minutes for each.
We also introduced Android Pay in addition to Apple Pay that was introduced last year.
Strategic report Operational review Above The first B store in Birmingham opened in September  a flagship property for CYBG in the heart of the Midlands.
CYBGs longestablished Retail and SME franchises have significant scale and strong market share in personal current accounts business current accounts mortgages and SME business lending in our core regions.
In 2017 we made significant operational progress with improvements in our customer experience taking effect.
This in turn is enabling us to deliver the midsingle digit loan growth we are targeting and which is prudently funded through our strong customer deposit franchise.
Bs product offering and advanced functionality has resulted in a marketleading customer experience CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 23 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Business current accounts have shown healthy growth over the year both in terms of volumes and the number of customers.
This is partly due to our renewed investment and commitment to the SME market which we believe is underserved by the larger incumbent banks and the 25 months fee free offer currently available to new customers or switchers.
Progress is currently being made to extend the B account for micro and small business customers in 2018 so that businesses can manage their money and forecast in the same way as personal customers.
Term deposits and cash ISA savings products remain an important part of our customer offering and a key element in our funding strategy.
In line with our channel development strategy a range of digital and omnichannel offers have been tested with customers.
Demand has been high for these offers and very positive feedback has been received from customers on the process and proposition.
Total term deposit and savings account balances did reduce over the course of the year as CYBG took advantage of relatively low cost funding from the TFS and used the opportunity to run off more defensive term deposit and savings balances.
However these reductions were partially offset by an increase in B savings account balances.
Overall customer deposit balances including current accounts increased by 2.5% or 0.7bn in the year as part of a balanced approach to funding our loan growth.
We continue to have a diverse wholesale funding strategy which includes balances secured on our highquality mortgage book and deposits with other banks.
During the year we drew down 1.9bn from the BoEs TFS and completed our inaugural MREL issuance transaction which was 300m of senior debt and was well received by the market.
Mortgages
We have a strong and growing mortgage franchise with the majority of customers sourced through a network of brokers that allows us to diversify risk across the entire UK.
As at 30 September 2017 we had 164000 retail mortgage accounts diversified across multiple regions in the UK.
The total mortgage book increased by 7.5% in the year to 23.5bn compared with market growth of 2.9% over the same period.
We advanced 5.5bn of new mortgages in the year with 80% of this coming through our broker network while our proprietary mortgage business delivered 20% to our retail and private banking customers.
The UK mortgage market continues to be dominated by brokers and while digital capability is emerging this remains a very small part of the market.
The journey customers go through when choosing a mortgage with us is a key area of focus with multiple enhancements made to our service offering in 2017 most notably a 50% reduction in time from application to offer for all customers and the delivery of a fully packaged application to offer in less than 10 days.
This enhanced customer journey makes a real difference to both customers and brokers with customers having certainty quickly over our ability to lend to them.
We are committed to enhancing both customer and broker journeys which will position us well as the market continues to evolve.
We are continually looking to enhance our mortgage offering and 2017 saw further progress in improving our customer proposition.
For example our mortgage offers are now valid for 180 days up from the previous 90 days.
We have also reduced the amount of documentation we request from brokers as part of the application process without compromising our data capture making it easier for brokers to do business with CYBG.
These incremental process improvements have enabled us to increase our share of broker business and reduce the proportion of consumers that drop out part way through the application process.
This has enabled us to capture market share in the mortgage market without compromising on pricing or weakening our underwriting standards.
Left In the B app customers can set up and name savings pots making it easier to put money aside regularly.
Other B smart tools such as the sweep facility and budgets have also been designed to help make saving simpler.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 24 We also have a successful mortgage retention proposition and customers are now able to switch to a new deal up to three months before the end of a fixed rate term without incurring an early repayment charge.
We have also launched an online broker switch portal that makes it easier for brokers to switch to a new deal for their customers.
Incremental process improvements have enabled us to increase our share of broker business and reduce the proportion of consumers that drop out part way through the application process.
The BTL market represented a smaller proportion of the growth in the mortgage portfolio in the year to 30 September 2017 due to regulatory changes and our continued focus on the owner occupier market.
The changes in the taxation regime coupled with tightening underwriting standards have slowed growth in the market as a whole.
Our BTL strategy remains unchanged and we continue to lend to this segment within our clear and prudent risk appetite.
The average loan to value LTV of the mortgage book is 57.5% and the average LTVs of the owner occupied and BTL portfolios are 56.9% and 58.6% respectively.
The loss rate on the mortgage portfolio continues to be at historically low levels and the book is well diversified across the UK.
This strong position is partly due to the underwriting process where the Group primarily uses automated credit decision tools to support its underwriting services supplemented by a robust manual underwriting process.
Successful
IRB accreditation should enable CYBG to be more competitive in other areas of the mortgage market while maintaining a healthy risk position.
SMEs
SMEs are the engine of the British economy and we believe CYBG has a critical role to play in providing banking services for startups cultivating established businesses as they scale up and encouraging sector expansion and innovation.
At CYBG we have a proven track record of being a regional economic champion and in April we announced a 6bn lending commitment available to UK SMEs over three years to 2019.
We advanced over 2bn of new loans and facilities in the first year and our SME business is a key differentiator for us in the market.
We have a strong belief that we need to understand how SMEs are performing UKwide both now and in the future in order to support them in the best way possible.
With this is mind we launched our SME Health Check Index a quarterly report in collaboration with the Centre for Economics and Business Research Cebr in June which analyses different statistics to evaluate the health of the business and macroeconomic environment.
Despite being in its infancy the index has already been well received by business and industry  our business banking teams are relishing the opportunity to discuss the regional results with current and potential customers while analysts have used the report findings in their work.
Strategic report Operational review CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 25 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information This year has seen excellent momentum in our SME business with a strong pipeline and drawdowns up 13% year on year.
In support of our lending pledge our core SME balances grew 6% in line with our expectations.
We provide SME customers with a full range of products and services including a deposit portfolio which consists of business current accounts variable rate savings accounts and fixed rate term deposits.
We also have a range of lending products and services for SMEs across a 7.3bn portfolio which consists of term lending overdrafts revolving credit facilities working capital trade and treasury solutions.
We also offer business banking products and services to larger SMEs and midcorporate businesses where we have the sector expertise experience and relationships to do so competitively and have a range of propositions designed for specific industries.
We are proud that 57% of our business customers have been with the Bank for more than 10 years and retain a commitment to local relationship management for all businesses with turnover above 2m.
SMEs are the engine of the British economy and we believe CYBG has a critical role to play in providing banking services for startups cultivating established businesses as they scale up and encouraging sector expansion and innovation.
We are continuing to develop our product service and sector propositions for key customer segments as we actively seek to grow our lending portfolio and support our SME customers.
The Fintech partnership we have launched will provide an innovative online lending facility for our small business customers who will benefit from faster decision making and fulfilment of funds through an easy to use online application.
The technology will eventually provide a fully automated review and approval for the customer with funding provided on acceptance.
In addition SME customers will begin to migrate onto iB for both mobile and web in 2018 this will enhance our service offering for small businesses by leveraging the capabilities of our iB platform already built and tested in other channels.
We also provide relationship banking for our small business customers delivered through 79 centrally based relationship managers via telephone Business
This channel will also next year be migrated to our iB digital platform enabling an integrated approach to banking.
Given our history of supporting the economies of the north of England we are very supportive of the Governments Northern Powerhouse initiative and its aim to spread economic growth more evenly across the UK.
CYBG believes passionately that the Northern Powerhouse offers significant opportunities for SMEs in the North of England and we believe that we are uniquely placed to help them benefit from this opportunity.
Our noncore portfolio continued to run off as planned reducing by 30% in the year and is now 0.5bn or less than 7% of the total portfolio.
Personal lending The Group has taken a cautious approach to the unsecured lending market and has continued to invest judiciously in our digital capabilities as part of our omnichannel approach.
During the year our personal loans book increased by 2.7% while the credit card book reduced by 1.1% due to the competitive pricing environment and long duration balancetransfer periods from peers which CYBG has chosen not to compete with.
We also introduced the B credit card in June of this year which has attractive features like an absence of charges for purchases made abroad as well as the ability to tag and track spending on the innovative B app and this has been well received by our customers with over 10000 cards already active.
We remain comfortable with the asset quality of our unsecured lending book and will continue to offer personal unsecured lending to customers in a manner reflecting our risk appetite and the emerging economic environment.
FINANCIAL INJECTION DOUBLES PRODUCTION AT SHETLAND MUSSELS At CYBG we understand that SMEs are the engine room of the UKs economy  with SMEs accounting for 99% of businesses in the private sector.
Its therefore vital that we are supporting businesses offering the right support and finance to ensure their success.
One example of this is our support of Shetland Mussels Ltd which is set to double production thanks to our multimillion pound finance package.
The company already supplies over 900 tonnes of mussels to restaurants wholesalers and retailers up and down the UK every year but its expected that this will grow significantly by 2020.
A family business Shetland Mussels is owned by father and sons Lollie Richard and Michael Tait.
The company already provides jobs in Shetland and expects to increase their number of employees over the coming few years.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 Strategic report Highlights of the year October November December January February March April May June July August September Financial results CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 27 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
October November December January February March April May June July August September Delivering for our stakeholders
Communities
Colleagues
Environment
Providing the right propositions Being a good employer Addressing our broader responsibility to society CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28 Delivering sustainable value for our customers colleagues and communities is an integral part of our overall business model and key to our future success.
Continuing to address our broader responsibility to society and managing the environmental impact from our daytoday operations remains fundamental to our strategy and longterm ambitions.
Strategic report Delivering to our stakeholders
We care about our customers and their individual needs.
Our strategy is designed to help us support our existing customers as well as attract new ones and achieve sustainable growth.
We aim to help our customers develop a healthy relationship with money and make their daytoday management of money simple through the development of our products such as B.
Listening to our customers and anticipating their needs as well as addressing the root cause of any concerns is a key input into the ongoing development of our products and services.
For more detail see page 29
Our support for our customers and the wider communities through our range of initiatives form part of our corporate responsibilities.
Our
For more detail see page 32
Our colleagues are integral to our ongoing success and our overall business performance is dependent on their engagement and advocacy.
In the same way that we are transforming our business for our customers we are investing in our colleagues.
We are creating a workplace where every colleague can reach their full potential in an environment which nurtures a diverse inclusive and committed workforce.
We are striving to build a highperforming culture where colleagues can use their initiative act with greater autonomy and connect with each other to deliver the right customerfocused outcomes regardless of where they work or what they do across the Group.
For more detail see page 30
The Groups commitment to operating in a sustainable way is underpinned by our Environmental Standard that recognises our need to meet key legislative compliance requirements voluntary commitments and covers our approach to environmental management controls and reporting.
The Group acts to prevent pollution and the use of natural resources through increased recycling and transition to lower emissions energy sources where practicable.
For more detail see page 34 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 29 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Understanding our customers is part of our DNA.
We constantly seek customer feedback and put this at the core of the development of our products and services.
Customer advocacy is monitored continually through various ways including NPS.
This focus on our customers perception of our offering enables us to respond build and innovate around real customer needs and ambitions.
Indeed our digital banking solution  B  was built as a direct result of what our customers told us they needed from a bank in todays alwayson world.
We also understand that customers can become vulnerable at any point in their lives and as a result may need our support.
We encourage our customers to let us know if they need our support and through our omnichannel service and empathetic staff are able to work with customers as individuals identifying solutions and providing the appropriate support as and when they need it.
Progress in FY2017 We continue to serve over 2.7m customers with overall customer numbers remaining stable while our B customer numbers have grown to over 100000.
Customer satisfaction and advocacy are key measures and we have enjoyed steady levels of satisfaction across all of our brands.
The highest levels of satisfaction being for B customers  with 86% happy with the service they received and 45% giving the service the maximum 10 out of 10.
At the forefront of our strategy to drive sustainable customer growth is the need to continually innovate creating unique customerled propositions that attract new customers to the Group.
In April we opened the doors of Studio B in Kensington an innovation lab which operates on the high street within a fully operational customer banking centre.
The mission of Studio B is for the next generation of customers to design the next generation of banking.
The lab within Studio B works directly with customers to cocreate new concepts and solutions publishing the best concepts to a public website to gather direct customer feedback.
The best of these concepts are taken forward into full development and deployment across our channels.
We aim to get our service right first time every time learning from any mistakes and driving continuous improvement.
This year the Financial Conduct Authority FCA changed the way customer complaints are reported.
To comply with these new rules on improving complaints handling we now include complaints resolved in shorter timescales when reporting our complaints numbers.
When we do make mistakes our goal is to provide our customers with fair outcomes consistently and promptly.
Development of B and the iB platform B is our digital first brand offering customers a current account savings account credit card and app that together help customers to take effortless control of their money.
B is supported by the existing CB and YB customer banking centre network and a 247 dedicated B contact centre.
As the primary brand for attracting new target retail customers the customer centric development of B drives the underlying development of the iB platform to the broader benefit of CB and YB customers.
Throughout 2017 a range of B and iB developments have been implemented responding directly to customer feedback.
Examples of these improvements include the redesign of the navigation within B to make it easier for customers to use on the go the introduction of fingerprint login to make it easier to securely login to the app the launch of the B credit card to give customers greater control of their everyday finances and the introduction of digital statements to enable customers to go paperless without losing control.
In August we relaunched the CB and YB mobile apps on the iB platform migrating existing customers from a 3rd party provided service.
By moving customers onto the iB platform they are able to benefit from some of the customer experience improvements first developed for B such as the fingerprint login and digital statements.
Our ambition to grow our customer base outside of our traditional CB and YB heartlands means the launch of our B store in Birmingham was a hugely exciting milestone enabling us to increase our presence in one of the UKs most vibrant regional economies.
The design and customer experience within the B store has been directly influenced by the design and concepts developed and tested within Studio B London.
As well as being a fully operational customer banking centre the store provides an exciting and inspiring location for customers to experience our digital services and to participate in concept cocreation.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 30 Strategic report Delivering to our stakeholders Serving our business customers As we continue to digitise our bank and create a more innovative business we are driving growth in the business sector through strategic associations with Fintech companies.
Our first Fintech collaboration is an innovative online lending solution for SME customers.
This year we announced that we would lend at least 6bn to SMEs over three years to help promote the growth of these businesses in the UK.
In June we launched our SME Health Check Index taking the temperature of small businesses in the UK this quarterly report with the Centre for Economics and Business Research Cebr is a new industry report that measures business performance and the macroeconomic environment affecting SMEs including business costs capacity confidence lending and revenue.
Recognition for our work We have won a number of awards this year including Best Digital Bank United Kingdom at the Capital Finance International Awards Fairbanking Foundation  best current account with overdraft for B Digital Launch of the Year for B at the 2017 FStech Awards and Challenger Bank of the Year at the Corporate Entrepreneur Awards 2016.
Colleagues
Our colleagues are integral to our ongoing success and our overall business performance is dependent on their engagement and advocacy with significant progress made during the year to improve our offering including Our culture This year we began a major programme to develop the positive culture we are aiming for.
This programme has several critical elements Our values and behaviours were refreshed in June and define the desired behaviours for every colleague in the Group.
Our values Be ambitious Be courageous Be curious Be all over it and Be connected are brought to life through their associated behaviours.
Every team has personalised the behaviours to their business area and every colleague has a personal goal in relation to our values to support their own development.
By turning these words into actions we are helping to build a Group where colleagues are focused on meeting the needs of both their own development and our current and future customers.
Great leadership is our new leadership framework and was introduced at the same time as our refreshed values.
All leaders play a critical role in creating culture and driving performance and so Great Leadership sets the expectations of all leaders.
Our leaders are being supported with targeted leadership development to help them to Lead with Purpose Drive Inclusion be Always Agile Grow Trust Be Connected and Stretch Possibilities.
Recruitment and performance management have both been updated to reflect our cultural aims.
Internal and external selection is now based on our values ensuring we recruit and promote colleagues who align with our culture.
Our
Engagement and communication This has been a year of transformational change and ensuring that our colleagues remain engaged is critical.
MyVoice our annual colleague feedback survey provides us with insight in relation to our values and behaviours alignment with our strategy and focus on serving our customers.
90% of colleagues understand how the work they do contributes to the Groups goals while 84% fully support our values.
Our primary digital communications channel is our intranet home page Our World and in its first year to August 2017 there was an average of c.6000 unique visitors per day with over 370 articles published relating to our leadership strategy culture business success and community activity.
This site is increasingly used for twoway engagement through the use of polls discussion threads and invitations to get involved in activities.
This year our communications won the award for the Best Use of Interactive Media at the IoIC Scotland Awards.
Inclusion
Inclusion is at the heart of our culture.
Its written into our values.
We are committed to fostering and sustaining a truly inclusive culture where every colleague and customer feels they belong.
We want all colleagues to recognise this and work together to ensure that inclusion achieves its promise.
We ensure equality diversity and inclusion by concentrating on ensuring that every colleague feels comfortable to be themselves to ask questions to be curious and operate at their personal best.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Reflecting the importance of inclusion this year our five network groups for gender age disability ethnicity and sexual orientation were reenergised and sponsored by members of the Executive Leadership Team unlocking access across the Group and acting as ambassadors for the Group externally.
Some specific highlights of the year include events and activities held to celebrate and improve awareness of World Aids Day International Womens Day International Transgender Day of Visibility National Inclusion Week Carers Week and religious celebrations including Ramadan and Vaisakhi becoming a signatory of the Women in Finance
With a longterm objective to be genderbalanced in senior management we have committed to a target of 40% of those in senior management roles to be female by 2020.
We are making good progress and as at 30 September 2017 35% of our senior managers are female helping ensure colleagues have the right tools available to break down the stigma of talking about mental health by launching new enablement and wellbeing resources.
These included a new mental health awareness training module a people leader toolkit and online support materials.
We also supported Mental Health Awareness Week in May and worked closely with LGBT Youth Scotland to broaden our reach and connection in the community.
We have also significantly increased our participation in Pride Glasgow connecting campaigning social responsibility and commercial opportunity.
As at 30 September 2017 our strong diverse and engaged network of colleagues included 5813 permanent FTE 63% of which are female 37% male three women and nine men on our Board three women and seven men in our Executive Leadership Team Gender pay gap An important element of inclusion is to reduce our gender pay gap.
As part of this years Annual Report and Accounts for the first time we are disclosing our April 2017 gender pay gap in accordance with the UK Government regulations for gender pay gap reporting.
Our overall mean and median gender pay and bonus gap based on a snapshot date of 5 April 2017 pay and bonus paid in the 12 months to 5 April 2017 is Pay and bonus  difference between males and females Mean Median Hourly pay gap 37% 36% Bonus pay gap 58% 39% Proportion of males and females in each pay quartile each containing just over 1690 colleagues shown lowest to highest 22% 78%
Female
Quartile 1 23% 77%
Female
Quartile 2 36% 64%
Female
Quartile 3 63% 37%
Female
Quartile 4 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 32 Proportion of males and females receiving a bonus payment Male Female 85% 90% We are confident that we do not have equal pay issues and conduct a biannual equal pay audit in partnership with our trade union Unite.
Through this audit we review the gender distribution of performance base pay allowances and bonuses paid to our staff.
We are confident that performance is not gender biased and where pay gaps exist they are not driven by gender.
Our gender pay gap is largely driven by the fact that we have more men than women in senior roles.
Our Women in Finance Charter commitments are a public demonstration of our ambition to increase the proportion of women in senior roles.
We are also working to increase career progression at all grades.
This commitment includes reviewing our approach to parental leave to encourage shared parental leave reviewing other working policies to make flexible working easier particularly in more senior roles ensuring our recruitment processes attract a diverse range of candidates making our unconscious bias training mandatory for all colleagues establishing a sponsorship programme to develop more diverse leaders formally linking executive reward to our inclusion targets continuing to undertake our equal pay audits in conjunction with our trade union Unite transforming our performance management approach to encourage ongoing personal improvement removing the risk of any gender bias and reviewing our reward practices to ensure they help us reduce any gender pay gaps.
Through all of these practices we are aiming to create meaningful progress with regards to inclusion in senior management based on robust pipelines of diverse talent.
Community
We bring our social purpose to life through our commitment to make a positive contribution to the local communities in which we live and work.
This is expressed through a series of community partnerships and initiatives that deliver our We care about here ethos.
The Group recognises the important role we play as an enabler of change in local communities and society at large.
Our charitable foundation supports our colleagues by enabling them to help causes they support regularly in their local communities by providing grants and encouraging volunteering of their time and expertise.
The Group supported National Volunteering Week in June and encouraged colleagues to use their two day entitlement to support local charities.
287 employee grants were awarded totalling over 141000 and almost 7000 volunteering hours were undertaken during the year.
Support for charities is provided through our annual Spirit of the Community Awards.
Now in its fifth year awards of 5000 were made to 30 charities under three categories of Employability Financial Education and Environment.
Over 300 applications were received and the charities collected their awards at ceremonies in Leeds and Glasgow in June.
The event in Glasgow was attended by the full CYBG
Awards totalling 160000 were given out and the total over five years amounts to 860000 awarded to 143 charities.
Financial education  Our Count me in 123 financial education programme is available in our branches online and via public libraries in Leeds and
The materials support parents and carers to engage with their preschool children and have fun with maths.
Over 65000 booklets have been distributed via our branches and the game is available to download on Apple and Android tablets.
Our
Hospice UK charity partnership  We celebrated our 10th year supporting Hospice UK.
Through the tremendous enthusiasm of our colleagues and the matched funding through our foundation we raised 5.8m for the charity to help provide hospice care across the country.
In addition to fun events throughout the year colleagues took part in a marathon challenge in the Tweed Valley of the Scottish Borders in September and raised over 100000.
Strategic report Delivering to our stakeholders CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 33 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information European City of Culture  During the year Yorkshire Bank supported Leeds bid to be European City of Culture 2023.
The Group is supporting a programme of cultural events in 2017 and 2018 that aim to showcase and enhance existing Leeds festivals as well as giving scope for new ones.
Community partnerships The Royal Zoological Society of Scotland RZSS Our Wild about Scotland educational outreach programme in partnership with RZSS continued to travel the length and breadth of Scotland teaching primary school aged children about Scotlands native species and natural environment.
It helped engage the next generation of conservationists while bringing RZSS expertise to communities that might not otherwise have been able to benefit from it.
A team of volunteers supported the programme at a series of community events across the country at weekends and school holidays.
Families hopped on the bus to take part in fun activities on Scottish wildlife such as guess the animal skulls build a beaver dam and look at minibeasts under microscopes.
An extra special community event took place at RZSS Edinburgh Zoo on Fathers Day in June when over 400 guests from five different Scottish charities visited the Zoo and took part in the second annual Wild about Scotland Day.
Scotlands Charity Air Ambulance SCAA Our support for SCAA is now in its third year and has helped to keep the aircraft in the air saving lives across Scotland.
Last year the aircraft responded to over 300 emergency call outs.
Volunteers from the Group supported the charity at the Blair Atholl Horse Trials.
Our colleagues along with our agencies also dedicated their expertise to help design and print customer communications including their Annual Report and Accounts.
SSE Hydro  Our support for the SSE Hydro the worlds second busiest music venue continued during the year.
We continued to use the SSE Hydro to reward customers and the wider public for playing an active role in their local communities through our Centre Stage reward programme and to date over 250 people have enjoyed attending a series of concerts.
Our unique seat upgrade initiative Get me in the Vault together with other competitions proved very popular with more than 46000 entries into 250 competitions.
Yorkshire Bank Bike Libraries YBBL  The legacy community initiative from the Grand Depart of the Tour de France in 2014 rolled into its third year.
A total of 46 bike libraries have been established across the county and the public continued to donate their old and unwanted bikes with over 5000 being distributed.
This resulted in over 48000 opportunities for children and their families to borrow a bike.
The initiative was recognised and shortlisted for three prestigious awards during the year from the European Sponsorship Association The Sponsorship Awards 2017 and BT Sports Industry Award for Community Programme of the Year.
The YBBL programme was the official partner of Stage 3 of the Tour de Yorkshire with childrens parades and activation tents promoting the service.
We supported the Tour de Yorkshire in our customer banking centres and our colleagues volunteered to help with the free fun activities for the local communities in large tents at the start and finish towns each day.
The Tour de Yorkshire attracted 2.2m spectators along the route and was viewed by c.10m people in 180 countries.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 34
During the year the Group made a contribution towards the drive for a low carbon and more resource efficient economy through establishing a standalone Environmental Standard for the Group and setting up a standalone group system to capture and report on greenhouse gas GHG emissions procuring 100% renewable green energy for electricity within Groups direct control continuing to roll out advanced building efficiency management systems as part of the branch refurbishment programme.
Such systems help automate controls to ensure we only operate air conditioning units and boilers within set operational hours and can respond quickly to changes in temperatures and retention of our ISO 14001 environmental accreditation in our Leeds offices.
Reporting on GHG emissions The reporting period for GHG emissions in the Group ran from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017.
Total emissions for the Group have reduced by 14% in the last year.
Nearly half of the reduction is driven by changes in the emission factors as defined by the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy guidelines.
The Group used the 2016 Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy conversion factors due to the timing of the release of the 2017 conversion factors.
The largest change in emission factors is the decarbonisation of electricity generated by the National Grid.
Using the same emission factor for both the 2016 and 2017 reporting years and accounting for the impact of FTE and portfolio changes the reduction in emissions would be 3%.
GHG emissions CO 2e tonnes Scope 2017 2016 Scope 1 emissions Generated from the gas and oil used in all buildings where the Group operates emissions generated from Groupowned and leased vehicles used for business travel and fugitive emissions arising from the use of air conditioning and chiller refrigerant plant to service the Groups property portfolio.
3297 r 3835 Scope 2 emissions Generated from the use of electricity in all buildings from which the Group operates.
14247 r 16743 Scope 3 emissions Relate to business travel undertaken by all colleagues using rail private vehicles hired vehicles contracted taxi services air travel waste water and paper.
6803 7595 Total 24347 28173 The Group reports GHG emissions in accordance with the GHG Protocol which sets a global standard for how to measure manage and report GHG emissions with the exception of reporting market based emissions in addition to location based.
The Group are working towards this.
Strategic report Delivering to our stakeholders CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 35 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Intensity ratio The Group has chosen to use an intensity ratio of GHG per average FTE for scope 1 and 2 emissions.
Using FTE offers a simple way to measure and monitor Group performance on emissions and is also a useful way to benchmark and compare with others.
Scope 1 and 2 2017 2016 GHG emissions per average FTE 2.61 2.83 The only estimated emissions in the GHG emission data relate to energy consumed in properties where the landlord controls the supply and recharges the Group via a service charge arrangement or where actual meter readings were not available before year end.
In these instances an average rate per kWh has been used.
Independent limited assurance The Group engaged KPMG LLP to undertake an independent limited assurance engagement over the selected information highlighted in this report with a r.
KPMG has issued an unqualified opinion over the selected information.
The full statement is available on the CYBG website.
Use of resources In 2017 we created four new environmental targets to measure the Groups performance over the next three years in comparison to a baseline in June 2016.
We have made good progress against three but there is work to do in the next 12 months to increase the volume of recycling across the Groups operational business through promoting staff awareness and improving inhouse recycling processes.
Area restated baseline
GHG measured by CO 2 25096 24347 3% 9% On target Energy gas and electric measured by gigajoules GJ 179649 172743 4% 9% On target Water consumption measured by m volume 71528 69055 3% 5% On target Recycling first line waste measured by % volume 74% 73% 1% 6% Behind target 2016 Baseline has been restated to reflect changes in emission factors property portfolio and FTE numbers during the course of 201617.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 36 Strategic report Highlights of the year October November December January February March April May June July August September Financial results COLLEAGUES STRIDE OUT TO SUPPORT HOSPICE UK Supporting local communities across the UK is important to the Group and our colleagues undertake around 11000 volunteer hours a year in support of our charity partners.
In September 150 colleagues pulled on their walking boots and trekked the rolling hills of the Scottish Borders in a fundraising challenge to support Hospice UK.
This is the fifth time we have supported a large fundraising event for Hospice UK and this year the challenge raised 50000 for the charitys work across the UK which was matched by the Group to a total of 100000 adding to the 5.8m raised for hospice care by colleagues since 2008.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 37 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
October November December January February March April May June July August September CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 Financial results Overview of Group results Our FY2017 results reflect a year of strong financial performance as we have delivered on our strategic priorities in a period of challenging market and economic conditions.
We have grown our customer lending without compromising on asset quality delivered cost savings well ahead of our targets in the first phase of our three year efficiency programme and taken concrete steps to improve our capital position.
We are firmly focused on building a solid base for delivering sustainable returns to our shareholders.
Summary balance sheet as at 30 September Customer loans 31967 30147 Other financial assets 10469 9223 Other nonfinancial assets 795 559 Total assets 43231 39929 Customer deposits 27679 27000 Wholesale funding 8602 5810 Other liabilities 3548 3908 Total liabilities 39829 36718 Ordinary shareholders equity 2952 2761 AT1 equity 450 450 Equity 3402 3211 Total liabilities and equity 43231 39929 Summary income statement  underlying and statutory basis for the year ended 30 September Net interest income 844 806 Noninterest income 172 183 Total operating income 1016 989 Total operating and administrative expenses 675 729 Operating profit before impairment losses 341 260 Impairment losses on credit exposures Underlying profit on ordinary activities before tax 293 221 Restructuring expense 67 45 Separation costs 8 11 Impairment of intangible assets  45 Conduct charges 58 51 Gain on defined benefit pension scheme reforms 88 Gain on disposal of VocaLink share 20 Gain on disposal of Visa share  7 Net gain on debt restructuring  1 Statutory profit on ordinary activities before tax 268 77 Tax expense 86 241 Statutory profitloss attributable to equity holders 182 164 1 The summary income statement is presented on a statutory and underlying basis.
In addition the financial key performance indicators KPIs used by management in monitoring the Groups performance and reflected throughout this section are determined on a combination of bases including statutory regulatory and alternative performance measures as detailed in the Glossary on page 253.
A reconciliation from the underlying to statutory basis is shown on page 47.
Impairment losses on credit exposures relate solely to loans and advances to customers refer to note 3.5 to the financial statements and exclude credit risk adjustments on loans at fair value through profit or loss which are incorporated in the movement in other assets and liabilities at fair value within noninterest income refer to note 2.3 to the financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 39 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 39 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Capital position Common Equity Tier 1 capital 2437 2397 Additional Tier 1 capital 450 450 Tier 2 capital 627 625 Total capital 3514 3472 Risk weighted assets RWAs 19678 19029 Profits up overall The Group has successfully delivered on each financial target set out at the Capital Markets Day in September 2016 and reported a statutory profit for the first time since 2011 of 182m 2016 loss of Significant progress has been made against the Groups strategic priorities which has led to FY2017 underlying profit before tax increasing to 293m up 72m 33%.
Together with a stable capital base this has been the primary driver of the increase in underlying RoTE from 5.2% to 7.5% and underlying basic earnings per share EPS from 16.2p to 21.5p.
Our disciplined approach to managing our balance sheet has enabled us to increase tangible net asset value TNAV from 284.1p to 295.6p per share.
As a result of the progress we have made in improving the performance of our business we are pleased to declare our intention to pay an inaugural dividend to our equity shareholders.
1.8bn growth in customer lending The Groups performance was delivered against a backdrop of challenging economic and market conditions as the effects of the base rate cuts in 2016 and the corresponding fall in LIBOR rates together with lower UK credit growth competitive pricing across the industry prevailed throughout the year.
In spite of these pressures we delivered growth in our mortgage and core SME lending portfolios up 1.6bn and 0.4bn respectively and saw an increase in our mortgage market share.
We remain cautious in the unsecured lending market taking a disciplined approach to pricing in a competitive market nevertheless our unsecured lending portfolio saw a modest increase in balances year on year.
Growth in the customer lending book has been achieved without compromising asset quality.
The
Groups cost of risk has remained relatively low at 14bps 2016 9bps reflective of the quality and mix of our book with the mortgage portfolio accounting for a high proportion of total customer lending 2017 73.4% 2016 72.4%.
Active management of customer deposits Customer deposits increased year on year as we saw 5.3% growth in current account balances with strong recruitment of business current accounts and substantial growth in B savings balances.
This growth more than offset the managed reduction in volumes of variable rate savings accounts as we rationalised and repriced our ISA portfolio.
This repricing was part of an overall plan to improve our funding mix with a shift from higher cost deposits towards lower cost funding.
The Groups participation in the Governments TFS was another element of this plan and together these actions helped to drive down the Groups funding costs with the blended rate on interestbearing liabilities falling by 25bps to 75bps.
While the rate environment dampened growth in interest income the actions taken across the liability portfolio allowed us to grow net interest income by 38m 4.7%.
Overall these factors combined to drive a 1bps increase in NIM to 227bps.
Underlying profit before tax 2016 221m
7.5% 2016 5.2% Basic EPS underlying 2016 16.2p Loan growth 6.0% 2016 4.7% Cost of risk 0.14% 2016 0.09% Deposit growth 2.5% 2016 2.2%
2.27% 2016 2.26% CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 Cost savings well ahead of plan We continued to improve our operational efficiency during the year through the restructuring and streamlining of our business.
We incurred restructuring charges of 67m to deliver gross run rate cost savings of 90m we saw the benefits of these actions as the year progressed as our full year underlying costs fell by 54m 7% to 675m well below our FY2017 guidance of 690m700m.
As a result and combined with the increase in income our underlying cost to income ratio improved from 74% to 67%.
Optimisation of our capital base  CET1 ratio 12.4% Our key capital ratios remain within our required operating range.
The core business generated 13bps of CET1 capital over the year.
Offsetting the growth in our core business were the costs associated with restructuring separation from our former parent and legacy conduct issues which together absorbed 61bps of CET1.
The capital position benefited from the closure of the defined benefit pension scheme the Scheme to future accrual for the majority of employees improving the IAS 19 position by 88m and contributing to an IAS 19 surplus of 207m at the year end.
In addition the trustees completed the 2016 triennial valuation which resulted in a reduction in the Scheme deficit on a trustee funding basis from 450m to 290m and no change to the existing deficit repayment schedule agreed with the Trustee in June 2014.
In April 2017 we submitted our application to the PRA for permission to use the IRB approach to calculating credit RWA.
This marked a key milestone in our path to IRB accreditation.
Outlook for 2018 The lending market will we expect remain competitive especially for home loans.
However our pipeline in both our mortgage and SME businesses is strong and supports our plans to deliver continued asset growth.
It is likely that we will see further price pressure in the mortgage and unsecured personal loan markets.
Our strong depositgathering capability founded on our personal and business current account franchise will ensure that we fund our growth in a sustainable and costeffective manner.
We expect to see modest pressure on net interest margin and our NIM guidance for FY2018 is 220bps.
Our efficiency programme will capitalise on the momentum seen over the past 12 months and will focus on procurement and organisational design enhancements in the coming year.
With a track record of achieving sustainable cost savings we are confident in our ability to deliver savings in line with our guidance and further reduce our cost income ratio.
We will manage our capital base within our stated operating range for CET1 of 12 to 13%.
Financial results Overview of Group results Underlying CIR 67% 2016 74% CET1 ratio 12.4% 2016 12.6% Total capital ratio 17.9% 2016 18.2% CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 41 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 41 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Financial performance review Sustainable customer growth 2017 has been a year of strong business growth against of a highly competitive backdrop and uncertain economic conditions.
In targeting sustainable growth in our customer balances we enhanced our product offerings to attract the right mix of customer profile to deliver longerterm value.
In doing so we have delivered growth while maintaining asset quality adhering to our underwriting standards and controlled risk appetite leading to a wellbalanced and diverse portfolio.
The asset quality of the Groups credit exposures remains stable relative to the growth in portfolio size evidenced by the reduction in the level of impaired assets to 179m 2016 233m and a modest increase in 90 days past due DPD to 161m 2016 150m.
In aggregate impaired assets and 90 DPD represent 1.06% of gross loans 2016 1.27%.
We have managed our deposits base throughout the year  growing balances improving the mix and reducing funding costs.
Mortgages 23480 21836 SME lending core 6821 6438 noncore 504 720 Unsecured personal lending 1162 1153 Gross loans and advances to customers 31967 30147 Current accounts 13948 13248 Variable rate savings accounts 7730 8240 Fixed rate term deposits 5983 5500 Other wholesale deposits 18 12 Total customer deposits 27679 27000 The 2016 comparative has been restated to reflect the reclassification of 80m of SME loans from the noncore to the core portfolio.
Mortgages
The mortgage book remains the Groups largest asset portfolio and has a significant impact on our overall financial performance.
This year we delivered record levels of new mortgage business which supported net growth of 7.5% in the year higher than system growth of 2.9% and saw our market share increase from 1.67% to 1.73%.
In line with our competitors we continued to see a growing number of customers favour fixed rate mortgage products as they sought to further capitalise on the prevailing low interest rate environment.
As a result the fixed rate book grew to 73% of mortgage balances 2016 68% and accounted for 95% of mortgages drawn in the year 2016 93%.
The split of our mortgage book between BTL and owner occupied properties remained broadly stable although owner occupied accounted for 70% of drawdowns in the year 2016 59% as we focused on our strategy to support the residential market and manage within our risk appetite limits.
The average LTV of new lending was 71% and as a consequence the average LTV of the mortgage book increased from 55.8% to 57.5%.
Our proportion of residential mortgages 90 days in arrears has remained stable at 0.52% September 2016 0.51%.
Includes financial assets at fair value of 477m September 2016 750m.
Includes financial liabilities at fair value of 26m September 2016 48m.
3 System growth is sourced from the BoE Mortgages outstanding by type of lender UK BOE report MM4.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 42 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 42 SME lending Our core SME lending portfolio increased by 383m 5.9% in the year ahead of system growth of 3.9%.
The main drivers for the increase were improved origination flows coupled with lower attrition in the second half of the year as we implemented a number of new propositions and developed new capabilities to better support the funding needs of our SME customers.
These included a new proposition for the financial services sector and the establishment of an agency capability.
Growth finance and cash flow finance also performed well.
We maintained a robust approach to credit decisions on new lending in the year reflective of the continued reduction in the impaired asset portfolio to 126m 2016 146m.
Notwithstanding an increase in specific provisions on a small number of exposures the underlying credit quality of the portfolio has remained stable.
In line with our strategy we continued to run off our noncore portfolio which reduced from 720m to 504m.
Unsecured personal lending Following a brief period of contraction in our unsecured personal lending book which comprises credit cards personal loans and overdrafts the second half of the year saw modest growth of 9m year on year.
Within this the fixed rate personal loan book was the largest contributor showing growth of 33m 5% from 625m at 30 September 2016 to 658m at 30 September 2017.
This growth was driven in the main by the launch of an improved personal loan proposition with competitive pricing in the third quarter supported by enhanced scorecards and a simplified online application process.
The uptake in this new offering contributed to higher loan origination in the second half of the year.
Credit card balances were broadly flat at 396m 2016 400m.
The smallest element of our unsecured lending portfolio is comprised of variable rate personal loans and overdrafts which fell by 20m in the year from 131m to 111m.
Variable rate loans continue to reduce as although these products remain on sale they are not actively promoted or targeted.
Current accounts Funding provided by current accounts increased by 0.7bn 5.3% since September 2016 due principally to continued growth in business current account balances up 387m driven by the 25month fee free offer we launched in December 2016 and system growth.
Personal current account balances also continued to grow with the B current account up 200m attracting both existing and new to bank customers throughout the year as we delivered further enhancements in product functionality.
Our Current Account Plus product also contributed growth of 140m with the average case size offsetting a declining stock balance.
While stock levels across the book fell overall new account openings were in line with our strategy to grow sustainably in a way that recruits the right profile of customer with whom we have an opportunity to build a longterm relationship.
Financial results Financial performance review System growth is sourced from the BoE Industrial analysis of monetary financial institutions lending to UK residents report C12 and excludes individuals and individual trusts activities auxiliary to financial intermediation insurance companies and pension funds and financial intermediation excluding insurance and pension funds results.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 43 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 43 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Variable rate savings accounts Funding from variable rate savings accounts benefited from growth of 0.7bn in B savings accounts and 0.3bn in business savings accounts.
This partially offset attrition of 1.2bn following the product rationalisation and repricing of our ISA portfolio.
In addition we saw attrition of 0.2bn across other savings products as in line with market trends we saw a shift in consumer behaviour towards easier access accounts such as instant access and current accounts.
Fixed rate term deposits Our fixed rate term deposit book increased by 483m 8.8% as a result of actions taken in the second half of the year including the repricing of maturing term deposits and competitive retail product launches in the digital bond space and fixed rate cash ISAs along with the launch of new notice accounts for SME depositors.
Funding and liquidity The Group continues to maintain its strong funding and liquidity position and seeks to achieve an appropriate balance between profitability liquidity risk and capital optimisation.
Our focus on delivering customer growth together with a managed reduction in volumes of variable rate savings accounts and drawdown of 1.9bn of lower cost funding from the Bank of Englands Term Funding Scheme has resulted in an increase in LDR from 112% to 115% well within our guidance for the year of 120%.
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio LCR was higher at 164% at 30 September 2017 2016 140% due to the prefunding of residential mortgagebacked securities RMBS callable in November 2017.
Net Stable Funding Ratio NSFR was 118% at 30 September 2017 2016 124%.
The Group has evolved its approach to managing the liquid asset buffer LAB to more efficiently utilise cash to reduce the cost of the LAB while still holding high quality low risk liquid assets by broadening the composition of the portfolio.
The Group has diversified by investing in a broader range of supranational and covered bond issuances.
Previously liquidity was mainly held in BoE accounts earning base rate alongside holdings of UK Sovereign bonds Gilts.
The issue of 300m of senior debt in June provided further funding to the Group and marked an important first step in our journey towards meeting the BoEs Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities MREL by 2022.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44 Financial results Financial performance review Net interest income Average balance sheet 2017 2016
Interest
Average yield rate %
Interest
Average yield rate % Interestearning assets Mortgages 22439 652 2.91 21261 672 3.16 SME lending 7110 264 3.71 6904 263 3.80 Unsecured personal lending 1172 105 8.99 1216 119 9.76 Liquid assets 6007 21 0.34 6001 31 0.51 Other interestearning assets 969 33 3.41 875 16 1.83 Total average interestearning assets 37697 1075 2.85 36257 1101 3.04 Total average noninterestearning assets 2489 2759 Total average assets 40186 39016 Interestbearing liabilities Current accounts 11032 6 0.05 10701 11 0.10 Savings accounts 7832 32 0.41 8034 63 0.78 Term deposits 5190 89 1.71 5397 114 2.11 Other wholesale deposits 8  0.58 70 1 0.95 Wholesale funding 6932 104 1.51 5140 95 1.85 Other interestearning liabilities    303 11 3.54 Total average interestbearing liabilities 30994 231 0.75 29645 295 1.00 Total average noninterestbearing liabilities 5926 5905 Total average liabilities 36920 35550 Total average equity attributable to ordinary equity holders 3266 3466 Total average liabilities and average equity attributable to ordinary equity holders 40186 39016 Net interest income 844 806 Includes loans designated at fair value through profit or loss.
The growth in our customer lending in the year has tempered the impacts of base rate cuts and together with lower funding costs driven by active management of rates across the savings portfolio has contributed to an increase in net interest income of 38m 4.7%.
As average interestbearing assets saw a similar increase Group NIM similarly increased by 1bps to 2.27% 2016 2.26%.
This was achieved in spite of rate pressures across the board as a consequence of the base rate reduction in August 2016 and a corresponding fall in LIBOR rates which together impacted 45% of the Groups customer lending portfolio which is on a variable rate.
The effects of these rate reductions combined with competition in the market continued to exert downward pricing pressure on the Groups lending portfolio with average yields reducing by 19bps to 2.85%.
Conversely average rates on interestbearing liabilities reduced by 25bps to 0.75% as a result of the rate cuts a shift in mix in the deposits portfolio and lower wholesale funding costs.
Noninterest income Noninterest income reduced by 11m 6.0% largely driven by a reduction in fees and commission income principally in relation to insurance revenues from offsale products which have continued to unwind lower account fees on the Signature current account and lower home insurance profit share due to a higher level of claims CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 45 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 45 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Impairment losses on credit exposures The increase in impairment charge from 39m to 48m reflects a modest increase in charges taken on our unsecured Retail portfolios together with impairment of a small number of individual SME exposures.
The cost of risk has consequently increased by 5bps but remains low reflecting the continuing benign credit environment.
2017 2016
Retail unsecured SME Total
Retail unsecured SME Total Gross cost of risk Specific provision releases and recoveries 12 16 Fair value loans 2 4 Net cost of risk bps 14 9 Delivering on our efficiency programme Operating and administrative expenses Personnel expenses 248 280 Depreciation and amortisation expenses 87 88 Other operating and administrative expenses 340 361 Total underlying operating and administrative expenses 675 729 Restructuring expense 67 45 Gain on defined benefit pension scheme reforms 88 Separation costs 8 11 Conduct charges 58 51 Impairment of intangible assets  45 Total statutory operating and administrative expenses 720 881 This year marked the first phase of the Groups threeyear efficiency programme during which we demonstrated our ability to execute on our strategy with clear focus and at pace and have set a strong foundation to deliver the next phase of savings in 2018.
We continued to improve our operational efficiency during the year through the restructuring and streamlining of our business.
As our strategic initiatives gathered pace the costs required to deliver the programme amounted to 67m in the year.
These largely comprised property closure redundancy and consultancy costs and arose in the main as we implemented our branch closure and voluntary severance programmes.
We started to reap the benefits of these actions as the year progressed and saw our full year underlying costs reduce by 54m 7% from 729m to 675m exceeding our FY2017 cost guidance of 690m700m.
As a result and combined with the increase in net interest income our underlying cost to income ratio improved from 74% to 67% for the full year 61% for the second half.
During the year we implemented a new reward programme for colleagues across the business including a revised pensions proposition.
As part of these reforms the Group closed the defined benefit pension scheme to future accrual on 1 August 2017 for the majority of current employees with affected employees future benefits being provided through an enhanced defined contribution scheme.
The closure of the Scheme resulted in the recognition of a past service credit of 88m.
On an underlying basis personnel expenses reduced by 32m in line with headcount which reduced from 6718 to 6040 Other operating and administrative expenses fell by 21m due to the impact of branch closures and tighter cost control across the board.
Based on average core FTEs during the year.
Actual core FTEs were 5739 as at 30 September 2017 2016 6313.
Core FTEs exclude legacy conduct FTEs.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 46 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 46 While our priorities have been focused on maximising efficiencies across the business we have nevertheless sought to maintain investment in our key strategic priorities.
During the year we invested heavily in significantly transforming the personal customer experience through increasing online account opening capability enhancing service functionality and releasing new applications across all brands.
In addition we continued to invest to ensure we remain compliant with our regulatory obligations and in enhanced security to maintain and strengthen the resilience of our operations.
During the year the Group continued to make progress on removing its reliance on National Australia Bank NAB for certain processes and systems.
Spend in the year in relation to separation costs was 8m 2016 11m and the Group is on track to exit all NAB services provided under Transitional Services Agreements by December 2018.
Capital optimisation Capital change bps CET1 At 30 September 2016 12.6% Generated 168 Asset growth 42 Investment spend 93 AT1 20 Core business  net capital generated 13 Restructuring costs 31 Separation costs 3 IAS 19 pension movement 21 Conduct costs 27 Other 7 Total net capital absorbed 20 At 30 September 2017 12.4% The Group continued to maintain its strong capital position throughout the year delivering a fully loaded total capital ratio of 17.9% and CET1 ratio of 12.4% at September 2017.
Underlying capital generation by the core business post AT1 distribution was 13bps largely driven by strong underlying profits offset by growth in mortgages and SME lending and investment spend with RWAs increasing by 649m.
After absorbing the net impact of AT1 distributions pension movements and exceptional charges such as restructuring charges separation costs and the Groups proportion of conduct provision charges the Groups CET1 ratio was 20bps lower at 12.4%.
During the year the Group reassessed the level of provision that was considered appropriate to meet current and future expectations in relation to the misselling of PPI policies and concluded that a further charge of 494m was required incorporating the Groups estimate of the impact of the Regulators policy statement issued on 2 March 2017 relating to a proposed time bar for complaints in August 2019.
It also incorporated a reassessment of the costs of processing cases and the impact of experience adjustments.
The Group also raised further provisions of 98m for other nonPPI conduct related matters.
In aggregate only 9.7% of the charge or 58m impacts the income statement as a result of the Capped Indemnity and has absorbed 27bps of capital in the year.
Strengthening our capital base The Group continually considers opportunities to further strengthen its capital base.
The closure of the Scheme to future accrual for the majority of employees coupled with the impact of the Schemes triennial valuation resulted in a reduction in the Scheme deficit on a trustee funding basis from 450m to 290m.
In addition the submission of our waiver application to the PRA requesting permission to apply IRB modelling in the calculation of credit risk RWAs marked a key milestone in our path to IRB accreditation.
Financial results Financial performance review CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 47 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 47 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Group is working towards implementation of the requirement to meet the minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities MREL on 1 January 2022 and issued 300m of senior bailin debt in June as the first step to meeting this requirement.
The BoE provided the Groups MREL guidance including transitional arrangements in late 2016.
An interim MREL requirement of 18% of RWAs has been set at the Group level from 1 January 2020 until 31 December 2021.
The BoE will advise the Group on its ultimate MREL requirement in 2020.
The Group expects to issue further senior debt gradually over the next four years to ensure compliance with MREL in 2022.
Reconciliation of statutory to underlying results The underlying results presented within this Financial performance review reflect the Groups results prepared on an underlying basis and as presented to the CEO and his Leadership Team and the Board.
These exclude certain items that are included in the statutory results as management believes that these items are not reflective of the underlying business and do not aid meaningful yearonyear comparison.
The table below reconciles the statutory results to the underlying basis and full details on the adjusted items are included in the Glossary on page 252 2017 income statement
Legacy conduct costs
Pension scheme reforms
Under lying basis Net interest income 844     844 Noninterest income 192    20 172 Total operating income 1036    20 1016 Total operating and administrative expenses before impairment losses 720 58 75 88  675 Operating profit before impairment losses 316 58 75 88 20 341 Impairment losses on credit exposures Profit on ordinary activities before tax 268 58 75 88 20 293 Tax expense 86 5 11 31 2 73 Profit attributable to equity holders 182 53 64 57 22 220 Financial performance measures CIR 69% 5% 7% 8% 2% 67% RoTE 6.1% 2.1% 2.3% 2.1% 0.9% 7.5% Basic EPS 17.3p 5.9p 7.3p 6.5p 2.5p 21.5p 1 Impairment losses on credit exposures relate solely to loans and advances to customers refer to note 3.6 to the financial statements and exclude the credit risk adjustments on loans at fair value through profit or loss which are incorporated in the movement in other assets and liabilities at fair value within noninterest income refer to note 2.3 to the financial statements.
Underlying profit after tax attributable to ordinary equity holders is equal to the underlying profit attributable to equity holders less dividends and distributions net of tax relief of 29m 2016 34m and amounted to 191m 2016 143m.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 48 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 48 2016 income statement
Legacy conduct costs
Intangibles
AFS investment disposal
Underlying basis Net interest income 806      806 Noninterest income 191  1  7  183 Total operating income 997  1  7  989 Total operating and administrative expenses before impairment losses 881 51 56 45   729 Operating profit before impairment losses 7  260 Impairment losses on credit exposures Profit on ordinary activities before tax 7  221 Tax expense 241 5 10 9 1 220 44 Lossprofit attributable to equity holders 164 46 45 36 6 220 177 Financial performance measures CIR 88% 5% 5% 5% 1%  74% RoTE 7.2% 1.7% 1.6% 1.3% 0.2% 8.0% 5.2% Basic EPS 22.5p 5.2p 5.2p 4.1p 0.7p 24.9p 16.2p 1 Impairment losses on credit exposures relate solely to loans and advances to customers refer to note 3.6 to the financial statements and exclude the credit risk adjustments on loans at fair value through profit or loss which are incorporated in the movement in other assets and liabilities at fair value within noninterest income refer to note 2.3 to the financial statements.
Financial results Financial performance review Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 49
Chairmans letter 50 Board of Directors 52 Executive Leadership Team 60 Corporate governance report 62 Governance and Nomination Committee report 74 Audit Committee report 79 Risk Committee report 88 Statement by the Chair of the Remuneration Committee 94 Directors remuneration report 96 Directors report 123 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 50 Dear shareholder I am pleased to present our Corporate governance report for 2017 our first full year since IPO.
Your Board firmly believes that strong and effective corporate governance underpins our commitment to delivering a strong customer centric banking proposition in the UK and to generating sustainable returns for shareholders.
The Board is focused on ensuring corporate governance is embedded across our business supporting better decision making and accountability.
This report sets out our approach to governance in practice the work of the Board in 2017 and includes reports from the Boards four principal committees.
Strategy
The Boards role is to focus on the creation of longterm sustainable value for our shareholders.
During the year the Boards focus was on supporting the Executive Leadership Team to deliver the Groups strategy.
The Board spent considerable time in 2017 exploring the challenges arising from the evolving external economic political and regulatory environment to ensure the continued effective execution and delivery of our strategic priorities against this backdrop and ongoing competitive success.
The Board held several strategy focused sessions which are described on pages 62 and 63 and ensured that appropriate risk monitoring and oversight was taking place with plans in place to mitigate the impact of principal risks as described on page 19 of the Strategic report.
Culture
Our approach to culture and values is led by the Board which sets the tone from the top.
The Board is committed to ensuring we continue to build a high performing culture which recognises that our colleagues are integral to our business success.
During the year the Board supported the launch of our new Values and Behaviours and Great Leadership framework described on page 30 which underpin our commitment to deliver the right customer focused outcomes by encouraging colleagues to use their initiative act with autonomy and to work together.
The Board also spent time hearing about colleague feedback from our annual MyVoice survey which highlighted colleagues commitment to deliver a strong customerfocused culture.
Governance
Chairmans letter Strong and effective corporate governance underpins our business.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 51 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The importance of a genuinely diverse and inclusive culture where every colleague and customer feels they belong is a core part of our Values and Behaviours.
During the year the Board refreshed its diversity commitment to maintain a minimum of 25% female representation on the Board with a target to achieve 33% by 2020.
The Board recognises the value in having a membership which reflects diversity in the widest sense and which represents a broad range of social perspectives.
While we have not set any diversity target beyond gender we will take opportunities through the natural refreshing of the Board to consider a number of diversity factors however it will always be the case that appointments to the Board are based on merit and breadth and depth of skills and experience.
Building stakeholder relationships Hearing from our stakeholders supports us in delivering our strategy and helps us focus on the things that are important to them.
Our stakeholders include our customers shareholders and colleagues in addition to government regulatory bodies our suppliers and wider society.
This year the Board adopted a refreshed stakeholder engagement programme to broaden its reach among stakeholder communities and we will further develop this in 2018.
During the year the Board either collectively or individually undertook site visits met with customers and representatives from our wider communities and the Board now receives a formal stakeholder update on a regular basis.
We engage with our shareholders through a calendar of meetings and events including the AGM and we use webcasting to allow all shareholders the opportunity to join the key meetings throughout the year.
The Board is updated regularly on both retail shareholder and institutional investor feedback and my fellow Directors and I very much look forward to having the opportunity to meet with our shareholders at our 2018 AGM.
Board changes Richard Gregory retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
Clive Adamson became Chair of the Risk Committee in January 2017 on Richards retirement and Tim Wade became Chair of the Audit Committee in November 2016.
The structure size and composition of the Board and its committees will continue to be kept under review in 2018.
Board effectiveness An important part of my role as Chairman is to ensure that the Board  both collectively and its individual members  operates effectively.
This year the Board undertook its first externally facilitated performance evaluation since becoming a listed company.
I am pleased to report that the key conclusion of the evaluation was that the Board and its committees are effective.
The process and principal findings are described on pages 68 to 70 of this report.
The Board adopts a continuous improvement approach to its effectiveness with a focus on achieving best practice across all aspects of corporate governance.
The Board will therefore keep its corporate governance arrangements under review through 2018 to ensure they adapt to changes in regulation or legislation and remain effective.
Looking ahead The Board remains focused on executing the agreed strategy and delivering an exceptional customer experience and sustainable returns to our shareholders and will continue to strengthen the effectiveness of the corporate governance framework to support this.
Finally I would like to thank the Board and our colleagues for their support and commitment throughout 2017.
Jim Pettigrew Chairman CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 52
Board of Directors CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 53 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Left to right Clive Adamson Independent NonExecutive Director Dr Teresa RobsonCapps Independent NonExecutive Director Paul Coby Independent NonExecutive Director David Duffy Executive Director and
Chief Executive Officer
Jim Pettigrew
Adrian Grace Independent NonExecutive Director Tim Wade Independent NonExecutive Director Fiona MacLeod Independent NonExecutive Director Debbie Crosbie Executive Director and Chief Operating Officer David Browne Independent NonExecutive Director Ian Smith Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer David Bennett Deputy Chairman and Senior Independent NonExecutive Director CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 54
Board of Directors Board roles and responsibilities The Board has agreed a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer.
The Chairmans priority is to lead the Board and ensure its effectiveness and the Chief Executive Officers priority is to manage the daytoday running of the Groups business.
The roles of the Chairman Chief Executive Officer and other Directors are clearly defined so that no single individual has unrestricted powers of decision.
Their key responsibilities are set out below.
Position Name Roles and responsibilities
Jim Pettigrew Leading the Board and its effectiveness by organising its business and setting its agendas ensuring that the Board as a whole plays a full and constructive part being forward looking and primarily focused on strategy performance and key value creation issues.
Promoting the highest standards of corporate governance and ensuring that the Board receives accurate timely and high quality supporting information.
Ensuring properly constructed Board induction evaluation and development and effective communications with the Groups shareholders.
Deputy Chairman and Senior
NonExecutive
Director
David Bennett Deputy Chairman  Supporting the Chairman and when required acting as the Chairmans delegate and ensuring continuity of Chairmanship supporting the Chairman in representing the Board and acting as spokesperson.
Being available to the Board for consultation and advising and representing the Groups interests at official enquiries and with review bodies.
Senior Independent NonExecutive Director  Providing a sounding board for the Chairman and serving as a trusted intermediary between the Chairman and the other Directors when necessary and ensuring that the views of all Directors are conveyed to the Chairman.
Being available to shareholders in the event of any matters which cannot be resolved through the normal channels of communication with the Chairman or the Executive Directors.
Maintaining contact as required with major shareholders to understand their issues and concerns maintaining stability and cohesion within the Board particularly during periods of stress.
Meeting with the NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman present at least annually and leading the NonExecutive Directors in the ongoing monitoring and annual evaluation of the Chairman.
Chief Executive
David Duffy Leading the daytoday management of the Groups business ensuring its effective running.
Leading the Executive Leadership Team being responsible for developing coordinating and proposing to the Board all activities to implement the Groups strategy and its overall objectives in accordance with the Groups risk appetite and maintaining a close working relationship with the Chairman.
Independent
NonExecutive
Directors
Clive Adamson David Bennett David Browne Paul Coby Adrian Grace Fiona MacLeod Dr Teresa RobsonCapps and Tim Wade Bringing an external perspective knowledge experience and insight from other industries and applying sound judgement and objectivity to the business of the Board.
Developing and setting the Groups strategy and monitoring its implementation reviewing the RMF and supporting and constructively challenging Executive Directors.
Satisfying themselves on the integrity of financial information considering and taking account of the views and concerns of the Companys shareholders and other stakeholders.
Having a principal role in appointing and where necessary removing Executive
Devising appropriate succession plans and approving appropriate levels of remuneration for the Executive Directors following recommendations from the Remuneration Committee.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 55 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Jim Pettigrew
Go Re David Bennett Deputy Chairman and Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Au Go Re Ri Joined the Group September 2012 and became Chairman in 2014 Joined the Group October 2015 Key areas of expertise Finance Governance MandA Key areas of expertise Finance MandA Retail Banking Skills and experience Jim has over 30 years experience in business and finance gained from executive and senior positions principally within financial services.
Jim was formerly Chief Executive Officer at CMC Markets PLC Chief Operating Officer at Ashmore Group PLC Group Finance Director at ICAP PLC and Deputy Group Finance Director and Group Treasurer at Sedgwick Group PLC.
He is a chartered accountant and has extensive NonExecutive Director experience in a listed environment.
He was previously NonExecutive Director at Aberdeen Asset Management PLC NonExecutive Director at AON UK Limited and NonExecutive Director at Hermes Fund Managers Limited.
He is the immediate past President of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland.
His breadth of experience credibility with key stakeholders and strong leadership qualities make him an effective Chairman.
Skills and experience David has significant experience in retail banking gained from a career spanning more than 30 years and including executive and senior roles in both the UK and internationally.
David was Group Finance Director of Alliance and Leicester plc for six years before becoming its Group Chief Executive.
Following the acquisition of Alliance and Leicester plc by Banco Santander he was appointed Executive Director on the Board of Abbey National plc.
His indepth experience of retail banking and involvement in organisational operational and structural change is invaluable as we execute our Group strategy.
He has significant NonExecutive Director experience in a listed environment which has included being a NonExecutive Director of Bank of Ireland UK PLC NonExecutive Director of easyJet plc and Non Executive Director of CMC Markets PLC.
Key external appointments Chairman of The Edinburgh Investment Trust PLC Senior Independent Non Executive Director of Crest Nicholson Holdings PLC Senior Independent NonExecutive Director of Rathbone Brothers Plc and Rathbone Investment Management Limited part of the Rathbone Brothers Plc group Chairman of RBC Europe Limited BlueBay Asset Management Services Ltd and BlueBay Asset Management LLP members of the RBC Group Chairman of Scottish Financial Enterprise and CoChair of the Financial Services Advisory Board.
Key external appointments NonExecutive Director of Ashmore Group plc PayPal Europe S.
S.
Chairman of Homeserve Membership Ltd.
Director of various companies within the Together Financial Services Limited group.
Key Re Remuneration Committee Ri Risk Committee Au Audit Committee Go Governance and Nomination Committee
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 56 Clive Adamson Independent NonExecutive Director Au Ri David Browne Independent NonExecutive Director Au Re Ri Paul Coby Independent NonExecutive Director
Adrian Grace Independent NonExecutive Director
Fiona MacLeod Independent NonExecutive Director Go Ri Dr Teresa RobsonCapps Independent NonExecutive Director
Joined the Group July 2016 Joined the Group May 2012 Joined the Group June 2016 Joined the Group December 2014 Joined the Group September 2016 Joined the Group October 2014 Key areas of expertise Governance Financial Services Regulation
Key areas of expertise Finance Risk Key areas of expertise Information Technology Strategy Key areas of expertise Finance Financial Services Regulation
Key areas of expertise MandA Marketing Strategy Key areas of expertise Finance Strategy Skills and experience Clive has considerable experience of UK and global economic banking and regulatory matters gained from an extensive career in banking and financial services regulation.
He held senior executive and advisory positions with the FCA the former Financial Services Authority and the BoE.
He was previously Head of Supervision and an Executive Director of the Board of the FCA until May 2015.
His strong understanding of the UK and global banking industry and related risks is invaluable to the Board.
Skills and experience David has over 30 years experience in debt capital markets treasury and investor relations.
He was previously Head of Group Funding and External Relations at Man Group PLC and spent a significant part of his career at JP Morgan where he held the positions of Assistant Vice President Vice President and Managing
David is a founding partner of Pinnacle Partners Limited a treasury consulting firm.
Skills and experience Paul is an accomplished IT professional with significant ecommerce international and technology experience.
In particular his understanding of how technology has changed consumer behaviour how advances in digital technology can impact customer outcomes and his appreciation of the endtoend customer journey in a strategic omnichannel context is invaluable to the Group as we develop new products and digital capability.
Paul is the John Lewis Partnerships Chief Information Officer CIO responsible for leading and coordinating IT across the John Lewis Waitrose and JLP Group.
Prior to his CIO role Paul was IT Director at John Lewis and previously CIO at British Airways for 10 years.
Pauls previous roles include NonExecutive Chairman of the Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques SITA the global provider of systems solutions and telecommunications to the air transport industry NonExecutive Director at Pets at Home Group PLC and at PandO Ferries Limited Chairman of the eSkills UK CIO Board and Chairman of the oneworld CIO Group which coordinated IT links across the 10 airline oneworld Alliance partners.
Skills and experience Adrian has extensive financial business leadership and general management experience gained from a career which has spanned a range of consumer and commercial financial services sectors and involved a variety of senior roles.
Adrians experience of designing and implementing substantial change programmes and delivering transformational growth through simple customer focused visions and plans is aligned to the Groups strategy.
Having started his career with the Leeds Permanent Building Society and then Mercantile Credit Adrian joined GE Capital where he spent time in the UK Asia and the Americas.
He became Managing Director of the Small Business Division at Sage Group plc.
He was Chief Executive at Barclays Insurance and Managing Director of Commercial Banking within the Corporate Division of HBOS.
Since 2011 Adrian has been Chief Executive Officer at Aegon UK having joined Aegon in 2009 as Group Business Development Director.
He was previously on the boards of the Association of British Insurers and Scottish Financial Enterprise.
Skills and experience Fiona has over 28 years international business experience in leading complex largescale business transformation and in managing the commercial human resources and cultural aspects of change programmes.
A substantial part of her career was at BP Group plc where she held various executive positions including latterly the role of President Retail USA and Latin America.
Fionas deep experience of operational business leadership of transforming businesses and in understanding and managing the organisational design and people impacts of business change are invaluable to the Group as we focus on building a high performing customer centric organisation and continue our cultural transformation.
Fionas experience of running retail businesses serving millions of customers per day is also of particular relevance.
Fiona was formerly Senior Independent NonExecutive Director of SThree plc.
Skills and experience Teresa has extensive financial customer service and general management experience from across a range of industries including telecommunications financial services and retail.
She is a chartered management accountant and has a Doctorate in Accounting and Management Control.
Teresa has a breadth of experience gained from executive leadership roles with BT Mobile Sears plc Eagle StarZurich Financial Services Cable and Wireless Reality and
She joined HSBC Group in 2006 and from 2010 was Deputy Head Direct Bank and First Direct.
Teresa also has strong board experience gained from her previous roles as Chairman of ACS Clothing Group Limited and Non Executive Director of Broker Network Holdings Limited Paymentshield Group Holdings Limited PowerPlace Insurance Services Limited and Towergate Insurance Limited.
Key external appointments Chairman at JP Morgan International Bank Limited NonExecutive Director of The Prudential Assurance Company Limited NonExecutive Director at Ashmore Group plc and senior adviser at McKinsey and Company.
Key external appointments Director of Pinnacle Partners Limited and Trustee and Director of London Youth Rowing Limited.
Key external appointment CIO of the John Lewis Partnership.
Key external appointments Director of various companies within the Aegon Group and a member of the FCA Practitioner Panel representing the life and pensions sector.
Key external appointment NonExecutive Director of Denholm Oilfield Services Limited.
Key external appointments NonExecutive Director of Hastings Group Holdings PLC and NonExecutive Director of Yorkshire Water Services
Governance
Board of Directors NonExecutive Directors CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 57 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Clive Adamson Independent NonExecutive Director Au Ri David Browne Independent NonExecutive Director Au Re Ri Paul Coby Independent NonExecutive Director
Adrian Grace Independent NonExecutive Director
Fiona MacLeod Independent NonExecutive Director Go Ri Dr Teresa RobsonCapps Independent NonExecutive Director
Joined the Group July 2016 Joined the Group May 2012 Joined the Group June 2016 Joined the Group December 2014 Joined the Group September 2016 Joined the Group October 2014 Key areas of expertise Governance Financial Services Regulation
Key areas of expertise Finance Risk Key areas of expertise Information Technology Strategy Key areas of expertise Finance Financial Services Regulation
Key areas of expertise MandA Marketing Strategy Key areas of expertise Finance Strategy Skills and experience Clive has considerable experience of UK and global economic banking and regulatory matters gained from an extensive career in banking and financial services regulation.
He held senior executive and advisory positions with the FCA the former Financial Services Authority and the BoE.
He was previously Head of Supervision and an Executive Director of the Board of the FCA until May 2015.
His strong understanding of the UK and global banking industry and related risks is invaluable to the Board.
Skills and experience David has over 30 years experience in debt capital markets treasury and investor relations.
He was previously Head of Group Funding and External Relations at Man Group PLC and spent a significant part of his career at JP Morgan where he held the positions of Assistant Vice President Vice President and Managing
David is a founding partner of Pinnacle Partners Limited a treasury consulting firm.
Skills and experience Paul is an accomplished IT professional with significant ecommerce international and technology experience.
In particular his understanding of how technology has changed consumer behaviour how advances in digital technology can impact customer outcomes and his appreciation of the endtoend customer journey in a strategic omnichannel context is invaluable to the Group as we develop new products and digital capability.
Paul is the John Lewis Partnerships Chief Information Officer CIO responsible for leading and coordinating IT across the John Lewis Waitrose and JLP Group.
Prior to his CIO role Paul was IT Director at John Lewis and previously CIO at British Airways for 10 years.
Pauls previous roles include NonExecutive Chairman of the Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques SITA the global provider of systems solutions and telecommunications to the air transport industry NonExecutive Director at Pets at Home Group PLC and at PandO Ferries Limited Chairman of the eSkills UK CIO Board and Chairman of the oneworld CIO Group which coordinated IT links across the 10 airline oneworld Alliance partners.
Skills and experience Adrian has extensive financial business leadership and general management experience gained from a career which has spanned a range of consumer and commercial financial services sectors and involved a variety of senior roles.
Adrians experience of designing and implementing substantial change programmes and delivering transformational growth through simple customer focused visions and plans is aligned to the Groups strategy.
Having started his career with the Leeds Permanent Building Society and then Mercantile Credit Adrian joined GE Capital where he spent time in the UK Asia and the Americas.
He became Managing Director of the Small Business Division at Sage Group plc.
He was Chief Executive at Barclays Insurance and Managing Director of Commercial Banking within the Corporate Division of HBOS.
Since 2011 Adrian has been Chief Executive Officer at Aegon UK having joined Aegon in 2009 as Group Business Development Director.
He was previously on the boards of the Association of British Insurers and Scottish Financial Enterprise.
Skills and experience Fiona has over 28 years international business experience in leading complex largescale business transformation and in managing the commercial human resources and cultural aspects of change programmes.
A substantial part of her career was at BP Group plc where she held various executive positions including latterly the role of President Retail USA and Latin America.
Fionas deep experience of operational business leadership of transforming businesses and in understanding and managing the organisational design and people impacts of business change are invaluable to the Group as we focus on building a high performing customer centric organisation and continue our cultural transformation.
Fionas experience of running retail businesses serving millions of customers per day is also of particular relevance.
Fiona was formerly Senior Independent NonExecutive Director of SThree plc.
Skills and experience Teresa has extensive financial customer service and general management experience from across a range of industries including telecommunications financial services and retail.
She is a chartered management accountant and has a Doctorate in Accounting and Management Control.
Teresa has a breadth of experience gained from executive leadership roles with BT Mobile Sears plc Eagle StarZurich Financial Services Cable and Wireless Reality and
She joined HSBC Group in 2006 and from 2010 was Deputy Head Direct Bank and First Direct.
Teresa also has strong board experience gained from her previous roles as Chairman of ACS Clothing Group Limited and Non Executive Director of Broker Network Holdings Limited Paymentshield Group Holdings Limited PowerPlace Insurance Services Limited and Towergate Insurance Limited.
Key external appointments Chairman at JP Morgan International Bank Limited NonExecutive Director of The Prudential Assurance Company Limited NonExecutive Director at Ashmore Group plc and senior adviser at McKinsey and Company.
Key external appointments Director of Pinnacle Partners Limited and Trustee and Director of London Youth Rowing Limited.
Key external appointment CIO of the John Lewis Partnership.
Key external appointments Director of various companies within the Aegon Group and a member of the FCA Practitioner Panel representing the life and pensions sector.
Key external appointment NonExecutive Director of Denholm Oilfield Services Limited.
Key external appointments NonExecutive Director of Hastings Group Holdings PLC and NonExecutive Director of Yorkshire Water Services
Key Re Remuneration Committee Ri Risk Committee Au Audit Committee Go Governance and Nomination Committee
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 58 Tim Wade Independent NonExecutive Director Au Ri David Duffy Executive Director and
Chief Executive Officer
Debbie Crosbie Executive Director and Chief Operating Officer Joined the Group September 2016 Joined the Group June 2015 Joined the Group June 1997 Key areas of expertise Finance MandA Retail Banking Risk Key areas of expertise Banking Finance MandA Strategy Key areas of expertise Information Technology Retail Banking Strategy Operations Skills and experience Tim has over 20 years senior experience in retail financial services including retail banking in both the UK and internationally.
An Australian national he is an experienced Chief Financial Officer a chartered accountant and a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
Tim was Managing Director at AMP International responsible for AMP Bank and the Virgin Direct now Virgin Money joint venture.
He began his career at Arthur Andersen working in Melbourne and Singapore and in 1994 he joined Colonial Limited the mutual financial services group as Chief Taxation Counsel.
He became Group Chief Financial Officer in 1997 and Executive Director of State Bank of NSW.
Tim subsequently oversaw the IPO of Colonial and was involved in Colonials subsequent acquisition by Commonwealth Bank  at the time the largest acquisition in Australian corporate history.
His previous NonExecutive Director board experience includes Friends Life Group Limited and Monitise plc.
Skills and experience David has significant international finance and banking experience gained from a career spanning almost three decades.
Davids proven ability to build and transform businesses and lead strong management teams brings significant value to all of the Groups stakeholders.
Prior to joining the Group David was Chief Executive Officer at Allied Irish Banks plc one of the largest retail and commercial banks in Ireland.
He was a former Chief Executive Officer of Standard Bank International with responsibility for operations in the UK Europe Latin America and Asia.
He was also previously Head of Global Wholesale Banking Network with ING Group and President and Chief Executive Officer of the ING wholesale franchises in the United States and Latin America.
David is a past President of the Banking and Payments Federation of Ireland and a past Director of the European Banking Federation.
Davids broadbased skills leadership energy and strategic vision are invaluable to the Group as it continues its strategic journey and cultural transformation.
Skills and experience Debbie has broad experience and knowledge gained over 20 years in the banking sector particularly around information technology complex project delivery material outsourcing and strategy and planning.
She has significant experience at a senior management level and is a strong advocate for customers and improving the customer experience by driving a change and transformation journey which has the customer as its core focus.
Since joining the Group in 1997 Debbie has held a variety of positions including Head of Technology Governance Head of Strategic Projects and Head of the Groups Development Centre.
She was Chief Information Officer from 2008 to 2011 she became Operations and IT Director in 2011 was appointed Executive Director in 2014 and Chief Operating Officer in 2015.
Debbie was Acting Chief Executive Officer from February 2015 to June 2015 and during this period led the preparation for the Groups demerger and IPO and was part of the management team which completed the transaction.
She was previously a NonExecutive Director of the Scottish Court Service and is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers.
Key external appointments Chairman at Macquarie Bank International Limited NonExecutive Director of companies within the Chubb European Group Limited and The Access Bank UK Limited groups and NonExecutive Director of The Coeliac UK Trading Company Limited.
Key external appointments NonExecutive Director of NewTA Limited trading as UK Finance the industry body representing leading firms providing finance banking markets and payments related services in or from the UK.
Key external appointments ViceChair of the Board of CBI Scotland and member of the Board of Glasgow Economic Leadership.
Governance
Board of Directors Executive Directors CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 59 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Ian Smith Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer Joined the Group November 2014 Key areas of expertise Banking Finance MandA Strategy Skills and experience Ian has considerable experience in finance audit and advising on bank strategy from a corporate transaction perspective gained from a career spanning more than 20 years.
He has held senior finance roles in HBOS plc and Lloyds Banking Group plc and has provided advice to boards considering significant corporate transactions.
He joined the Group in November 2014 from Deloitte LLP where he was a partner specialising in financial services.
Key external appointment NonExecutive Director of 67 Pall Mall Limited.
Lorna McMillan Company Secretary Joined the Group September 1994 Skills and experience Lorna has responsibility for supporting the Chairman and the Board as well as leading the delivery of shareholder services.
She has over 20 years experience gained from various roles in the Group across retail and business banking wholesale banking risk management and legal and governance areas.
Lorna was appointed Company Secretary in October 2014 and led the corporate governance preparation for the Groups demerger and IPO during 2016.
Company Secretary CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 60 The Executive Leadership Team operates under the direction and authority of the Chief Executive Officer and is responsible for supporting him in all aspects of his role.
Each member has been assigned individual accountability for delivery of the overall strategy and the principal risks outlined in the Strategic report.
They also have accountability for delivering against the initiatives designed to underpin our strategic priorities of capital optimisation improving efficiency and driving sustainable customer growth.
David Duffy Executive Director and
Chief Executive Officer
Debbie Crosbie Executive Director and Chief Operating Officer Ian Smith Executive Director and Chief Financial Officer Enda Johnson Group Corporate Development Director Joined the Group September 2015 Skills and experience Enda has responsibility for the Groups strategic development corporate affairs and investor relations.
He has over 14 years experience in financial services and before joining the Group he worked at Allied Irish Banks plc as Head of Corporate Affairs and Strategy and was a member of the Executive Leadership Team.
Enda previously worked in the banking unit of the Irish National Treasury Management Agency NTMA where he worked on the recapitalisation and restructure of Irish banks following the global financial crisis.
Before the NTMA he worked internationally with Merrill Lynch in its investment banking and capital markets divisions.
Kate Guthrie Group Human Resources Director Joined the Group January 2016 Skills and experience Kate has responsibility for human resources and internal communications focusing on talent and leadership development colleague engagement and culture.
She has over 30 years domestic and international HR experience having worked in six different blue chip organisations in four industrial sectors including financial services.
Prior to joining the Group Kate spent a decade with Lloyds Banking Group plc where she was latterly the HR Director responsible for leading the group culture capability and engagement.
Fergus Murphy Group Customer Value Director Joined the Group January 2016 Skills and experience Fergus has responsibility for the delivery of the Groups product suite including pricing propositions customer liability strategy capital allocation and product development.
He has over 20 years experience in financial services gained from Allied Irish Banks plc Rabobank Group BNP Paribas Group and KBC Bank Ireland plc.
At Allied Irish Banks plc he held roles including Director of Products and Capital Markets and latterly Director of Corporate and Institutional Banking.
During his tenure with AIB he redesigned the customer product offering to better meet customers needs and led the rebuilding of AIBs operating model.
He is a former CEO of Rabobank Asia and was responsible for the overall strategy and performance of Rabobank in the region.
Governance
Executive Leadership Team CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 61 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Gavin Opperman Group Customer Banking Director Joined the Group November 2015 Skills and experience Gavin has responsibility for developing and leading the Groups customer banking strategy.
He is a senior executive with over 30 years of banking experience in leadership risk operations and customer facing roles across retail commercial corporate and investment banking and within a wide range of geographies.
Gavin has experience of different levels of complexity market and team dynamics.
He was previously Regional Head of Consumer Banking for Standard Chartered plc based in China and prior to that held a number of senior positions in a career spanning 20 years with Barclays Group including being Chief Executive Officer of Absa Bank Limited a subsidiary of Barclays Africa Group.
Helen Page Group Innovation and Marketing Director Joined the Group December 2012 Skills and experience Helen has responsibility for the Groups marketing and customer innovation strategy.
She has over 25 years experience in marketing product and customer innovation and brand strategy principally within the financial services industry.
Helen spent eight years at Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc in a number of roles and was latterly Managing Director for Marketing and Innovation with responsibility for all UK brands across the Retail Commercial and Corporate divisions.
Helen was previously Head of Brand Marketing at Argos part of the Home Retail Group plc and prior to Argos held a number of product and marketing roles at Abbey National plc now Santander where she became Head of Marketing.
James Peirson Group General Counsel Joined the Group November 2014 Skills and experience James has responsibility for leading the Groups legal and governance strategy.
He joined NAB in 2005 where he led the NAB London Branch legal team.
James also held roles supporting NAB and Clydesdale Bank PLC Treasury activities as part of NABs capital and funding legal team in both Melbourne and London.
Prior to joining NAB he worked in private legal practice at Hogan Lovells International LLP.
Mark Thundercliffe Group Chief Risk Officer Joined the Group September 2016 Skills and experience Mark is responsible for the management of significant risks and opportunities across the Group including strategic reputational operational financial credit and regulatory.
He has over 29 years international retail and business banking experience.
Mark was previously Chief Risk Officer at HSBC responsible for management and oversight of risk for HSBCs Retail Banking and Wealth Management business across the UK Europe the Middle East and Africa.
Mark has also held a number of senior international positions in financial services firms up to Chief Executive Officer and Executive Director level.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 62 Statement of compliance The Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 has been prepared in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 Code which was issued in April 2016.
The Code is publicly available at www. rc.
The Board confirms that the Company has applied the main principles and complied with the provisions of the Code.
The Group has also adopted the British Bankers Association Code for Financial Reporting Disclosure which is available at www. ba. prepared in compliance with its principles.
Leadership
The Board is the principal decisionmaking body of the Group and is collectively responsible to shareholders for promoting the longterm success of the Company.
The Boards role is to provide leadership to the business as a whole within a framework of prudent and effective controls which enable risk to be assessed and managed.
It sets strategy and oversees its delivery and establishes its culture values ethics and standards.
It sets the Groups risk appetite monitors operational and financial performance and reporting ensures the Group is adequately resourced and has effective controls and remuneration policies and that there are appropriate succession planning arrangements.
In order to assist the Board in carrying out its functions and to ensure that there is independent oversight of financial reporting internal controls risk management governance and remuneration matters the Board delegates certain clearly defined responsibilities to its four principal committees.
Reports from the Governance and Nomination Committee the Audit Committee and the Risk Committee are contained in this report.
A report from the Remuneration Committee is included in the Directors remuneration report.
As required the Board may also establish special purpose Committees to assist the Board in the oversight of specific areas that may require more detailed attention.
The Board established a special purpose IRB and Credit IFRS 9 Committee to oversee the transition from a standardised approach to calculating capital requirements for credit risk to an IRB approach and the implementation of the credit element of the IFRS 9 accounting standard which will be effective for the Group in the reporting period beginning 1 October 2018.
During the year the activities of the Committee included overseeing the submission of the Groups application to the PRA for IRB accreditation and system changes covering critical delivery of IFRS 9 and stress testing to embed an advanced Credit Risk Management capability.
The chart on page 132 of the Risk report illustrates the Board and management structure as at 30 September 2017.
Matters reserved to the Board and delegated authorities In order to retain control of key decisions and ensure there is a clear division of responsibilities at the head of the Company the Board has identified certain reserved matters that only it can approve.
Other matters responsibilities and authorities have been delegated to its committees and the Chief Executive Officer.
The matters reserved to the Board are set out in the Charter for the Board and this as well as the Charters for each principal Board committee is available to view on the Companys website siteaboutuscorporategovernance.
The Charters are also available on request from the Company Secretary at the Companys registered office.
During the year the Board and each of the Board committees reviewed its Charter.
The authorities delegated by the Board to the Chief Executive Officer are set out in the Delegation of Authority Framework.
Board and strategic planning During the year the Boards focus was on supporting executive management to deliver the Groups strategy.
The strategy communicated at our Capital Markets Day in September 2016 is unchanged and the Boards discussions throughout the year focused on overseeing delivery of the strategic priorities of sustainable customer growth improved efficiency and capital optimisation.
A key objective during the year was to deepen and embed the strategy to align with the evolving competitive economic and regulatory environment with a focus on execution and derisking delivery.
As part of this process the Board was engaged in three indepth strategic review and planning sessions with the management team and received regular updates on the initiatives under way to build core capabilities and support strategic delivery.
During the first half of the year the areas of focus for the Board included discussing the impacts of the challenging external environment including the political uncertainty arising from the UKs exit from the European Union and the potential for a second Scottish Independence Referendum.
It was also updated on progress in transforming the distribution model and evolving channel capabilities developments in building digital capability and improving customer service and the banking experience.
Potential inorganic strategic opportunities including Fintech partnerships to achieve scale and asset growth and to capitalise on existing operational leverage were considered as was performance against the target cost structure and our structured approach to cost reduction.
The Board also monitored progress in delivering the refreshed people strategy the simplification of the governance framework and on the cultural transformation to enable strategic delivery.
Governance
Corporate governance report CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 63 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information In the second half of the year the Board continued its review and discussion of strategic performance in the context of the economic political and competitive environment.
In addition the Board was deeply engaged in discussing the evolving UK banking landscape and the Groups future participation choices.
The Board also participated in an evaluation of the underpinning fundamentals of the strategy in the context of the market environment and considered different growth alternatives to increase value for investors.
The Board also held a challenge session on potential inorganic opportunities and alignment with the Groups strategic priorities and broader market dynamics.
Each of these areas of strategic focus was informed by external insights and input which strengthened the debate.
The Board also spent time considering updates from the Board committees which informed the Groups strategy.
The output of the review and planning sessions was a refreshed strategic and financial plan to be approved by the Board along with a revised RAS.
During the process the Board considered very carefully the issues informing the strategic and financial plan to ensure that the business will be able to continue to drive sustained performance for the benefit of all stakeholders to be monitored by the Board through a set of key performance indicators.
Board attendance The core activities of the Board were carried out in 11 scheduled meetings of the Board.
Two additional ad hoc meetings of the Board were arranged when matters required to be brought to the Boards attention or when decisions were required outside scheduled meetings.
The attendance of Directors at scheduled Board meetings which they were eligible to attend and the number of meetings attended in the year ended 30 September 2017 is shown in the following table.
Director
Number of scheduled Board meetings eligible to attend Number of scheduled Board meetings attended
Jim Pettigrew 11 11 NonExecutive Directors Clive Adamson 11 11 David Bennett 11 11 David Browne 11 11 Paul Coby 11 11 Adrian Grace 11 11 Richard Gregory Fiona MacLeod 11 10 Dr Teresa RobsonCapps 11 11 Tim Wade 11 10 Executive Directors David Duffy 11 11 Debbie Crosbie 11 11 Ian Smith 11 11 1 Richard Gregory retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
2 Unable to attend the meeting due to a prior business commitment.
Board activity Setting the Board agenda There is a comprehensive and continuous process in place for ensuring the Board has full and timely access to all relevant information in an insightful format.
The Chairman is responsible for setting the Board agenda and is assisted by the Chief Executive Officer and Company Secretary.
The Board agenda is structured to ensure it covers each of the three strategic priorities and underpinning core capabilities to support strategy engagement and the challenge and debate on performance and delivery at Board level.
The Chairman reviews the time allocation with the Company Secretary to ensure adequate time is allowed to discuss material matters.
The Company Secretary keeps the Chairman informed of any agenda items requested by NonExecutive Directors.
In order to carry out its work a yearly planner is prepared by the Company Secretary to map out the flow of key items of business to the Board and to ensure that sufficient time at the meeting is provided for debate and challenge.
Directors are sent papers for Board meetings up to five working days in advance of the meeting whether they are able to attend or not in order that they may have the time to consider the proposals put forward seek clarification or if required request further information.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 64
Corporate governance report At each main meeting the Board discusses the Chief Executive Officers report  including performance against the strategic plan key developments in the external environment the economic outlook and impacts for the Group business performance product and proposition developments stakeholder engagement and investor relations matters material regulatory issues and key matters relating to people cultural and organisational transformation and capability the Chief Financial Officers report  including performance against the financial plan key performance indicators capital liquidity and funding matters the Chief Operating Officers report  including delivery against customer service commitments operational efficiency IT service and security and the status of major investment programmes and the Group Chief Risk Officers report  including the risk profile and risk categorisation and principal and emerging risks key risk issues and RAS performance and trends.
How Board meetings are run Prior to the start of a scheduled Board meeting the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director meets with NonExecutive Directors excluding the Chairman and then with the Chairman present to discuss matters of concern or focus.
Both the Chairman and the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director report to the Board on issues to be brought to the Boards attention at the commencement of each meeting and these are recorded in the Board minutes.
The Chairman ensures Board meetings are structured to facilitate open discussion debate and challenge with dissenting views of Directors being freely expressed and discussed within the decisionmaking process leading to Board decisions being made on a sound and wellinformed basis.
All Directors are expected to attend each Board meeting and committee meeting for which they are members save for in exceptional circumstances.
Reasons for nonattendance are generally unavoidable conflicts with prior business commitments personal reasons or illness and nonattendance must always be notified in advance to the Chairman relevant committee Chair or the Company Secretary.
In the rare event of a Director being unable to attend a meeting heshe has the opportunity to discuss with or notify the Chairman relevant committee Chair or the Company Secretary of any matters heshe wishes to raise and to follow up the decisions made at the meeting.
The Chairman and Company Secretary together with members of the Executive Leadership Team are available to discuss issues relating to meetings or other matters with Directors.
During the year the Chairman held a number of meetings with NonExecutive Directors without the Executive Directors being present.
Board committees The Board delegates certain clearly defined responsibilities to its four principal Board committees namely the Governance and Nomination Committee the Audit Committee the Risk Committee and the Remuneration Committee.
The committee Chairs report to the Board on the activities of the committees at each Board meeting.
Each principal committee membership comprises NonExecutive Directors only and is chaired by an experienced Chair.
Committee memberships are spread between the NonExecutive Directors drawing on each of their relevant skills and experience.
Only members of the committees are entitled to attend their meetings but others may attend at the discretion of the committee Chair.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 65 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Board focus in 2017 The significant matters addressed by the Board during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 and in evaluating the Companys 2017 Annual Report and Accounts are described below.
Regular agenda items Chairmans report Senior Independent NonExecutive Directors report
Chief Executive Officers report
Chief Financial Officers report
Chief Operating Officers report
Group Chief Risk Officers report
Reports from committee Chairs Board administration and governance Strategy and financial Monitored delivery of the Groups strategic plan and performance of the financial plan including the impacts of changes in the economic political regulatory and competitive environment Development and monitoring of key performance indicators Approved the Companys Annual Report and Accounts Interim Financial Report related announcements and supporting analyst presentations Reviewed the capital funding and liquidity frameworks and approved the Capital Plan and the Funding Plan Approved the Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process ILAAP Approved Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP scenarios Approved a Debt Issuance programme and a Tier 1 capital instrument distribution Approved the Group tax strategy Approved the submission and subsequent withdrawal of a preliminary nonbinding proposal to the Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC in relation to its Williams and Glynn operations Approved major capital and investment expenditure Approved and recommended to shareholders the reappointment of the External Auditor Approved and recommended to shareholders a final dividend for FY2017 Customer focus Monitored progress with the digitally enabled omnichannel strategy and the customer journey programme Reviewed progress of the PPI complaints remediation programme Monitored Conduct Framework progress and outcomes Received updates on the actions to address customer vulnerability in financial services People culture and values Approved a revised Board inclusion and diversity policy statement Reviewed succession planning and talent management Reviewed the results from the MyVoice colleague engagement survey Approved the outcomes of a strategic reward review which included pension scheme reforms Reviewed health and safety updates Approved the Modern Slavery Act statement Supported the launch of the new Values and Behaviours and Great Leadership framework
Approved Senior Independent Non Executive Director and Board committee appointments Considered the Board and committee structure size and composition Approved the Board and committee charters and division of roles of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Approved revisions to the External Directorship Policy Standard Considered the outputs of the external Board Effectiveness Review and agreed actions to be taken Approved NonExecutive Director fees Considered NonExecutive Directors independence Reviewed the Register of Directors Conflicts of Interests Recommended the reelection by shareholders of Directors at the Annual General Meeting
Approved the Groups recovery plan in the event of a significant deterioration in financial stability Approved the Pillar 3 Disclosures Report Reviewed compliance with the new Financial Services Compensation Scheme rules Received a presentation from the PRA on its Periodic Summary Meeting letter Considered the PRAs annual assessment of the Conduct Indemnity Fund Kept informed of regulatory changes
Risk management
Approved and received interim updates on the RAS Approved the enhanced RMF Agreed and monitored principal and emerging risks Reviewed internal control systems Monitored the IRB and Credit IFRS 9 programme and related matters and approved the submission of the Groups IRB application to the PRA Considered the outcome of an independent review of PPI control frameworks Approved the Scheme triennial valuation Approved Group insurance renewal including a Directors and Officers Liability Insurance Policy
Agreed and received updates on the stakeholder engagement strategy Received investor relations updates Approved results announcements Received briefings on AGM arrangements Received briefings on shareholder engagement feedback Approved the small holding sale facility CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 66
Corporate governance report Deep dives and Board briefings The Board has a programme of deep dive sessions focusing on thematic updates aligned to the strategic priorities and core capabilities which give Directors the opportunity to engage with management in a more informal way outside of the structure of a Board meeting to gain insight on topics of interest or focus for the Board.
Additionally the Board receives briefings on regulatory and corporate governance change.
Listed below are the deep dive topics and Board briefings during the year.
Deep dives Mortgage market and performance UK banking landscape and strategic update Small and medium business segments
Customer journey programme Current account market Board briefings IRB and IFRS 9 Credit models Antibribery and corruption risk Stakeholder engagement Directors either collectively or individually undertook site visits and met with customers and representatives from our wider communities.
Site visits provide an opportunity to get closer to business operations current issues and customer service in an operational environment.
This provides insight into customer experiences and allows Directors to connect with management and colleagues alike.
In April 2017 the Board visited Studio B our new innovation lab in London which has been designed to inspire a new way of thinking that could shape the future of banking.
It also visited the new flagship Customer Banking Centre in Edinburgh in July 2017 which has a modern design and facilities to reflect the new way in which the Group interacts with and serves its customers.
In June Directors met the winners of our annual Spirit of the Community Awards which are described in more detail on page 32.
Effectiveness
Board size and composition The Board comprises a NonExecutive Chairman three Executive Directors and eight independent NonExecutive Directors.
The size of the Board is considered to be suitable in the context of a highly complex commercial and regulatory operating environment with the appropriate combination of Executive and NonExecutive Directors such that no individual or small group of individuals can dominate the Boards decision making.
The names of the Directors together with their full biographical details including the skills and experience they each bring to the Board are on pages 55 to 59.
Further details on the composition of the Board and independence of the NonExecutive Directors are provided in the Governance and Nomination Committee report on page 77.
Time commitments The Board recognises that it is vital that Directors should be able to dedicate sufficient time to the Company to effectively discharge their responsibilities.
The time commitment is considered by the Board on appointment and kept under review.
The letters of appointment of the Chairman and of each of the NonExecutive Directors set out the minimum time commitment for their roles and that they undertake to allocate sufficient time to the Company as is necessary for the effective discharge of their duties.
The Chairman is expected to commit at least 60 days per year on Company business the Deputy Chairman 45 days per year and NonExecutive Directors at least 35 days.
Time commitment increases for other Board roles such as the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and committee Chairs and for involvement in a committee as a member.
As described within the relevant sections of this Corporate governance report the NonExecutive Directors preparation for and attendance at Board and committee meetings is only part of their role.
The other significant commitments of the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are disclosed to the Board before appointment with an indication of time involved.
During the year the Governance and Nomination Committee kept under review the number of external directorships held by each Director and considered the limits on the number of directorships which Directors may hold as a result of PRA Rulebook General Organisational Requirements 5.4 having regard to General Organisational Requirements 5.5 and 5.6 and FCA Handbook Senior Management Arrangements Systems and Controls SYSC 4.3A.5R having regard to SYSC 4.3A.6R and 4.3A.7R.
Details of the Chairmans other significant commitments are set out on page Details of the NonExecutive Directors other significant commitments are set out on pages 55 to 58.
Any changes to the NonExecutive Directors time commitments were reported by the Governance and Nomination Committee to the Board.
The
Board is satisfied that each NonExecutive Director is able to devote sufficient time to their role.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 67 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Executive Directors are encouraged to take nonexecutive positions in other companies and organisations to broaden their experience.
The appointment to such positions is subject to the approval of the Board which considers in particular the time commitment required.
Board changes Richard Gregory Senior Independent NonExecutive Director retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
Further details about the Groups approach to succession planning and diversity can be found in the Governance and Nomination Committee report on page 77.
Changes to committee memberships are set out on pages 76 81 and 90.
Board independence It is the Companys policy that at least half the Board should be independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Board assesses the independence of Directors on an annual basis following a review by the Governance and Nomination Committee.
The Board considers each of its current NonExecutive Directors to be independent in character and judgement.
The Chairman was considered independent on appointment.
Further information is given in the Governance and Nomination Committee report on page 77.
Conflicts of interest Pursuant to the Companies Act 2006 the Directors have a statutory duty to avoid situations in which they have or can have a direct or indirect interest in the Company unless that interest is first authorised by the other Directors.
This duty is in addition to the existing duty that a Director owes to the Company to disclose to the Board any transaction or arrangement under consideration by the Company.
Prior to appointment potential conflicts of interest are disclosed and assessed to ensure that there are no matters which would prevent the incoming Director from taking the appointment and during their tenure Directors are asked to consult with the Company Secretary and the Chairman before taking up any external appointment or responsibilities.
Any changes to the commitments of Directors are reported to the Governance and Nomination Committee and the Board.
Directors are reminded at each Board meeting of their duty to report any actual or potential conflict as soon as they become aware of any such events.
If any actual or potential conflict arises the relevant Director will excuse himselfherself from any meeting or discussions where the potential conflicts are considered and all relevant material will be restricted including Board papers and minutes.
A Director with a potential or actual conflict will not be permitted to form part of the quorum or vote upon the matter giving rise to the conflict.
Directors do not participate in decisions concerning their own remuneration or interest.
All potential conflicts authorised by the Board are recorded in a Register of Directors Conflicts of Interests which is reviewed by the Board annually.
Board induction The Chairman ensures that each newly appointed Director receives a full and formal induction on joining the Board which is tailored to reflect a Directors skills experience and Board role.
The Company Secretary designs and facilitates the induction programme having consulted with the Chairman and having regard to the particular needs of the new Director.
Progress is reported to the Chairman and reviewed regularly by the Chairman with each Director.
The aim of the induction programme is to quickly provide a new Director with an understanding of how the Group works and the key opportunities and challenges that it faces to enable them to contribute fully in Board and Committee meetings and covers at least the following the Group and its strategy key business drivers of performance and the competitive environment and regulatory landscape in which the Group operates major strategic and investment programmes and priorities the key current and emerging risk issues and challenges for the business and risk appetite the organisational culture and capabilities the role of the Board and its committees and the Companys corporate governance practices and training on the role and responsibilities of a Director including statutory duties.
The induction programme is delivered through a combination of onetoone briefings with the Chairman Company Secretary current Directors and members of the Executive Leadership Team site visits to some of the Groups customer facing and operational areas and reading materials including archive Board and committee papers and other key corporate governance documents.
Meetings are also arranged with other selected senior managers including the Group Director Internal Audit and with external stakeholders including the External Auditor.
Directors joining the Board to perform a specific role or holding a senior management function role such as a committee Chair are provided with additional indepth training including meeting with the outgoing role holder or committee Chair where possible and completing a documented handover.
Particular attention is given to the tailored components of the programme where a Director is appointed from outside the financial services sector or where a Director has not previously served on a UK listed company board.
Directors who take on or change role during the year participate in an induction programme tailored to their new role.
As described on page 68 the Board has in place a professional development and training programme which ensures that Director development continues after the initial induction programme has been completed.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 68
Corporate governance report Professional development and training Continuing professional development is an important aspect of a Directors role.
Skills and knowledge need to be kept up to date to ensure the effectiveness of the Board as a whole and allow every Director to contribute fully in Board and committee meetings.
During the year the Board Development Programme was refreshed so as to provide a more structured approach.
The Board Development Programme includes components covering Board deep dive sessions details on page 66 stakeholder engagement see page 66 opportunities for wider stakeholder engagement in the community in which the Group operates seminars courses and roundtables to provide external insights on topical issues technical briefings and peer group debates and Board briefings see page 66.
The Chairman reviews with each NonExecutive Director their individual training and development need and progress at regular oneone meetings.
The Company Secretary maintains a training and development log for each Director.
Board performance evaluation During 2017 the Board engaged an external company Advanced Boardroom Excellence to facilitate the 2017 assessment of the effectiveness of the Board and of its committees.
Advanced
Boardroom Excellence is an independent consultancy with extensive experience undertaking evaluations for publicly listed companies and with no other connection to the Group.
The review was led by Helen Pitcher the Chairman of Advanced Boardroom Excellence and took place between March and July 2017.
The key conclusion of the evaluation was that the Board and committees operate effectively with a high degree of integrity and appropriate challenge and support.
Significant progress has been made since the last external Board evaluation in 2015 before listing.
Indeed the Board was recognised as having operated effectively to complete a successful demerger and IPO.
The key theme from the review was therefore evolutionary development of the Board recognising the changes to both Board and Board Committee composition during 2016 the integration of new members which continued through 2017 and the transition to an independent publicly listed company.
2017 review process The Board performance evaluation was coordinated by the Company Secretary and Fiona MacLeod a NonExecutive Director on the Governance and Nomination Committee and overseen by the Governance and Nomination Committee.
The Governance and Nomination Committee with the support of the Board agreed the themes to be assessed use of Board time and efficiency of meetings quality of the information received by the Board the Board as a team succession planning induction and training and depth of engagement on areas including strategy risk and customer related topics.
The evaluation was conducted against the Financial Reporting Councils FRC best practice framework Guidance on Board Effectiveness March 2011 which is publicly available at www. rc.
The 2017 process included various elements.
2017 review process Briefing between Advanced Boardroom Excellence the Company Secretary and Fiona MacLeod during March to agree the scope process and timetable for the review Structured oneone meetings between Helen Pitcher and all Directors in addition to senior leaders who regularly interface with the Board and Board committees Observation of meetings of the Board Audit Committee and Risk Committee Facilitated roundtable discussions with the Governance and Nomination Committee and with the Remuneration
Review of the Board and Board committee charters papers and other key governance documentation Draft discussion document discussed with the Governance and Nomination Committee in May Presentation and facilitated discussion of key evaluation outcomes led by Advanced Boardroom Excellence Presentation by Advanced Boardroom Excellence to the Chair of each Board committee Production of a final report of findings and recommendations Agreement by the Board of the key areas of focus and continuous improvement actions for the future development of Board effectiveness CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 69 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The approach was designed to facilitate and encourage open and constructive dialogue and the exchange of ideas and viewpoints between the reviewer and participants.
As such a tailored discussion guide was used to structure the oneone meetings held with each Director the Company Secretary Group General Counsel Group Chief Risk Officer Group Human Resources Director and Group Director Internal Audit.
In the oneone meetings participants were asked for their views on the elements of Board effectiveness identified by the FRC.
While a formal assessment of each individual Director was not sought due to the relatively short period the current Board composition had been in place the process elicited a number of useful insights which were shared by the Chairman with each NonExecutive Director in his regular oneone meetings.
A more formal assessment of individual Directors will be addressed in future years.
Due to evolving corporate governance best practice and regulatory requirements impacting the remit of governance and nomination committees and remuneration committees facilitated roundtable discussions were held with the Chair and members of the Governance and Nomination Committee and of the Remuneration Committee.
This approach enabled the committees to openly discuss how their areas of focus could evolve over the next 1224 months and what should be the principal areas of committee activity and priorities.
The information gathered during the individual meetings Board and committee observations documentation review and roundtable discussions was independently reviewed by Helen Pitcher to produce an analysis of strengths challenges development opportunities and recommendations which was set out in a draft discussion document reviewed by the Governance and Nomination Committee.
This was followed by a facilitated discussion with the Board at which Helen Pitcher presented the key outcomes of the evaluation and the Board agreed the key areas of focus and priority actions for the future development of Board effectiveness.
In addition a report on the evaluation of each principal Board committee was produced and discussed with the Chair of each committee.
The Senior Independent NonExecutive Director received a report on the Chairman which was shared with the Chairman individually and with the NonExecutive Directors without the Chairman being present.
Principal findings The conclusions of the 2017 review were positive and have confirmed that the Board and its committees operate effectively.
A benchmark provided by Advanced Boardroom Excellence against a FTSE 100 comparator group the Company is currently in the FTSE 250 showed a good balance of strengths and areas to further develop.
The Board was found to be detailed in its governance committed to its continuous improvement and development and showed a desire to achieve best practice on all fronts.
The review recognised that the Board comprises a group of accomplished individuals.
With a number of relatively new members at Executive Leadership Team and NonExecutive Director level there is a clear focus on further consolidating and building its own dynamic to become an even more integrated and effective team.
It was recognised that the team dynamic had been well demonstrated at the successful IPO.
The four key areas for the future development of the Boards effectiveness were Board oversight  Increase the opportunities for engaging the full Board in evolving the Groups strategy including developing the knowledge and insight of the whole Board and encouraging Directors to bring external insights Board development and engagement  As the Board evolves it continues to focus on the development of the Board itself as a cohesive unit able to continue to challenge consistently and effectively while maximising the diversity of contribution expertise and knowledge on the Board Leadership role of the Board  Provide for greater engagement of the Board with broader stakeholder communities including customers in a more proactive and consistent way and Board planning  Continue to develop an efficient effective and balanced governance support process including creating capacity for the Board to undertake reflective challenge and debate on strategic performance.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 70
Corporate governance report Continuous improvement actions The Board performance evaluation report from Advanced Boardroom Excellence sets out a series of recommendations that have been carefully considered by the Board.
The Board has agreed a suite of priority actions aligned to the key areas for the future development of the Boards effectiveness.
Pleasingly a number of these actions had already been discussed and in some cases instigated by the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer.
It was positive to see these recommendations reinforced by external expert evaluation.
The priority actions agreed by the Board include ensuring the already robust strategy process allows greater time for input debate challenge and discussion at the Board  prior to the evaluation the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer had agreed a full programme of Board engagement in relation to the FY2018FY2022 strategic planning process.
The Board performance evaluation added some helpful suggestions around seeking an even broader suite of external insights reviewing the Boards role in the process of both creating and monitoring culture and values to develop a programme of effective feedback to the Board  the Board is very engaged around the culture and values of the organisation.
As agreed by the Board the Group Human Resources Director is working with the Governance and Nomination Committee and the wider Board to ensure a deep rooted and sustained Board role in culture and values going forward ensuring that work on executive succession and pipeline is integrated into the activities of the Governance and Nomination Committee and more widely shared with the Board  to this end the Governance and Nomination Committee has identified succession planning including the Committees role in executive and senior management succession planning as a further priority area of focus for 2018.
The Board will review the senior talent and diversity succession and development plans on an annual basis mapping in conjunction with NonExecutive Directors a programme of external input to strengthen the debate and discussion on the key areas of the business strategy and transformation considering the development opportunities for the Board both from a business and Board dynamics perspective  the Board annual calendar will be refreshed to include more opportunities for the Board members to spend informal time together.
The Chairman will continue to focus on further enhancing the strong Board culture and positive and constructive relations between the Directors as a collective and between the Board and the Executive Leadership Team focusing specifically on further developing the Board members into a coherent collective innovative strategic oversight team  the Board agenda has been restructured as recommended by Advanced Boardroom Excellence to provide more agenda space for effective debate and challenge at Board meetings on topics such as strategy culture and stakeholder including colleague engagement and providing the broader executive team with the opportunity to align with the Board more closely  the Chairman will encourage all NonExecutive Directors to have more oneone time with the members of the Executive Leadership Team not limited to those members who are Executive Directors on the Board with progress to be discussed during the Chairmans regular scheduled oneone meetings with each NonExecutive Director and recorded on their individual training and development plan.
Follow up The Chairman and Board very much regard the Board performance evaluation as an opportunity for continuous improvement not a oneoff event.
The Governance and Nomination Committee with the support of the Company Secretary prepared a detailed action plan incorporating the priority actions agreed by the Board and addressing the other recommendations agreed by the Board to be taken forward.
The Governance and Nomination Committee will coordinate the implementation of the actions which will be fully owned across the Board and all Board committees.
Information and support The Board has processes in place to ensure that it is supplied in a timely manner with information in a form and of a quality to enable it to effectively discharge its duties.
The Chairman through the Company Secretary is responsible for ensuring communication flows between the Board and its committees with the support of the Executive Directors and management and ensures that this information is of high quality in terms of its currency clarity accuracy appropriateness and comprehensiveness.
All Directors have access to the advice of the Company Secretary in relation to the discharge of their duties and matters of governance.
Directors are able to seek clarification or further detail from management where necessary.
The Company Secretary is also responsible for facilitating communications with shareholders as appropriate and ensuring due regard is paid to their interests.
All Directors are provided with sufficient resources to undertake their duties.
In appropriate circumstances Directors may obtain at the Groups expense independent professional advice where they judge it necessary to discharge their responsibilities as Directors.
The appointment and removal of the Company Secretary is a matter reserved for the Board as a whole.
Service contracts and letters of appointment Details of Executive service contracts and letters of appointment of the Board are set out on pages 105 and 106 of the Directors remuneration report.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 71 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Internal control Board responsibility The Board is responsible for the Groups systems of internal control.
The internal control framework is designed to facilitate effective and efficient operations ensure a high quality of internal and external reporting and ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
The Directors and management are committed to maintaining a robust control framework as the foundation for the delivery of effective risk management.
Owing to the limitations inherent in any internal control framework the controls have been designed to manage and mitigate rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve the Groups business objectives and can provide only reasonable not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Directors acknowledge their responsibilities in relation to the Groups internal control framework and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The Board confirms that throughout the year ended 30 September 2017 and up to the date of approval of this Annual Report and Accounts there have been rigorous processes in place to identify evaluate and manage the principal risks faced by the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the likelihood of a risk occurring and the costs of control in accordance with the Guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting published by the FRC.
In order to assist in the identification and management of the principal risks the Board has established an RMF which is integrated into the Groups overall framework for risk governance and has developed a system of regular reports from management.
The Board has authorised the Risk Committee to oversee the Groups compliance with the Boards approved RAS RMF and risk culture.
Further details can be found in the Risk report on pages Reviews by the Board The effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems is reviewed regularly by the Risk Committee and the Audit Committee including an annual review.
The Risk Committee is responsible for providing oversight and advice to the Board in relation to current and potential future risk exposures.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities with regard to external and internal audit activities and controls including reviewing audit reports internal controls and risk management systems.
The Groups risk management and internal control systems are regularly reviewed by the Board and are consistent with the guidance on Risk Management Internal Control and Related Financial and Business Reporting issued by the FRC and compliant with the requirements of the Capital Requirements Directive IV CRD IV.
They have been in place for the year under review and up to the date of the approval of the Annual Report and Accounts.
Control effectiveness A review of the effectiveness of controls is regularly undertaken across the Group providing an assessment and statement on the effectiveness of the Groups control environment.
This provides assurance to the Risk Committee that no new material control issues have been identified and that robust management actions are in place to address specific known gaps.
Overall assessment Over the past year the Group has further enhanced the RMF simplifying and improving the risk categories and impact classification.
The control environment remains stable with the 2017 Control Effectiveness Statement providing assurance that ineffective controls are escalated appropriately and have adequate action plans in place.
The Risk Committee in conjunction with the Audit Committee concluded that the Groups risk management and internal control framework in relation to the Groups risk profile and strategy was effective and adequate and was recommended to and approved by the Board.
Bribery and corruption In compliance with the Bribery Act 2010 the Group has in place risk assessments policies and guidelines on interacting with customers suppliers and agents including specific policies for gifts and hospitality.
Certain Senior Managers are required to assess money laundering risks and the adequacy of related internal controls within their areas of responsibility on an ongoing basis.
Formal antibribery and corruption training is required for all colleagues the Executive Leadership Team and Directors.
Remuneration
The statement by the Chair of the Remuneration Committee and the Directors annual report on remuneration are set out on pages CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 72
Corporate governance report Shareholder relationships The Board recognises the need for a programme of engagement which offers all shareholders opportunities to receive information from the Company and enables them to share their views with the Board.
In addition the Board regularly receives feedback on shareholder sentiment and sell side analyst views of the Group and the wider industry.
The Board is committed to ensuring that there are effective channels of communication with the Companys shareholders.
The Groups website enables access to documents and communications as soon as they are published including recordings of webcasts and other analyst presentations.
Relationships with institutional investors Engagement with institutional investors both existing and potential investors took place throughout the year in order to update the market on our progress against the Groups longterm strategy and recent financial performance.
Investor roadshows were held in key geographic locations reflecting the nature of the Companys institutional ownership and were attended by an appropriate mix of Directors and included the Chairman the Deputy Chairman and Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and the Chief Executive Officer.
The Board receives regular feedback on share price performance investor and analyst views and changes to the shareholder register via regular monthly reports a quarterly detailed investor relations update and ad hoc intelligence.
Relationships with retail shareholders The Company Secretary oversees communication with retail shareholders and provides feedback to the Board and appropriate committees to ensure the views of retail shareholders are received and considered.
The Groups Registrar Computershare provides a dedicated shareholder service at site in the UK and siteau in Australia through which shareholders can manage their shareholding online receive Company communications and cast proxy votes for forthcoming general meetings.
Small holding sale facility In May 2017 the Company announced the launch of a sale facility for eligible holders including shareholders and CDI holders for small holdings defined in the Companys Articles of Association as a holding of shares with an aggregate market value of less than A500 based on the closing price of a CHESS Depository Interest CDI on the Australian Securities Exchange ASX.
This facility provided eligible shareholders with an easy and costeffective way to sell all of their shares and enabled the Group to reduce the ongoing costs associated with administering the security registers.
The sale facility closed on 28 June 2017 at which point 5187747 shares were sold pursuant to the facility which had been held by 139846 eligible holders representing 0.59% of the total issued share capital of the Company at the time.
Nov 2016 2016 preliminary results Dec 2016 2016 Annual Report and Accounts published Jan 2017 2017 AGM Jan 2017 Analyst briefings on Q1 results Aug 2017 Analyst briefings on Q3 results Jan 2017 Q1 results announcement Feb 2017 Australian investment institutions meetings Nov 2016 Analyst briefings on Q1 results North American investor roadshow May 2017 Half year results announcement May 2017 Analyst briefings on half year results UK roadshows Aug 2017 Q3 results announcement Sept 2017 Institutional investor engagement on remuneration Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Reporting events Stakeholder engagement CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 73 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The annual general meeting Shareholders are invited to attend the Companys 2018 annual general meeting AGM to be held at 10am GMT on Wednesday 31 January 2018 at the offices of Pinsent Masons LLP 30 Crown Place Earl Street London EC2A 4ES United Kingdom when they will have the opportunity to engage directly with Directors who will be available to answer any shareholder questions.
Facilities are also available for shareholders to cast their votes electronically or by post.
All resolutions at the 2018 AGM will be voted on a poll.
The procedure for voting on a poll follows best practice and allows the Company to count all votes rather than just those of the shareholders attending the meeting.
The resolutions to be proposed at the AGM together with explanatory notes are set out in a separate Notice of AGM which accompanies this Annual Report and Accounts and is on the Companys website site.
The Notice of AGM is circulated to all shareholders at least 20 working days before such meetings and it is the Companys policy not to combine resolutions.
As recommended by the Code all resolutions to be proposed at the 2018 AGM will be voted on separately and the voting results will include all votes cast for against and those withheld together with all proxies lodged before the meeting.
A vote withheld will not be a vote in law and will not be used in calculating the votes for or against a resolution.
Details of the proxy votes cast will be made available on the Companys website as soon as is reasonably practicable after the meeting by means of an announcement on the securities exchanges to which the Company is listed and on the Companys website site In the opinion of the Board where the situation arises that a significant proportion of votes have been cast against a resolution at any general meeting the Company will explain when announcing the results of voting what action it intends to take to understand the reasons behind the result of the vote.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 74 Dear shareholder As Chairman of the Board and Chairman of the Governance and Nomination Committee I am pleased to present the report on the Committees activity during 2017.
The Committees role is to regularly review the structure size and composition of the Board having regard to the balance of skills experience knowledge independence and diversity on the Board.
It is also responsible for developing and maintaining a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for identifying and nominating for approval by the Board candidates to fill Board and committee vacancies when they arise.
The Committee also reviews the succession plans at Board and Executive level leads the process for the periodic evaluation of the performance and effectiveness of the Board committees and individual Directors and makes recommendations to the Board to ensure that the Groups corporate governance arrangements are consistent with best practice and good corporate governance standards.
During 2017 the Committee spent considerable time overseeing the annual performance evaluation of the Board and its committees which this year was externally facilitated by Advanced Boardroom Excellence.
I am grateful to Fiona MacLeod who led the process on behalf of the Committee and the Board.
The evaluation approach process followed principal areas of development and priority actions agreed by the Board are described on pages 68 to 70 of the Corporate governance report.
I am pleased to confirm that the key conclusion of the evaluation was that the Board and its committees operate effectively with significant progress made since the last external Board evaluation which was undertaken in 2015 in advance of the demerger and
Since the completion of the review the Governance and Nomination Committee has overseen the preparation and implementation of a detailed action plan incorporating the priority actions agreed by the Board and has kept the Board informed of progress.
Governance
Governance and Nomination Committee report The Committee has evolved its role and remains committed to being at the forefront of best corporate governance practice.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 75 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information As part of the annual performance evaluation the Governance and Nomination Committee held a facilitated roundtable session with Advanced Boardroom Excellence to discuss openly how the Committee wanted to evolve its role consistent with best practice for listed company governance and nomination committees.
Following the IPO the focus of the Committee in 2016 and early 2017 was principally on succession planning and refreshing capability and composition of the Board and its committees.
Having taken time to both fully reflect and to look ahead the Committee has now agreed its principal areas of activity and priorities for 2018 as follows evaluation of the skills knowledge and experience on the Board particularly with regard to longerterm requirements and to inform future Board composition succession planning including the Committees role in executive and senior management succession planning which is an area of growing shareholder and regulatory interest developing the Committees and Boards role in the areas of talent management and leadership development agreeing the Committees and Boards role in supporting management with the cultural transformation and diversity and inclusion agendas and improving Director training and development.
In the year ahead the Committee will continue to monitor the needs of the Board its committees and the longerterm leadership of the business by ensuring that succession plans align to and keep pace with the strategic goals of the Group.
The Committee will continue to oversee the effectiveness of the corporate governance arrangements particularly the impacts of corporate governance reforms and will continue to monitor the implementation of the actions agreed by the Board following the performance evaluation of the Board and of its committees.
Jim Pettigrew Chair Governance and Nomination Committee CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 76
Governance and Nomination Committee report Membership and meetings The current members of the Committee are Jim Pettigrew Chair David Bennett Fiona MacLeod The Committee is chaired by the Chairman of the Board and the members of the Committee are Independent NonExecutive Directors in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
If a matter were to concern the Chairman then he would leave the meeting and the remaining members would elect one of their number to take the Chair unless the Chairman had designated a member to do so.
The Chief Executive Officer attends meetings at the invitation of the Committee.
The Group Human Resources Director also attends meetings at the invitation of the Committee particularly when it is considering Executive succession planning matters.
Members of the Committee took no part in any discussions concerning their own membership of the Board or appointment as a Chair of a committee.
Committee attendance The core activities of the Committee were carried out in four scheduled meetings of the Committee.
One additional ad hoc meeting was arranged for decisions required outside scheduled meetings.
The table below shows the Committee members during the year to 30 September 2017 and their attendance at scheduled Committee meetings.
Number of scheduled
Number of scheduled
Committee Chair Jim Pettigrew 4 4 Committee members David Bennett 4 4 Fiona MacLeod Former Committee members Richard Gregory 1 Fiona MacLeod was appointed as a Committee member on 30 December 2016.
2 Richard Gregory retired as a Committee member on 10 January 2017.
Committee role and responsibilities During the year the Committee revised its Charter which sets out the role and responsibilities of the Committee.
The Charter of the Committee can be found on the Companys website siteaboutuscorporategovernance Committee performance evaluation The independent externally facilitated Board Performance Evaluation carried out during the year included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
The review identified that the Committee Charter reflected best practice and that the responsibilities of the Committee set out in the Charter were consistent with the Code.
A key finding was that the Committee needs to reflect on its responsibilities and to set its objectives and priorities for the year and agree the processes by which it will fulfil its responsibilities.
The Committee has now agreed its priorities as set out on page 75 and is developing a work plan to address these priorities in addition to its wider Charter responsibilities.
The
Committees calendar of meetings has been refreshed to allow for better planning and to ensure the Committees workload is spread across the calendar year.
Matters considered and actions taken by the Committee The significant matters addressed by the Committee during the year ended 30 September 2017 and in evaluating the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts are described in the following pages.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 77 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Board and Board committee composition Membership of the Board and the current and future composition of its committees Reviewed the structure size and composition of the Board and Board committees including skills experience independence knowledge and diversity and considered the longerterm succession of Board and committee members relative to tenure mix and diversity of skills and the Groups strategy future challenges and opportunities reported the outcome and recommendations to the Board Reviewed the time commitment including external appointments of serving Directors Undertook the annual review of the Conflicts of Interests Register and When considering the recruitment of a new Director the Committee adopts a formal rigorous and transparent procedure with due regard to diversity including gender.
Before commencing the recruitment process the Committee evaluates the balance of skills knowledge experience independence and diversity on the Board and in light of this evaluation prepares a description of the role and capabilities required.
In identifying suitable candidates the Committee uses open advertising or the services of external advisers to facilitate the search considers candidates from different genders and a wide range of backgrounds considers candidates on merit and against objective criteria ensuring that appointees have sufficient time to devote to the position in light of other potential significant positions and engages from time to time with the Groups major shareholders in future skills requirements and ideas for potential candidates.
Skills and independence  Assessed the independence of NonExecutive Directors having regard to both the Code requirements on independence and factors such as length of tenure and the ability of NonExecutive Directors to objectively challenge the Executive free from relationships or circumstances which are likely to affect or could appear to affect the Directors judgement.
The Committee also took account of any relationships that had been disclosed and authorised by the Board.
Based on the assessment for 2017 the Committee is satisfied that throughout the year all NonExecutive Directors remained independent as to both character and judgement and that Jim Pettigrew the Board Chairman was considered independent on appointment.
At least half the Board comprised independent NonExecutive Directors and Recommended to the Board the reelection of all Directors.
Executive succession planning and talent management Had an update from and discussion with the Group Human Resources Director on the succession plan for the Executive Leadership Team and their direct reports and Had an update from and discussion with the Group Human Resources Director on the Groups talent management framework and talent pool and the opportunities for Board engagement in talent management and leadership development.
Diversity and inclusion  The Board recognises the value of achieving diversity on the Board and throughout the
Although new appointments are based on merit careful consideration is given to the benefits of improving and complementing the diversity skills experience and knowledge of the Board.
The Board recognises and is committed to creating the conditions that foster talent for women to achieve their full potential by building strong female representation at Board level Executive Leadership Team level and throughout the Group.
During the year the Committee reviewed and recommended to the Board an updated Board Inclusion and Diversity Policy Statement to include a target of 33% female representation on the Board by 2020 achieved through the natural cycle of Board renewal.
It is also the Boards intention to broaden diversity on the Board beyond gender diversity alone to reflect the communities in which the Group operates and serves.
As at 30 September 2017 there were three female Directors 25% on the Board.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 78
Governance and Nomination Committee report Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Board and Board committee effectiveness review Oversaw the annual performance evaluation of the Board and its committees which was externally facilitated by Advanced Boardroom Excellence.
The evaluation approach process followed principal areas of development and priority actions agreed by the Board are described on pages 68 to 70 of the Corporate governance report Oversaw the preparation and implementation of a detailed action plan incorporating the priority actions agreed by the Board actions of an administrative nature and actions specific to a Board committee kept the Board informed of progress and Undertook an assessment of the effectiveness of the externally facilitated independent performance evaluation of the Board.
Governance  Participated in a facilitated roundtable session with Advanced Boardroom Excellence to openly discuss the evolving corporate governance best practice and regulatory requirements impacting the remit of the Governance and Nomination Committee Discussed and agreed how the Committees areas of focus could evolve over the next 1224 months and what the principal areas of Committee activity and priorities should be Received an update on proposed corporate governance reforms and Reviewed and agreed an External Directorship Policy for adoption by the Board to govern the number of nonexecutive directorships an incoming or current Director is permitted to hold in the context of ensuring Directors are able to commit sufficient time to their role with the Group to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 79 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Audit Committee report The Audit Committee has fulfilled its responsibilities to ensure the integrity and quality of the Groups financial reporting.
Dear shareholder As Chair of the Audit Committee I am pleased to present the report from the Committee for the year ended 30 September 2017.
I became the Chair of the Committee on 23 November 2016 having been a member since 12 September 2016.
I would like to thank David Bennett my predecessor as Interim Chair for his invaluable guidance and insight to me as incoming Chair.
Highlights in 2017 During the year the Audit Committee has fulfilled its responsibilities and met its key objectives by overseeing financial reporting including the adequacy of related disclosures as well as reviewing internal controls and the effectiveness of both internal and external audit.
The Committee is comprised of independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee continued to exercise its responsibilities for ensuring the integrity and quality of the Groups financial reporting and spent considerable time reviewing the Groups financial results.
It questioned management robustly on a number of key accounting judgements relevant to the financial statements including a focus on impairment losses on loans and advances PPI redress provision and other conduct matters deferred tax assets retirement benefit obligations and fair value of financial instruments full details are contained on pages 82 to 84 of this
The Committee has focused closely on the analysis underpinning the ongoing Going Concern test the longerterm Viability Assessment and in particular the presentation of the Annual Report and Accounts in a way that makes them Fair Balanced and Understandable.
The Group continues to enhance its control environment.
The
Committee utilising its independent perspective challenged constructively the operation of the Groups Three Lines of Defence model in relation to the Groups internal controls which is essential to ensure risks are appropriately managed and mitigated.
The Committee has worked closely with the Risk Committee in this process.
The Committee continued to oversee the performance and effectiveness of internal and external audit the main independent assurance mechanisms that serve to protect shareholders interests.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 80
Audit Committee report
Audit Committee report The Group Director Internal Audit provided regular updates to the Committee on enhancements made during the year to the Internal Audit function following on from Deloitte LLPs external quality assessment of the Internal Audit Function in 2016.
These included a refresh of the Internal Audit strategy to align to the Groups strategy and clearly link the Internal Audit work to the key drivers of success for the Group.
Having considered feedback from stakeholders peer benchmarking analysis results of quality assessments and the Internal Audit reports provided to the Committee it was concluded that Internal Audit activities were effective.
The Committee closely monitored the external audit process and the performance of the External Auditor EY through an annual effectiveness review against four themes in line with the FRC guidance judgement mindset and culture skills character and knowledge and an assessment of quality control.
The Committee considered the review and concluded in terms of the themes assessed that the external audit process was effective.
Committee performance evaluation The independent externally facilitated Board Performance Evaluation carried out during the year included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
Overall the Committee was assessed as effective.
Further details are provided in this report.
Looking ahead The report sets out the areas the Committee focused on in 2017.
Many of these areas will again be areas of focus for the Committee in 2018.
In particular the Committee will monitor the application of the Three Lines of Defence Model assess the Internal Audit oversight of the IRB project and continue to provide oversight of the implementation of the new financial instruments accounting standard IFRS 9 which will be effective for the Group in the reporting period beginning 1 October 2018.
Tim Wade Chair Audit Committee CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 81 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Membership and meetings The current members of the Committee are Tim Wade Chair Clive Adamson David Bennett David Browne Dr Teresa RobsonCapps The Committee comprises five Independent NonExecutive
Tim Wade Chair has recent and relevant accounting and audit experience for the purposes of the Code having held a number of senior finance roles.
The other Committee members have significant current or recent experience in the financial services and banking industries details of which are contained within the biographies section on pages 55 to 58.
This depth of experience enables the Committee to deal effectively with the matters within its remit and to challenge management and auditors when required.
In addition to the Committee members the Chairman Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Group Head of Finance Group Chief Risk Officer Company Secretary Group General Counsel Group Director Internal Audit and the External Auditor are invited to attend Committee meetings.
The Chair is also a member of the Risk Committee.
Private sessions are held with the External Auditor and Group Director Internal Audit at alternate Committee meetings to provide additional opportunity for open dialogue and feedback without management being present.
The Chair of the Committee also meets with the Group Director Internal Audit and the Senior Statutory Auditor outside the formal Committee process at regular intervals throughout the year.
Alignment with Risk Committee The Committee recognises the common interest in issues relevant to both the Risk Committee and Audit Committee and in particular the responsibilities of both in relation to the effectiveness of internal control.
Joint discussions by both committees for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 included progress made towards the implementation of IFRS 9 the Companys fraud and money laundering controls assurance plans from the Three Lines of Defence the Viability Statement and bonus risk adjustments and metrics to be recommended to the Remuneration Committee.
To support the coordination of information between the committees the Chairs of each of the Audit and Risk Committees are members of both committees.
The Audit Committee and Risk Committee also hold at least one joint meeting per year.
Committee attendance The core activities of the Committee were carried out in six scheduled meetings of the Committee.
Two additional ad hoc meetings were arranged for decisions required outside scheduled meetings.
The table below shows the Committee members during the year ended 30 September 2017 and their attendance at scheduled Committee meetings.
Number of scheduled
Number of scheduled
Committee Chair Tim Wade 6 6 Committee members Clive Adamson 6 6 David Bennett 6 6 David Browne 6 6 Dr Teresa RobsonCapps 6 5 Former Committee members Richard Gregory 1 Unable to attend the meeting due to a prior business commitment.
2 Richard Gregory retired as a Committee member on 10 January 2017.
Committee role and responsibilities During the year the Committee revised its Charter which sets out the role and responsibilities of the Committee.
The Charter of the Committee can be found on the Companys website siteaboutuscorporategovernance.
Committee performance evaluation The Committees performance was reviewed as part of the independent externally facilitated Board Performance Evaluation during the year which included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
Overall the Committee was assessed as effective.
The key area for development related to ensuring that the Charters for the Audit and Risk committees were reviewed to mitigate duplications and overlaps.
This was an action already identified by both committees.
As part of a handover to Tim Wade on his appointment as Chair of the Committee the new Chair set out his priorities for the Committee and these priorities have been incorporated into the Committees annual work plan and informed the Committees agenda throughout the coming year.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 82
Audit Committee report Matters considered and actions taken by the Committee The significant matters addressed by the Committee during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 and in evaluating the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts are described in the following pages.
Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Accounting tax and financial reporting To review the appropriateness of the Companys financial statements including the content of the Interim Financial Report Annual Report and Accounts and related Preliminary Results Announcements Interim and quarterly results announcements and supporting analyst presentations.
Understood the process for the production of the reports under the remit of the Chief Financial Officer and the level of involvement of crossfunctional subject matter experts including monitoring the procedures in place to ensure that all contributors attested to the completeness accuracy and appropriateness of the disclosures provided.
Accounting policies and practices To review the critical accounting policies disclosure obligations and changes in accounting requirements.
Reviewed with both management and the External Auditor critical accounting estimates and judgements significant accounting policies and disclosures for the Groups financial statements during the year and Received regular updates from the Group Accounting Policy team and External Auditor on key developments in financial reporting requirements.
In particular deep dives were presented on the Groups readiness to implement IFRS 9 to be adopted by the Group from 1 October 2018.
Significant issues and areas of judgement To consider where necessary the actions estimates and judgements of management.
Impairment losses on loans and advances The Groups loans and advances are subject to impairment losses which are measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of the estimated future cash flows discounted at the assets original effective interest rate.
The process of calculating the collective loan loss provision requires the use of significant estimates and judgements over the following estimating the probability of default and estimates of future recoveries in Base Models Model Risk Reserves and the use of overlays.
Reviewed regular reports from management in relation to impairment provisioning with the key focus being on collective provisioning for SME lending where the judgemental element is most significant Reviewed and challenged the inputs and resulting output of the base models with a particular focus on probabilities of default and the estimate of future recoveries Reviewed and challenged the level of overlays included within the collective provision and the rationale behind the requirement for overlays to be held that augment the collective provisioning modelled output and Agreed that the judgements were appropriate at 30 September 2017.
The disclosures relating to impairment provisions are set out in note 3.6 to the financial statements and in the Risk report from page 137.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 83 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed PPI redress provision and other conduct related matters The level of provisions required for both redress and administration in relation to past conduct related matters requires assumptions to be made that are based upon a combination of historical data and management judgement.
These judgements are inherently complex as they involve making estimates based on multiple factors that incorporate expectations of future customer behaviour the impact of regulatory rule making and the application of precedent from the Financial Ombudsman Service.
Reviewed and challenged the assumptions made by management when determining the level of provisions required for PPI and other conduct related matters Reviewed in detail proposals in relation to PPI and other conduct scenarios including potential redress and administrative costs presented by management which reflected alternative potential outcomes before concluding on the 190m provision increase recorded in March 2017 and the 403m increase recorded in September 2017.
Under the terms of the Conduct Indemnity Deed in place with NAB the impact of this on the Group income statement was 58m Considered the continued impact of Plevin together with PS173 issued in March 2017 relating to the August 2019 time bar for PPI complaints.
Based upon the most recent information the Committee concluded that the assumptions used by management were supportable and that the PPI provisions recorded at 30 September 2017 were appropriate and Based upon the most recent information the Committee concluded that management assumptions were supportable and that the other related conduct provisions recorded at 30 September 2017 were appropriate.
The disclosures relating to provisions for conduct matters and the impact of the Conduct Indemnity Deed are set out in note 3.14.
Deferred tax assets The largest elements of the Groups deferred tax asset are historic losses and capital allowances.
In determining that the deferred tax asset balance remains on the balance sheet management has exercised judgement over the forecast future profitability of the Group and the number of years over which to take account of future profits i. reliably estimated.
Reviewed the recoverability of deferred tax assets throughout the year Considered the judgements made by management over the forecast future profitability of the Group and the time horizon over which the use of tax losses was foreseeable in light of the continuing and progressively tightening restrictions on their use and Agreed that the recognition of a deferred tax asset balance of 154m at 30 September 2017 was appropriate.
The disclosures relating the Groups deferred tax asset position as at 30 September 2017 are set out in note 3.11.
Retirement benefit obligations The actuarial valuation of the Groups defined benefit scheme liabilities involves making several financial and demographic assumptions including discount rate future inflation rates and future mortality rates.
Reviewed the discount and inflation rate assumptions proposed by management at 30 September 2017 against a benchmark range provided by the external adviser and concurred with these key assumptions and Considered the mortality assumptions which were reflective of the position reported at the recent Triennial Review by the Scheme actuary.
The disclosures relating the Groups retirement benefit obligations at 30 September 2017 are set out in note 3.16.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 84
Audit Committee report Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Fair value of financial instruments Significant management judgement is required for Level 3 measurements as one or more inputs are unobservable.
The most significant Level 3 asset is the Fair Value Loan Portfolio where management exercises significant judgement over future expectation of credit losses through the application of a Credit Risk Adjustment CRA.
Reviewed the judgement made by management and concurred with the level of CRA applied at 30 September 2017.
The disclosures relating the Groups fair value loan portfolio and fair value measurements at 30 September 2017 are set out in notes 3.3 and 3.18 respectively.
The Committee considered managements review of the disclosed critical accounting estimates and judgements.
The Committee concluded that with the exception of the consideration of the carrying value of the Companys investment in Clydesdale Bank PLC which was not a critical estimate or judgement as at 30 September 2017 as there was no evidence that the asset was impaired no changes were required to these in the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
The Committee considered whether critical estimates and judgements were involved in a number of other areas including the effective interest rate method of accounting Note 2.2 and the capitalisation and impairment of intangible assets Note 3.10.
The Committee concluded that the impact of the sensitivity of judgement in these areas was low and consequently they were not critical estimates or judgements.
Going concern  Reviewed and challenged the going concern assessment undertaken by management including evidence of the Groups capital liquidity and funding position and confirmed to the Board that it was appropriate for the Groups financial statements to be prepared on a going concern basis.
Longterm viability  Reviewed and challenged the viability assessment including the three year time horizon selected undertaken by management in the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts.
The
Committee considered the process to support the viability statement in conjunction with an assessment of principal risks and strategybusiness model disclosures taking into account the assessment by the Risk Committee of stress testing results and risk appetite.
The Committee recommended the draft viability statement as set out on page 125 to the Board for approval.
Assessment of the fair balanced and understandable reporting Considered at the request of the Board the comprehensive review process which supports the Board and Committee in reaching its conclusion whether the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts was fair balanced and understandable and whether it provided the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
The process which enabled the Committee to reach this conclusion included the production of the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts which was managed by the Chief Financial Officer with overall governance and coordination provided by a crossfunctional team of senior management led by the Group Head of Finance crossfunctional support to drafting the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts which included input from Finance Risk Legal and Governance Investor Relations HR and the wider business a robust review process of inputs into the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts by all contributors to ensure disclosures were balanced accurate and verified and further comprehensive reviews were conducted by senior management a review by the Company Secretary of all Board and Committee minutes to ensure all significant matters discussed at meetings were appropriately disclosed in the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts as required a formal review by the Committee of the draft 2017 Annual Report and Accounts in advance of final signoff and a final review by the Board of Directors.
After careful review and consideration of all relevant information including principal risks the Committee was satisfied that taken as a whole the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable and has affirmed that view to the Board.
This process was also undertaken in respect of all the Groups financial reporting during the year to ensure that taken as a whole based on the information supplied to it and challenged by the Committee they were fair balanced and understandable and advised the Board to that effect.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 85 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Regulatory compliance Oversight of the Groups compliance with all necessary regulatory reporting.
Reviewed the integrity of the Pillar 3 Disclosures and recommended approval by the Board Considered the findings from Internal Audits review of COREP reporting as requested by the PRA as part of an industrywide exercise to examine the quality of COREP reporting across a number of banks and building societies and Oversight of significant management judgement in the regulatory returns to the Groups regulators the PRA BoE and FCA.
Internal controls and RMF Details of the internal controls and risk management systems for the Groups financial reporting process are provided within the Corporate governance report on page 71 and in the Risk report on pages 127175.
Reviewed in line with the Internal Audit plan the output of Internal Audit reports including thematic and focused reviews of prudential credit conduct and strategic change risks to confirm the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems and Considered the findings of the External Auditor in connection with the Groups control environment.
Monitoring the effectiveness of the Groups whistleblower framework The Chair of the Committee is the Whistleblower Champion in accordance with the Senior Managers Regime with responsibility for the integrity independence and effectiveness of the Groups policies and procedures on whistleblowing and the Committee has oversight of the whistleblower policy standard and framework.
Considered periodic whistleblower framework reports covering the Groups whistleblowing arrangements including monitoring the trends in reported and substantiated whistleblowing cases Obtained assurance on the completion of training by colleagues to raise awareness across the organisation of the whistleblower framework Agreed the transfer of responsibility of the whistleblowing policy standard and framework from Internal Audit to Regulatory and Compliance Risk with Internal Audit undertaking periodic assurance over its effectiveness and operation and Had oversight of updates to the whistleblowing policy standard to include slavery and human trafficking concerns as a result of the Modern Slavery Act 2015 and to reflect the requirements set out in the FCAs Senior Management Arrangements Systems and Controls Sourcebook the PRA Rulebook  General Organisational Requirements and the Employment Rights Act 1996.
Fraud and antimoney laundering  In conjunction with the activities of the Risk Committee reviewed managements processes for identifying and responding to the risk of fraud and money laundering.
Specifically this involved understanding and overseeing the adequacy of Internal Audit coverage of fraud and money laundering controls and External Audit coverage of fraud risks and controls relating to financial reporting and Considered any instances in which control weaknesses fraud or misconduct were highlighted and managements response in conjunction with any associated control deficiencies.
As a result the Committee in conjunction with the Risk Committee is satisfied that internal controls for financial reporting and risk management systems were appropriate and fit for purpose throughout the year.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 86
Audit Committee report Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Independence and assurance Internal audit Monitoring the role and effectiveness of the Internal Audit function including the role of the Group Director Internal Audit Approved revisions to the Internal Audit Charter which sets out the role and responsibilities of the function in relation to recommendations made by Deloitte LLP in their external quality assessment EQA of the Internal Audit Function in 2016 the EQA is to take place at least once every five years and updated guidance in accordance with the Institute of Internal Auditors.
The Internal Audit Charter can be found on the Companys website at siteaboutuscorporategovernance Approved the audit plan and monitored progress to deliver the plan and material changes to it on a quarterly basis Reviewed the outcomes of Internal Audits work the actions agreed with management to address any issues raised and the status of previously agreed actions Regular interactions with the Group Director Internal Audit during the year including private sessions with the members of the Committee and specific workshops with Internal Audit and senior management to discuss audit planning and priorities Assessed the annual performance of the Group Director Internal Audit.
The Group Director Internal Audit continued to report directly to the Chair of the Committee with a secondary reporting line to the Chief Executive Officer for administrative purposes Following the EQA in 2016 the Committee tracked the progress made during the year of the implementation by the Group Director Internal Audit of certain recommendations raised in the assessment to further enhance the Internal Audit function and Reviewed the results of internal quality assurance reviews on the effectiveness of the Internal Audit function.
The Internal Audit function was sufficiently resourced and skilled to operate as a standalone entity Monitored the adequacy of Internal Audit resources including the financial budget and capability to draw on external specialists when appropriate.
This included a dedicated peer benchmarking exercise conducted during the year.
External audit Responsible for overseeing the relationship with the External Auditor Approved the annual audit plan approved the engagement letter and agreed the auditors remuneration.
The Committee was authorised by shareholders at the 2017 AGM to agree the remuneration of the External Auditors Reviewed the findings of the external audit including key judgements and the level of challenge provided by the External Auditor Reviewed the External Auditors representation letter and Reviewed managements responses to control findings noncompliance and any other findings identified by external audit.
Assessed the performance of the External Auditor The Committee considered the effectiveness of the audit process and the External Auditor performance as part of an annual performance review.
The assessment focused on the areas of judgement mindset and culture skills character and knowledge with an overarching assessment of quality control.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 87 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed External Auditor independence and objectivity and remuneration for audit and nonaudit services Both the Board and the External Auditor have safeguards in place to protect the independence and objectivity of the External Auditor.
The Committee approved during the year revisions to the External Auditor Policy Standard Policy Standard to align it to the Groups Policy Management Framework aligned with the RMF in September 2017 and the FRCs Revised Ethical Standard 2016 The Policy Standard details the nature of the services that the External Auditor may not undertake and specifies that nonaudit services may not be preapproved and are subject to prior approval from the Committee or a delegate.
In certain cases the External Auditor may be selected over another service provider due to their detailed knowledge and understanding of the Groups operations.
Any allowable nonaudit service with a value above 100000 requires approval from the Chair of the Committee.
The Policy Standard also specifies that the overall fee for nonaudit services be continually monitored and should not exceed 70% of the average audit fee over the prior threeyear period The total amount paid to the External Auditor in 2017 was 1766k 2016 1697k.
Payments by the Group for both audit and nonaudit services provided in 2017 and 2016 are further detailed in note 2.4 to the financial statements and The Policy Standard also regulates the appointment of former audit colleagues to senior finance positions in the Group.
This policy is reviewed at least annually and was refreshed during 2017.
Following the Committees review of the effectiveness of the external audit process and the assessment of the External Auditors independence and objectivity it has recommended to the Board the reappointment of EY as the Groups External Auditor for recommendation to and approval by shareholders at the 2018 AGM.
The External Auditor the Senior Statutory Auditor and The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 EY has been the External Auditor for Clydesdale Bank PLC and other Group entities since January 2005.
EY was appointed as the Companys External Auditor on 14 January 2016 following an audit tender shortly before the Company became the holding company of the Group and for the initial period post the demerger and IPO in February 2016 however the Committee recommended that this be kept under review The Group has no current retendering plans.
The Committee undertook a competitive tender of the audit of the Group in early 2015.
In applying the CMAs requirements the next mandatory tender would be in respect of the 2026 financial year During the year Steven Robb succeeded George Reid as the Senior Statutory Auditor and EY will continue to practice the rotation of the Senior Statutory Auditor responsible for the Group audit at least every five years and all other audit partners and audit senior management will be required to rotate at least every seven years The Committee continues to follow developments in the reform of the external audit regulations and the UK and European requirements on publicly listed banking groups and The Committee confirms that the Group has complied during the period of financial review and to the date of this report with The Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 which relates to the frequency and governance of tenders for the appointment of the External Auditor and the setting of a policy on the provision of nonaudit services.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 88 Dear shareholder As Chair of the Risk Committee I am pleased to present the report from the Committee for the year ended 30 September 2017. been a member since 1 July 2016.
I would like to thank Richard Gregory my predecessor as Chair for imparting his knowledge and insight to me as incoming Chair.
Highlights in 2017 During the year there have been a number of key priorities upon which the Committee has focused to enhance both its effectiveness and role.
In particular the Committee has assessed how best it can support a strong and effective risk culture which drives customer centricity.
The Committee has continued to direct the enhancement of the Groups RAS and associated metrics to better align with the strategic planning process with particular focus on defining the risk appetite for conduct risk and operational resilience.
It continued to consider stress and scenario analysis to provide comfort on the Groups ability to mitigate potential risks.
The Committee developed its view and understanding of top and emerging enterprisewide risks as agreed by the Executive Leadership Team and the Board which represent the most significant risks to the achievement of the Groups current business plan and strategy andor could result in material financial reputational or regulatory impact.
The Group continues to operate in an environment subject to considerable change and during the year the Committee has been proactive in its review oversight and challenge of risks arising from headwinds such as the recent political events specifically the outcomes of the UK general election and the commencement of Brexit negotiations following the EU referendum and wider geopolitical risks which have led to increased economic and political uncertainty.
In addition there has been focus on a number of high profile cyber security breaches during the last few years at other UK corporates such as the recent WannaCry incident in May 2017 given the importance of digital capability to the Groups strategic focus and enhancing the Groups enabled omnichannel offering to customers.
The potential impact to the Groups business from various mandatory regulatory developments such as fulfilling the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR Payment Services Directive 2 PSD2 MiFiD II ring fencing and any changes due to regulatory capital requirements as a result of the BCBS are also topical and subject to ongoing consideration by the Committee.
Governance
Risk Committee report The Risk Committee has developed its role in supporting a strong and effective risk culture which drives customer centricity.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 89 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Following his appointment in September 2016 the new Group Chief Risk Officer Mark Thundercliffe reviewed the Groups RMF and Three Lines of Defence Model and the Committee monitored the enhancement and embedding of these arrangements.
The following report sets out the principal risks and areas of emerging risk the Committee evaluated over the year.
More details on the wider risk profile and the RMF that the Committee oversees can be found in the Risk overview within the Strategic report on pages 18 to 19 and in the Risk report on pages Committee performance evaluation The independent externally facilitated Board performance evaluation carried out during the year included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
Overall the Committee was assessed as effective.
Further details are provided in the Committee report.
Looking ahead The Group has made significant advances this year towards its delivery on executing its threeyear strategic plan to establish itself as the UKs leading full service challenger bank.
In support of the Groups strategy the Committee will closely scrutinise developments and any impact on the RAS.
Clive Adamson Chair Risk Committee CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 90
Risk Committee report Membership and meetings The current members of the Committee are Clive Adamson Chair David Bennett David Browne Paul Coby Fiona MacLeod Tim Wade The Committee comprises six Independent NonExecutive Directors who have a variety of industry backgrounds including banking and financial services.
Membership of the Committee has been designed so that there is a deep understanding of the risk management banking and financial sector expertise it needs to fulfil its responsibilities.
Paul Coby and Fiona MacLeod joined the Committee on 30 December 2016 bringing valuable insights into IT risk and strategic change risk and control respectively.
In addition to the Committee members the Chairman Chief
Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Chief Operating Officer
Group Chief Risk Officer Company Secretary Group General Counsel and Group Director Internal Audit are invited to attend Committee meetings.
The Chair is also a member of the Audit Committee.
Committee attendance The core activities of the Committee were carried out in six scheduled meetings of the Committee.
Two additional ad hoc meetings were arranged for decisions required outside scheduled meetings.
The table below shows the Committee members during the year ended 30 September 2017 and their attendance at scheduled Committee meetings.
Number of scheduled
Number of scheduled
Committee Chair Clive Adamson 6 6 Committee members David Bennett 6 6 David Browne 6 6 Paul Coby Fiona MacLeod Tim Wade 6 5 Former Committee members Richard Gregory 1 Paul Coby was appointed as a Committee member on 30 December 2016 2 Fiona MacLeod was appointed as a Committee member on 30 December 2016 3 Unable to attend the meeting due to a prior business commitment 4 Richard Gregory retired as a Committee member on 10 January 2017 Committee role and responsibilities During the year the Committee revised its Charter which sets out the role and responsibilities of the Committee.
The Charter of the Committee can be found on the Companys website siteaboutuscorporategovernance.
Committee performance evaluation The Committees performance was reviewed as part of the independent externally facilitated Board performance evaluation during the year which included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
Overall the Committee was assessed as effective.
In common with the Audit Committee the key area for development related to ensuring that the Charters for the Risk and Audit Committees were reviewed to mitigate duplications and overlaps.
This was an action already identified by both Committees.
Following Clive Adamsons appointment as Chair of the Committee he set out his priorities for the Risk Committee and these priorities have been incorporated into the Committees annual work plan and will inform the Committees agenda throughout the coming year.
Matters considered and actions taken by the Committee The significant matters addressed by the Committee during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 and in evaluating the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts are described in the following pages.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 91 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Role of the Committee Key matters considered and actions completed Enhancing the RAS and stress testing Reviewing and approving the Groups risk appetite Conducted sixmonthly reviews and recommended any updates to the Board for approval of the RAS taking into consideration the strategic objectives and target business model of the Group as well as the environment in which it operates Reviewed regular reports of performance against each RAS measure and assessed and confirmed the adequacy of management actions in relation to actual or potential breaches of Red and Amber RAS thresholds Fully refreshed the statements of appetite and limit settings for the material sources of risk during the year and Requested and reviewed deepdive analysis on a variety of risk matters including B post implementation review customer funding gap and IT.
Reviewing the ICAAP and ILAAP and recommending approval to the Board Reviewed and monitored the capital funding and liquidity profile through the ICAAP and ILAAP processes.
Embedding the risk framework and governance Providing oversight and reviewing the application of the Groups risk management compliance and control systems Reviewed and approved proposals to enhance the RMF Reviewed and approved an updated Policy Management Framework which provides the overarching principles and minimum control requirements that operate across the Group to mitigate risks to within the Groups risk appetite Received updates in relation to the Groups IRB application to the PRA and ongoing compliance Considered an annual review of the Groups antimoney laundering and counter terrorist policy systems and controls and Reviewed the policies and procedures for preventing and detecting fraud and bribery.
Supporting an effective risk culture Ensuring that all colleagues operate in line with the Groups risk focused culture Continually assessed risk culture including considering risk events and undertaking root cause analysis Developed financial risk measures for bonus and long term incentive plan LTIP with the Remuneration Committee for 2018 Recommended the levels of alignment of remuneration to risk performance and Considered any risk adjustments to be taken into account by the Remuneration Committee when making remuneration decisions for 2017 and 2018.
Risk management
Overseeing the risk profile and risk management of the Group within the Board approved RAS Reviewed and challenged regular reports from the Group Chief Risk Officer that considered matters of concern on the material sources of top and emerging risks to the Group see the following pages and outlined the remedial activities initiated to ensure that the risk was brought within risk appetite Reviewed and challenged regular reports from the Chief Financial Officer to manage the risks related to Funding Liquidity and Capital Approved the annual Three Lines of Defence Oversight and Assurance Plans and received regular updates on the adequacy and effectiveness of the application of the risk and control framework Received updates on the output of assurance activities from the Three Lines of Defence regarding internal control processes for risk management Carried out an assessment of the Viability Statement in the draft 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and advised the Board and Audit Committee to that effect and Alongside other risk categories the Committee oversaw Conduct Remediation Programmes ensuring that they deliver the right outcomes for our customers.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 92
Risk Committee report As part of the RMF during the year the Committee maintained oversight of the following identified principal risks and associated top and emerging risks Principal risk Examples of Risk Committee consideration Credit risk The risk of loss of principal or interest stemming from a borrowers failure to meet contracted obligations to the Group in accordance with the terms agreed.
Credit risk is evident at both a portfolio and transactional level.
The Committee reviewed regularly the performance of the credit risk portfolio including segmentations alongside changes in the economic environment to ensure that concentration risks were minimised.
An area of particular focus and attention is the Groups mortgage portfolio spread and the level of concentration of mortgage lending.
Emerging risk  Macroeconomic environment.
The impact of the sustained low interest environment places increased pressure on NIM and conversely a sharp rise in interest rates leads to an increased risk of default rates and credit losses.
Emerging risk  Consumer credit.
Maintaining awareness of the risk of significant unforeseen credit losses occurring within a short time period which has the potential to have a detrimental impact on earnings and profitability.
Balance sheet and Prudential regulation risks This covers a number of categories of risk which combined affect the manner in which the Group can support its customers in a safe and sound manner The Committee monitored closely the Groups funding position giving due consideration to any additional risks arising from increased market uncertainty following changes in the macroeconomic environment including the triggering of Article 50 and subsequent Brexit negotiations which continue to create significant economic uncertainty for the UK and At each meeting the Committee considered a report from the Treasurer which provided an update on the Groups exposure to balance sheet and prudential regulation risks.
Regulatory and compliance risks This consists of regulatory strategy and change risk regulatory relationship risk and the risk of failing to understand and comply with relevant laws regulations licence conditions supervisory requirements industry codes of conduct and voluntary initiatives.
The Committee obtained frequent briefings from management on forthcoming regulatory developments and upstream risk to allow members to consider and oversee the implications of these on the Groups strategic objectives and operations systems and controls Regular updates were received by the Committee from the Group Chief Risk Officer on progress made towards achieving IRB accreditation and The Committee reviewed regular reports detailing how regulatory changes were being integrated into business strategic execution see emerging risks below.
Emerging risk  Regulatory capital requirements  Changes to regulatory capital requirements due to the BCBS consultation on changes to the standardised approaches for calculating credit risk and operational risk.
Emerging risk  Banking reform ring fencing and resolution  Regulatory authorities in the UK and Europe have proposed reforms to certain aspects of banking sector regulation including ring fencing requirements and MiFID II.
Emerging risk  Use of data  The EU Commissions General Data Protection Regulation GDPR is to be introduced from 25 May 2018 meaning the Group will be subject to increased regulatory burden when processing customer colleague and other data and may be subject to increased sanctions for breach.
Conduct risk Defined as the risk of treating customers unfairly andor delivering inappropriate outcomes resulting in regulatory fines compensation redress costs andor reputational damage.
Through the execution of the Group Conduct Strategy the Committee oversaw the proactive review of the business for potential conduct issues The Committee monitored progress to remediate key legacy conduct issues throughout the year including PPI and other remediation programmes The Committee received regular updates on the implementation and effective execution of the Group Conduct Strategy including the biannual Conduct Framework assessment This included review of product governance outcomes obtaining assurance that product design and execution continued to deliver fair outcomes to customers and The Committee oversaw performance against Conduct Risk Appetite including the introduction of additional and enhanced Conductrelated RAS measures and approved a new Conduct Risk Policy Statement.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 93 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Principal risk Examples of Risk Committee consideration Operational risk The risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes and systems or from external events.
The Committee reviewed the current and target approaches to change management to ensure that the Operational risk elements inherent in the Groups strategic plans were being effectively mitigated.
This included the oversight of the effectiveness of actions to exit remaining TSAs with NAB.
Emerging risk  Geopolitical uncertainty.
The outcome of the EU referendum and subsequent triggering of Article 50 has created a period of economic uncertainty for the UK.
Financial crime risk The risk that the Groups products and services will be used to facilitate financial crime against the Group its customers or third parties.
The Committee maintained oversight of the effectiveness of the Financial Crime Framework for monitoring management and mitigation of financial crime and considered reports on the strength of the Groups cybercrime defence strategy.
Emerging risk  Cybercrime.
There is a risk that the Group is unable to keep pace with the increased threat of cybercrime that digital expansion presents.
Strategic business and financial performance risk The risk of significant loss loss of earnings andor damage arising from business decisions that impact the longterm interests of stakeholders or from an inability to adapt to external developments.
The Committee reviewed a consolidated report outlining the triggers and exposure to strategic risk by the Group Chief Risk Officer.
Emerging risk  Payment Services Directive 2 PSD2  A directive of the European Parliament the rules of which will apply from 13 January 2018 which aims to further develop a better integrated internal market for electronic payments within the EU and which the Group will be required to comply with.
People risk The risk of not having sufficiently skilled and motivated colleagues who are clear on their responsibilities and accountabilities and who behave in an ethical way.
The Committee provided oversight of people risks which included the ability to manage change the availability of management resources against plan and the culture embedded across the Group.
Further details on the Groups approach to risk appetite risk culture the RMF and significant and emerging risks can be found in the Risk report beginning on page 127.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 94
Statement by the Chair of the Remuneration Committee Dear shareholder As Chair of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present the Groups Directors remuneration report including details of the Directors and NonExecutive Directors pay for the year ended 30 September 2017.
Our Directors remuneration policy was approved by shareholders in 2017 and no changes to the policy are proposed for 2018.
This statement and the accompanying report demonstrate the framework in which decisions have been made the outcomes for the 2017 performance year and how the Committee plans to approach the year ahead.
2017 review Overall 2017 has been a very strong year and the Group has maintained momentum in delivering against its strategic priorities.
These priorities and commitments remain unchanged providing sustainable customer growth efficiency and capital optimisation delivered by a strong customerfocused culture all within a framework of prudent risk management and governance.
This purpose is once again reflected in our remuneration arrangements and is supported by the implementation of our remuneration policy for 2018 and onwards.
Underlying profit is up 33% year on year and 15% ahead of the target.
Underlying CIR has improved by 7% from 74% to 67% notwithstanding the additional costs associated with our first full year since the IPO.
Overall underlying costs for the year of 675m were below our target of 690m700m.
Balance sheet growth continued based on a prudent risk appetite with customer loans increasing by 6.0% as mortgage balances increased by 7.5% and core SME balances grew by 5.9%.
Following the success of the demerger and IPO we embarked on a programme of significant transformation.
That activity has been far reaching and had a personal impact on many colleagues.
2017 saw our colleague engagement fall to 72% a decrease of 7%.
When compared with a score of 79% last year the results show a decline across a number of categories.
When we compare ourselves to other organisations going through similar levels of transformation known as the Transitional Companies norm our engagement is more in line with this norm and significantly ahead on half of the survey categories.
In fact despite the overall decline many of our scores remain strong.
As detailed in the Annual report on remuneration the substantial majority of both financial and nonfinancial targets set by the Committee for the 2017 bonus were exceeded.
However as the customer metric NPS and colleague engagement scores underperformed the Committee exercised their discretion to reduce the element of bonus linked to business performance and therefore determined that a bonus of 82% of salary be paid to the
Chief Executive Officer CEO Chief Financial Officer CFO and
Chief Operating Officer COO.
The Committee continues to ensure the Groups remuneration arrangements support delivery of its strategic priorities for 2018 and onwards.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 95 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Group has also devoted significant effort into enhancing its credibility and relationships with key external stakeholders across the business regulatory and government spectrum.
Considerations for the year ahead The Committee will continue to operate within the existing approved Directors remuneration policy in 2018 and will continue to focus on ensuring the remuneration policy remains in line with the market and compliant with regulatory requirements.
Our
Directors and shareholders.
Given the continuing uncertainty over the exit of the UK from the EU the unexpected outcome of the June general election for the UK Government and the relatively high inflation figures in comparison with previous years the Committee will also focus on ensuring the Group is able to attract retain and motivate key talent at all levels of the organisation in a challenging market.
Working within the policy framework the Committee has undertaken a review of the Groups remuneration arrangements and in particular the performance measures of our incentive plans to ensure they are aligned with the Groups business strategy and reward for the delivery of key strategic objectives.
Executive Directors salaries It is the Committees intent that Executive Director salary increases remain aligned to those applied to colleagues generally across the Group.
However as per our remuneration policy the committee reserves the right to provide increases that are greater than those applied across the Group where there is a strong rationale to do so.
As last year the CEO and COO salaries will remain unchanged in 2018.
The CFOs salary will increase by 8.75% to 500000 from 1 October 2017.
This change reflects the new status of the role as a FTSE 250 PLC CFO and the importance of the role in driving the performance of the business.
Pay and employment conditions of other colleagues in the Group were taken into account when considering these outcomes.
Building an improved colleague proposition across CYBG has been a key area of focus in 2017 and improvements have included consolidated pay increases enhanced defined contribution pension provision and the introduction of a flexible benefits account worth up to 5% capped at 2500 of salary from 1 January 2018 for all colleagues below Executive Director.
Variable pay The Committee will set appropriate and stretching annual variable reward targets for the year ahead based on the Groups key financial risk customer and culture objectives.
The Remuneration Committee is committed to providing transparency in decision making in respect of the Groups incentive plans.
It will disclose targets and measures together with information relating to performance against those targets within the Annual report on remuneration for the relevant year except to the extent that the Board deem these to be commercially sensitive in which case it will disclose this information once it is deemed not to be sensitive.
The new LTIP award for our executives awarded in respect of performance in the financial year ended 30 September 2017 is subject to a threeyear performance period 1 October 2017 to 30 September 2020 and a three to seven year deferral period.
This ensures a significant proportion of Executive Directors remuneration continues to be deferred.
This together with the fact that a large proportion of shortterm incentive is deferred and delivered in shares ensures that Executive Directors remuneration is aligned with the achievement of our longterm strategy and the longterm interests of shareholders.
Details of the performance measures and targets for the LTIP award to be granted in respect of 2017 are provided on page 111.
Details of the performance measures for the 2018 annual incentive bonus are detailed on page 108.
However for reasons of commercial sensitivity the specific targets for each measure will not be disclosed until the end of the 2018 performance period when performance against the targets will also be disclosed.
Consideration of shareholders views Shareholders have an essential role to play in guiding responsible pay practices.
The Committee received feedback from our major shareholders ahead of the 2017 AGM and took account of these views when formulating the final development of our policy which was reflected in the high levels of support for resolutions relating to remuneration.
On behalf of the Board I am pleased to recommend this statement to shareholders ahead of the 2018 AGM.
Adrian Grace Chair Remuneration Committee This report has been prepared in accordance with Schedule 8 to The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in 2013 the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and the Listing Rules.
On behalf of the Board Adrian Grace Chair Remuneration Committee 20 November 2017 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 96
Directors remuneration report Remuneration Committee Purpose and membership of the Remuneration Committee The Committee is responsible to the Board for overseeing the Directors remuneration policy ensuring that the Group complies with its regulatory requirements and is able to recruit retain and motivate its senior colleagues and reward their individual contribution to the Group in line with the Groups risk appetite.
Under the Committees Charter the key roles and responsibilities of the Committee are to develop the Groups remuneration strategy and policy for all colleagues including Executive Directors for approval by the Board ensure the Directors remuneration policy has regard to the risk appetite of the Group and aligns with its longterm success ensure there are measures in place to avoid potential conflicts of interest in the design of incentive arrangements to ensure the interests of customers colleagues shareholders and other stakeholders are aligned submit the Directors remuneration policy at least every three years to a binding vote of the Groups shareholders consider and where appropriate respond to feedback received from shareholders through that process determine the overall parameters for variable pay arrangements for colleagues members of the Executive Leadership Team and Executive Directors determine the remuneration in respect of the Chairman and members of the Executive Leadership Team consider and approve the list of Material Risk Takers MRTs monitor the remuneration arrangements of all MRTs in line with the PRA Remuneration Code and approve annually the formal Groups PRA Remuneration Policy Statement RPS required under the PRA Remuneration Code.
The Committee reports to the Board on its activities and makes recommendations where required by charter all of which have been accepted during the year.
Remuneration Committee membership in 2017 All members of the Committee were independent NonExecutive Directors who serve on the Committee for a minimum threeyear term and a maximum of six years.
The Committee is chaired by Adrian Grace and it held five scheduled meetings during the financial year.
Three ad hoc meetings were arranged for decisions required outside scheduled meetings.
The table below shows the Committee members during the year to 30 September 2017 and their attendance at scheduled Committee meetings.
Number of scheduled Committee meetings eligible to attend Number of scheduled Committee meetings attended Committee Chair Adrian Grace 5 5 Committee members David Bennett 5 5 David Browne 5 5 Jim Pettigrew 5 5 By invitation other attendees will include the Chief Executive Officer the Group Human Resources Director the Head of Reward and Pensions and the Chief Financial Officer except when issues relating to their own remuneration are being discussed.
PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC LLP the Committees independent remuneration adviser also attend meetings where invited.
The Company Secretary attends meetings to record minutes.
In addition representatives from the Risk Committee may attend where appropriate to provide the Remuneration Committee with detailed risk assessments.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 97 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Committee performance evaluation The Committees performance was reviewed as part of the independent externally facilitated Board performance evaluation during the year which included an assessment of the Committees effectiveness.
Overall the Committee was assessed as effective.
The key areas for development related to continuing to evolve its role consistent with best practice for listed company remuneration committees particularly by refreshing the approach to setting out the Committees objectives and priorities for the year to ensure its responsibilities are addressed in the most effective manner and formalising the reporting to the Committee from the Risk Committee.
Key matters considered by the Committee during 2017 During the year the Committee considered among other matters the following Role of the Committee Key matters considered Actions taken Fixed and variable pay issues 2017 short and longterm incentive arrangements Considered and approved 2017 discretionary incentives performance measures and structures for delivery 2017 total remuneration outcomes Approved variable remuneration awards for Executive Directors other senior management MRT and all colleagues for 2017 financial year Approved the release of deferred bonus awards Legacy NAB awards  Considered approach to legacy NAB awards and recommended no change All colleague 2017 pay mandate  Considered all colleague pay and executive pay arrangements.
Recommended change to CFO base salary Chairmans fee  Considered external market insight and recommended no change MRT termination and commencement awards  Considered all commencement awards and termination payments Delegated authority to approve awards and release payments below a de minimis level to Group Human Resources Director and CEO Governance risk and other matters MRTs  Reviewed and approved changes and confirmed MRT throughout the year Regulatory developments  Considered regulatory remuneration requirements and approved compliance review Remuneration policy Approved the CYBG remuneration policy ahead of the AGM 2016 risk adjustments Approved the Groups approach to risk and control adjustments for incentive arrangements and periodic review thereof Formalised role of Board Risk Committee and Board Audit Committee 2016 performance assessment CEO CFO COO and LT Reviewed Executive Director and senior leadership team individual scorecards Scheme rules and terms of the DEP and LTIP  Approved the terms of the DEP and LTIP plans for 2017 and 2018 Annual remuneration disclosures  Approved the submission of the remuneration policy statement to the PRA and FCA Approved the 2017 Directors remuneration report including Pillar 3 requirements Investors and regulator feedback  Considered investor feedback and AGM outcomes and any impact on future structure of Executive Directors remuneration CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 98
Directors remuneration report Role of the Committee Key matters considered Actions taken Pension arrangements Considered the closure of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme to future accrual and approved retirement arrangements for COO.
Remuneration Committee adviser review  Considered performance of PwC LLP and confirmed continued engagement.
Terms and conditions for Executive Leadership Team Approved changes to contract terms for notice periods.
Remuneration Committee effectiveness  Considered independent assessment of Committee effectiveness and approved recommendations.
Advisers to the Committee Following a selection process carried out by the Remuneration Committee prior to the IPO of the Group the Committee engaged the services of PwC as independent remuneration adviser.
During the financial year PwC advised the Committee on all aspects of the Directors remuneration policy for members of the Executive Leadership Team.
PwC also provide professional services in the ordinary course of business including assurance advisory tax and legal advice.
The Committee is notified of other remuneration work that is undertaken by PwC.
In addition there are processes in place to ensure no conflict of interest exists in the provisions of these services.
PwC is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group whose voluntary code of conduct is designed to ensure objective and independent advice is given to remuneration committees.
Fees of 139000 excluding VAT 2016 93000 in respect of the eight month period from the IPO to the year end were paid based on time spent on advice provided to the Remuneration Committee in respect of Directors remuneration for the financial year.
Statement of voting at general meeting Prior to the IPO the Groups sole shareholder was NAB and there is therefore no prior historic voting information prior to this date.
The proposals in relation to the Groups remuneration policy and the remuneration offered to the Executive Directors in 2017 were detailed within the Directors remuneration report for 2016 and were voted on at the AGM on 31 January 2017.
The shareholder votes submitted at the meeting either directly by mail or by proxy were as follows Votes for Votes against Votes withheld Number of shares % of votes Number of shares % of votes Number of shares Directors remuneration policy 594488715 99.23% 4592820 0.77% 1524064 Directors remuneration report 588279591 98.89% 6602277 1.11% 5719654 CYBG Long Term Incentive Plan 592635707 98.93% 6437433 1.07% 1510537 CYBG Deferred Equity Plan 596602161 99.59% 2430299 0.41% 1546891 Remuneration Committee continued CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 99 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Directors remuneration policy  abridged At a glance  Executive Directors remuneration structure in 2018 summary For the 2018 performance year the annual incentive award bonus will be up to 100 percent of base salary with measures described on page 108.
Executive Directors will also be eligible to receive an LTIP award of up to 100 percent of base salary in respect of the 2018 performance year.
The level of LTIP vesting will be based on performance measured over the 20192021 period with targets disclosed in next years annual report.
In combination bonus and LTIP will not exceed the regulatory 21 ratio between variable to fixed pay.
Base salary  David Duffy  1000000 unchanged from 2017.
Ian Smith  500000 increased for 2018.
Debbie Crosbie  450000 unchanged from 2017.
Benefits and allowances Benefits and allowances include pension car medical cover life assurance arrangements and where applicable relocation.
David Duffy  236000 Accommodation allowance ceased 2017.
Ian Smith  105000 increases relative to salary.
Debbie Crosbie  91000 Pension cash allowance for 2018.
FY18 Annual incentive bonus
Awarded
50% in shares 50% cash Vesting Potential share deferral and phased vesting Maximum 100% of base salary and linked to the delivery of 2018 business strategy.
At least 50% delivered in shares.
Delivered in December after the year end.
Part of the bonus may be deferred to ensure that in combination with the LTIP award regulatory requirements for deferral are met.
FY18 Long term incentive plan LTIP Awarded Performance period Vesting Deferral and phased vesting Maximum of 100% of base salary and linked to the delivery of business strategy over the years 2019 to 2021.
It is expected that awards will be granted in December following the year end.
Award deferred for a total of seven years with vesting in equal tranches over years three to seven.
Award subject to 12 month holding period in line with regulatory requirements.
Policy and principles The current Directors remuneration policy approved by shareholders at the AGM on 31 January 2017 remains in force.
The Committee will consider the remuneration policy annually to ensure that it remains aligned with business needs and is appropriately positioned relative to the market.
There is no intention to revise the policy more frequently than every three years unless amendments to the policy are required in the interim in which case appropriate shareholder approval will be sought.
An abridged version of the policy which includes the remuneration tables for Executive and NonExecutive Directors is included in the following pages for reference.
This does not replace or override the full approved policy which is available on pages 106115 of the 2016 Annual Report and Accounts available at siteinvestorcentreannualreports Details on how the policy will be applied in 2018 are included on pages 108 to 109 of the report.
In applying this policy the Group remuneration approach remains to provide competitive transparent and fair rewards benefits and conditions reward achievement of short and longterm individual objectives and business strategy align the interests of colleagues and shareholders through colleague share ownership deliver outcomes over short and longterm horizons with appropriate performance and risk adjustments ensuring performance assurance principles are applied support the RMF with regard for the risk appetite of the Group and attract recognise motivate and retain high performers.
Remuneration arrangements are fully compliant with and will be operated in line with all regulatory requirements including the PRA Remuneration Code and are in line with UK listed financial services sector best practice.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 100
Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration policy  abridged continued Our peer group companies The CYBG comparator peer group was reviewed by the Committee and is defined as other UKbased banks and wider financial services firms of a comparable size divisional heads in larger UK banks and other FTSE companies reflecting our market capitalisation.
Elements of package  fixed remuneration The policy in relation to each element of Executive Directors remuneration is set out in the following tables.
Base salary Purpose and link to strategy Recruit reward retain and recognise leadership position and responsibility for delivering strategy.
Operation Base salaries are paid in 12 equal monthly instalments during the year and are reviewed annually.
Any changes are effective from 1 January.
When determining and reviewing base salaries the Committee considers Group and individual performance the skills experience and responsibilities of the Executive Director and their market value the scope and size of the role base salary increases for colleagues throughout the Group and external benchmarks data for peer banks the divisional heads of larger UK banks and FTSE data reflecting our market capitalisation.
Maximum potential The Committee will seek to limit pay increases for Executive Directors where there is no change in role to those applied to colleagues generally across the Group.
However where an Executive Director is relatively new in role the Committee reserves flexibility to provide increases that are greater than those applied across the Group to bring the individuals salary into line with the market and reflect the gaining of experience.
Other colleagues The approach takes into account affordability economic factors external market data business and personal performance.
Pension
Purpose and link to strategy Recruit reward retain key talent and contribute towards individuals funding for retirement.
Operation Executive Directors are entitled to participate in the Group defined contribution pension scheme or may receive a cash allowance in lieu of some or all of the employer pension contribution.
The Groups defined benefit pension scheme is only available to existing members.
Maximum potential The maximum cash allowance for Executive Directors will be set at 20% of an Executive Directors base salary.
Contributions to the Groups defined benefit pension scheme are capped by reference to the Scheme earnings cap.
Only one Executive Director was a member of the Groups defined benefit scheme during 2017 and they ceased to accrue benefits from 31 July 2017 in line with other colleagues.
Other colleagues All new colleagues are automatically enrolled in the Groups defined contribution pension scheme.
The defined benefit scheme closed to new entrants in 2004 and closed to the future accrual of benefits for the majority of colleagues from 31 July 2017.
Benefits
Purpose and link to strategy To provide benefits consistent with role.
Operation The Group provides a range of benefits which can include private medical insurance health assessments life assurance and car allowancecar.
The Committee retains the discretion to provide additional benefits as may be reasonably required.
These may include relocation benefits such as but not limited to accommodation family relocation support and taxable travel.
The Executive Directors are entitled to a maximum of 30 days holiday in addition to applicable bankpublic holidays.
Maximum potential The CEO has a cap of 250000 on his benefits including pension contributions and any cash allowance in lieu of pension contributions.
For the other Executive Directors the maximum value of benefits is set by the nature of the benefits and the cost of providing them.
Other colleagues The Group provides a range of benefits based on colleagues roles which include private medical insurance health assessments life assurance and car allowancecar.
Colleagues receive between 25 and 30 days holiday annually depending on their role.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 101 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Elements of package  variable remuneration
Purpose and link to strategy The annual bonus is designed to reward Group and personal performance in line with strategic objectives.
Operation Annual bonuses are discretionary and are based on Group and individual performance within the year.
The measures their weighting and targets are set annually with awards determined by the Committee at the end of the financial year.
The annual bonus may be delivered in cash and shares which in combination with the LTIP awards and any relevant awards under the allemployee Share Incentive Plan SIP will be structured in line with the requirements on the deferral of variable pay under the PRA Remuneration Code.
The equitybased element of the award will be made as rights to CYBG shares or other instruments which are released at the end of the required holding period.
The mechanism for making these awards will be the Deferred Equity Plan DEP.
The amount and deferral period for bonus will be determined in line with regulatory requirements and to the extent that the LTIP award does not fully meet the deferral requirements.
Dividends or dividend equivalents accrued on deferred annual bonus shares are paid on vesting subject to the extent permitted under the relevant remuneration regulations.
Discretion may be exercised by the Committee to ensure that the bonus outcomes are a fair and accurate reflection of the business and individual performance and consider any risk related issues but may not exceed the maximum opportunity.
The Group can in specific circumstances apply malus andor clawback to all or part of any bonus award.
Maximum potential Taken together with the LTIP awards total variable remuneration is limited by the 21 ratio of variable pay to fixed pay subject to the LTIP award being at least half of the total variable pay award.
Performance conditions Performance measures are set by the Committee each year and are set out in the Annual report on remuneration normally this would be 80% of the annual bonus opportunity for Executive Directors is based on performance of the Group against key financial and nonfinancial measures and 20% is based on personal performance and behaviours.
When determining the outcome of the performance measures the Remuneration Committee will seek the advice of the Risk Committee to ensure all relevant risk factors are identified and the bonus pool andor individual awards adjusted accordingly.
Specific measures targets and weightings will be set by the Remuneration Committee annually and disclosed on a retrospective basis.
Other colleagues All colleagues within the Group are in a single Groupwide scheme with target opportunities ranging from 8% to 50% of base salary depending on role.
Awards will be funded from a bonus pool reflecting the same financial and nonfinancial measures that apply to Executive Directors.
When determining the outcome of the performance measures the Remuneration Committee will seek the advice of the Risk Committee to ensure all relevant risk factors are identified and the bonus pool andor individual awards are adjusted accordingly.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 102
Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration policy  abridged continued Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Purpose and link to strategy Delivery of the Groups strategy and growth in shareholder value.
Operation Awards are based on a threeyear performance period reflecting a basket of business and shareholder measures aligned with strategic goals.
Awards will vest a minimum of three years after being awarded or longer for example where required by the PRA Remuneration Code.
Where a period of deferral extends beyond three years awards will only be subject to service requirements for the first three years thereafter awards will only be subject to forfeiture for reasons of gross misconduct or malus.
The value of awards for the purposes of determining total variable remuneration will be in line with the rules set by the Regulator.
The Committee in its absolute discretion will determine the level of the LTIP awards made under the LTIP after taking account of the Executive Directors individual performance and business performance.
Any LTIP award when combined with any deferred element of the annual bonus will meet the deferral requirements under the PRA Remuneration Code.
Malus and clawback also apply to the whole of the LTIP award in line with the requirements of the PRA Remuneration Code.
Awards are made as conditional rights to CYBG shares or other instruments which will be released at the end of the holding period or later where required under the PRAs Remuneration Code.
Dividends or dividend equivalents accrue on the LTIP awards and to the extent that the award vests are paid on vesting subject to the extent permitted under the relevant financial services remuneration regulations.
Maximum potential Taken together with the bonus award the total variable remuneration is limited by the agreed 21 ratio of variable pay to fixed pay subject to the LTIP award being at least half of the total variable pay award.
Performance conditions Service and performance conditions must be met over a threeyear period.
Measures aligned with strategic goals are proposed for future LTIP awards including the 2016 awards to be made following the AGM Sustainable Customer Growth
Capital Optimisation and Prudent Risk Management and Governance.
The weighting of metrics will be determined before each award and those for the 2017 award are set out in the Annual report on remuneration with 25% of the maximum vesting for each measure for threshold performance.
The measures reflect a balanced approach between financial and nonfinancial.
The Committee has discretion to vary the weighting of performance metrics or to substitute the metrics over the life of this Directors remuneration policy.
Shareholders will be consulted should the metrics themselves be varied.
In determining the outcome the Remuneration Committee will seek the advice of the Risk Committee to ensure all relevant risk factors are identified and the level of vesting adjusted accordingly.
Other colleagues Members of the Executive Leadership Team and other senior managers are eligible to participate in the LTIP with awards made solely at the discretion of the Committee.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 103 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Shareholding requirement Purpose and link to strategy To align Executive Directors interests with those of shareholders
Executive Directors Executive Directors are expected to build up a specified holding of CYBG shares equivalent to a percentage of salary.
60% of the shares vesting after settling tax and National Insurance liabilities from CYBG share plans must be retained until the shareholding requirements are met.
Executive Director Shareholding requirement % of salary CEO 200% CFO and COO 150% When assessing an Executive Directors shareholding against the requirement vested awards which are held as rights rather than shares will be included based on the anticipated net number of shares that would be released to the Executive Director at the end of the holding period.
Other colleagues Additionally members of the Executive Leadership Team are expected to build up a holding of CYBG shares equivalent to 100% of salary.
50% of the shares vesting after settling tax and NIC liabilities from CYBG share plans must be retained until the shareholding requirement is met.
Performance measures The Committee selected the short and longterm performance measures to ensure an appropriate balance between short and long term strategic goals and aligning the interests of Executive Directors with shareholders.
Targets are set each year having regard to the strategic plan and consensus forecasts.
Measures and targets for both the bonus plan and LTIP are aligned to the strategic plan and have been approved by the Board.
The Committee may apply discretion in exceptional circumstances for example if there is a major corporate event to amend or vary targets or the weighting of performance metrics measures or to substitute the metrics over the life of this Directors remuneration policy if these are no longer appropriate to ensure alignment with strategy and any risks within the business.
The Committee will consult with the Groups risk management and control functions to ensure changes are appropriate and do not inadvertently encourage irresponsible or inappropriate behaviour.
The Committee will consult with shareholders in advance of any change to performance metrics.
The Committee retains discretion to adjust outcomes to ensure these are consistent with corporate performance.
The Committee proposes to use the measures described in the Policy Table for the 2016 LTIP award to be made after the AGM and future awards but will reassess these annually based on the Groups performance and strategy.
In determining the 2016 measures the Committee consulted with major shareholders.
Risk adjustments malus and clawback For MRTs which include the Executive Directors bonus and LTIP awards may be reduced before they are released malus or may be subject to clawback where the Committee determines that an adjustment should apply.
Clawback may be applied up to seven years from the award date or 10 years for those holding a senior management function where an investigation has commenced.
Malus may be applied where there is evidence of colleague misbehaviour misconduct material error where a colleague participated in conduct which resulted in losses for the Group or they failed to meet appropriate standards any material failure of risk management at a Group business area division or business unit level if the financial results at a Group division or business unit level are restated if the financial results for a given year do not support the level of variable remuneration awarded or any other circumstances where the Committee consider adjustments should be made.
The Committee is supported in this by the Board Risk and Audit Committees and the CYBG Risk function.
Clawback may be applicable where there is reasonable evidence of colleague misbehaviour or material error or there is material failure of risk management at a Group business area division or business unit level.
Other CYBG share plans The Executive Directors are invited to participate in allemployee share plans on the same basis as other Group colleagues.
These plans encourage share ownership aligning colleagues interests with those of shareholders and allowing them to benefit from the longterm success of the Group.
The CYBG Share Incentive Plan SIP provides for the purchase of shares in line with HMRC participation level rules on a monthly basis from gross pay and is also the vehicle used to allow for awards of free or matching shares.
Each Executive Director received 256 free shares following the demerger and the CFO participates in the monthly purchase of shares through the SIP.
If operated in the future Executive Directors will also be eligible to participate in all employee share plans operated by the Group.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 104
Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration policy  abridged continued Legacy arrangements Awards granted under the NAB Share Plans were retained by colleagues of the Group following the demerger and IPO on 8 February 2016.
Awards remain subject to their existing terms and performance conditions with service requirements based on employment by Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Detailed below are the rights under the NAB LTIP held by the COO.
Neither the CEO nor the CFO received any NAB LTIP awards.
Debbie Crosbies NAB LTIP awards Vesting date Release date Performance period if applicable NAB performance rights FY2013 LTIP 20 Dec 17 20 Jun 18 11 Nov 13 to 11 Nov 17 FY2014 LTIP 21 Dec 18 21 Jun 19 10 Nov 14 to 10 Nov 18 1 Reflects the end of the six months post vesting holding period.
2 Awards that do not vest at the end of the first performance period will be retested after 12 months.
The level of vesting for these awards is determined by the NAB Board and in 2017 the NAB Board determined that the 2012 NAB LTIP should be lapsed in full.
The 2013 and 2014 LTIP awards are due to be released in June 2018 and June 2019 respectively and are based on NABs relative TSR performance with half measured against the SandPASX Top 50 Index peer group and half against a selection of financial companies in the ASX Top 200 peer group.
Awards that do not vest at the end of the first performance period will be retested after 12 months.
The final decision on the level of vesting will be taken by the NAB Board with value at the date of vesting included in the Directors single table figure in the year they vest.
Illustration of the application of remuneration policy The chart below illustrates the potential remuneration of the Executive Directors based on the policy in the following three scenarios minimum remuneration based on fixed elements of package only salary pension benefits target outcome assumes the actual bonus award is 50% of the maximum opportunity with 60% of the LTIP vesting and maximum outcome which assumes the actual bonus award is 100% of the maximum opportunity and 100% vesting of the LTIP.
The amounts do not allow for share price appreciation and do not include dividends or payments in lieu of dividends.
Salary figures are as at 1 October 2017 and in line with policy the maximum bonus and LTIP awards are 100% of base salary.
Potential 2018 remuneration outcomes 0teltel 1236k 2236k 3236k 100% 53% 26% 21% 31% 38% 31% 1115k 1605k 100% 52% 26% 22% 31% 22% 31% 38% 31% 1036k 1441k 100% 52% 26% 38% 31% LTIP Bonus Fixed Minimum Target Maximum Minimum Target Maximum Minimum Target Maximum David Duy  CEO Ian Smith  CFO Debbie Crosbie  COO 000 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 105 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Service contracts and policy on payments for loss of office Standard provision Provision Details Election All Executive Directors are subject to annual reelection.
Notice periods within Executive Directors service contracts 12 months notice from Company.
12 months notice from Executive
Executive Directors may be required to work during the notice period unless determined otherwise.
Confidentiality Sixmonth posttermination restrictive covenants Executive Directors are subject to a confidentiality undertaking without limitation in time as well as to sixmonth posttermination restrictive covenants covering noncompetition nonsolicitation of and non dealing with clients noninterference with suppliers or contractors and nonsolicitation of colleagues.
Compensation for loss of office Payment in lieu of notice of no more than 12 months salary Payable monthly and subject to an obligation on the Executive Director to mitigate their loss such that payments will either reduce or cease completely if the Executive Director obtains alternative employment.
In the event of redundancy the Executive Director shall be entitled to receive statutory redundancy pay together with outplacement and legal support.
Treatment of annual bonus on termination With the exception of good leavers where participants leave before 1 December they will not be eligible for an award.
The Committee has discretion to reduce the entitlement of a good leaver in line with performance and the reason for leaving.
Treatment of unvested deferred bonus on termination With the exception of good leavers awards lapse where participants leave in the three years following the award being made.
Awards to good leavers will be retained in full with no change to vesting or release dates.
With the exception of gross misconduct and malus service provisions end three years from the date of award.
Treatment of unvested LTIP awards on termination With the exception of good leavers awards lapse where participants leave in the three years following the award being made.
Awards to good leavers will be prorated unless the Committee decides otherwise to reflect the period worked in the three years following the award.
The award will vest unless the Committee decides otherwise on the normal vesting date to the extent that any performance condition has been met.
With the exception of gross misconduct and malus service provisions end three years from the date of award.
Outside appointments Executive Directors may accept outside appointments in other listed companies with Executive Directors retaining any fees received.
The Chair is required to approve appointments in advance.
Agreement from the Board must be sought before Executive Directors accept any additional NonExecutive roles outside of CYBG.
Procedures are in place to ensure that regulatory limits on the number of directorships held are complied with.
Details of the directorships held can be found in the biographies section of the Corporate governance report.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 106
Directors remuneration report Directors remuneration policy  abridged continued The Committee retains the discretion to determine whether an Executive Director is to be treated as a good leaver.
Unless determined otherwise an Executive Director will be treated as a good leaver in cases where their employment ends due to death injury illhealth disability redundancy retirement or the company being transferred out of the CYBG Group and any other reason except for dishonesty fraud misconduct or dismissal.
The Committee reserves the right to make additional payments where such payments are made in good faith and are required to discharge legal obligations or are due to the breach of such obligations.
The notice periods and dates of their service contracts are shown below.
Executive Directors Notice period Date of service contract Debbie Crosbie 12 months 24 November 2015 David Duffy 12 months 25 November 2015 Ian Smith 12 months 3 December 2015 Considerations of employment conditions elsewhere in the Group Pay and employment conditions generally in the Group are considered when setting Executive Directors remuneration.
The Committee are provided with regular updates on overall pay and conditions including negotiated pay increases for the broader colleague population has oversight of significant changes in the provision of benefits including pension provisions and approves the colleague bonus pool.
During the year the Committee considered the following in relation to colleagues below the Executive Directors remuneration packages of Executive Leadership Team members design of the annual bonus plan for Executive Leadership Team and all colleagues measures and targets for the 2017 annual bonus pool salary increases for all colleagues policy in relation to pension plans and the closure of the defined benefit pension plan to future accrual design of the 2017 LTIP and awards to members of the Executive Leadership Team and other Group senior colleagues based on role and commencement and termination payments made to MRTs.
The Committee does not specifically invite colleagues to comment on the Directors remuneration policy but any comments made by colleagues are taken into account.
Consideration is given to feedback provided by colleagues through the annual engagement survey.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 107 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Chairman and NonExecutive Directors remuneration policy abridged The table below sets out the NonExecutive Directors remuneration policy which applies to the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors.
NonExecutive Directors are engaged through letters of appointment which are for an initial period of three years subject to three months notice by the NonExecutive Directors or the Group.
The Chairman has six months notice.
All NonExecutive Directors are subject to annual reelection by shareholders at each AGM and are subject to early termination without compensation if he or she is not reappointed at a meeting of shareholders.
NonExecutive Directors packages Purpose and link to strategy To ensure the Group is able to engage and retain highly skilled and experienced individuals.
Operation Fees paid to the Chairman are determined by the Remuneration Committee while the fees paid to the NonExecutive Directors are set by the Board annually.
The fees reflect a base fee with additional fees payable for being members of or chairing Board committees and a separate fee is payable to the Senior Independent Director and Deputy Chairman.
NonExecutive Directors are appointed for an initial threeyear term and will normally serve two terms exceptionally three.
The fees are set at a rate that reflects the value to the Group and expected time commitment given the added regulatory complexity within the financial services sector.
In exceptional circumstances incremental fees may be paid for additional duties and time commitment to reflect increased workload.
From time to time new Board committees may be established andor responsibilities distributed between committees at which point fees for committee membership and Chair may be reviewed.
The Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed for expenses incurred in performing their duties and any tax arising on such reimbursed expenses is paid by the Group.
For individuals based outside of the UK this will include travel to and from the UK.
Non
Executive Directors and the Chairman do not participate in any variable remuneration or benefits arrangements.
Maximum potential The maximum aggregate value of fees payable to the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors is capped at 2.5m under the Articles of Association.
Performance conditions There are no performance conditions attached to the fees payable to the Chairman or NonExecutive Directors.
The dates of NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are shown below NonExecutive Directors Clive Adamson 19 May 2016 David Bennett 23 November 2015 David Browne 11 November 2015 Paul Coby 19 May 2016 Adrian Grace 11 November 2015 Fiona MacLeod 8 September 2016 Jim Pettigrew 11 November 2015 Teresa RobsonCapps 11 November 2015 Tim Wade 8 September 2016 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 108
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration Implementation of the policy in 2018 The following sets out how the Directors remuneration policy will be applied in 2018 The remuneration policy will be operated as set out above.
In particular the targets for the 2018 annual bonus are considered to be commercially sensitive at this time but will be disclosed along with measures and weightings on a retrospective basis details of the LTIP award for 2017 are set out in the Annual report on remuneration including how they are aligned with our strategic priorities of delivering sustainable customer growth improving efficiency and capital optimisation and link to our risk and compliance and customerfocused culture objectives salary change for the CFO is intended from the 1 October 2017 reflecting his role since the IPO the annual bonus for Executive Directors for the performance year 2018 will be capped at 100% of base salary the LTIP for Executive Directors for the performance year 2018 will be capped at 100% of base salary NonExecutive Directors fees in 2018 may be reviewed as the Group progresses with its strategic priorities and to reflect any changes in the nature of a NonExecutive Directors role and responsibilities to comply with remuneration regulation changes effective for 2018 the deferral of awards has been extended to between three and seven years and in addition dividends will not accrue on bonus and LTIP awards made in relation to FY2018 in line with regulatory requirements.
However the number of deferred bonus sharesLTIP awards granted may be based on a share price discounted by reference to the expected dividend yield over the vesting period.
Base salary David Duffy 1000000 Ian Smith 500000 Debbie Crosbie 450000 Benefits and allowances including pension David Duffy 236000 Ian Smith 105000 Debbie Crosbie 91000 FY2018 annual bonus Opportunity 100% of base salary.
In line with policy 80% of the award is based on the performance of the Group against key financial and nonfinancial measures and 20% is based on personal performance and behaviours.
The overall design of the 2018 plan remains unchanged from last year.
Performance measures and targets The Committee has determined that for 2018 the annual bonus will be based on the following underlying financial measures with a weighting of 77% including underlying profit before tax underpin customer lending growth total costs CIR and
CYBG Retail net promoter score CB YB and B adoption of our digital channels and colleague engagement linked to our annual survey.
The Board considers that the targets which apply to these measures are commercially sensitive and as such these will be disclosed alongside the level of payout in next years implementation report.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 109 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information FY2017 longterm incentives Opportunity 100% of base salary.
Performance measures and targets The Remuneration Committee has again set performance measures based on delivering the companys strategic objectives and containing measures linked to sustainable customer growth efficiency capital optimisation risk and compliance and customerfocused culture.
These measures and their respective targets are consistent with the strategic plan.
The Remuneration Committee has determined that 60% vesting is justified for target performance and 25% is justified for threshold performance.
Vesting terms The performance period will be the three years commencing 1 October 2017.
An assessment of personal performance in the financial year preceding the date of the grant will be taken into account before awards are made.
The anticipated date of grant is November 2017.
To the extent that the performance conditions are met awards will vest equally from the third anniversary of the date of grant to the seventh such anniversary.
At each vesting date the resultant number of shares post taxation will be subject to a twelvemonth retention period.
Executive Directors  single total figure of remuneration audited The table below sets out the single total figure of remuneration and breakdown for each Executive Director in respect of the financial year to 30 September.
David Duffy Ian Smith Debbie Crosbieteltel Salary 1000 100tel450 Benefits and allowances Pension and pension allowance Total fixed remuneration 1236 124tel560 Annual bonus LTIP vesting in year Other awards Total remuneration 2056 204tel921 1 David Duffy and Ian Smith have both opted out of the Groups defined contribution pension scheme and received a cash allowance in lieu of the Groups pension contributions.
Debbie Crosbie was a member of the defined benefit plan until 30 July 17 and then opted out of the Groups defined contribution pension scheme and received a cash allowance.
Her pension figure includes both elements with the defined benefits element reflecting the HMRC noted below.
2 Includes the cash upfront retained and deferred bonus elements.
3 No CYBG PLC LTIP awards or legacy NAB LTIP awards vested during 2016 or 2017.
4 Each of the Executive Directors also received 500 of free shares in March 2016.
Former Executive Directors and payments to past Directors audited No Executive Directors left during the year.
Richard Sawyer resigned as an Executive Director on 2 February 2016 when CYBG PLC demerged from NAB and no additional remuneration or fees were paid in 2017 by the Group or NAB for his services to the Group.
Executive Directors payments for loss of office audited No payments were made during the year.
Total pension entitlements audited David Duffy and Ian Smith have both opted out of the Groups defined contribution pension plans and receive cash allowances in lieu of pension contributions.
Debbie Crosbie participated in the Groups defined benefit scheme until 31 July 2017 when the plan was closed to future accrual based on her salary up to the earnings cap 150600 from October 2016 to April 2017 and 154200 from April 2017 to July 2017.
In addition Debbie Crosbie received a cash allowance of 17.6% of her salary above the earnings cap up to 31 July 2017 and an allowance of 18% on her full salary from 1 August 2017.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 110
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration continued Details of the pension accrued in the Groups defined benefit pension scheme by Debbie Crosbie in respect of qualifying services are shown below.
The value of the pension is calculated using the HMRC method.
The remainder of the pension value is delivered as a cash allowance.
Values relating to DB scheme
Normal retirement date Additional value of pension on early retirement Pension value in the year from DB scheme Pension value in year from cash allowance
Debbie Crosbie 40 30 March 2035  43 57 100 Taxable benefits audited Executive Directors receive private medical cover health assessment and life assurance.
The CEO receives a car cash allowance of 30000 p. and the other Executive Directors receive an allowance of 6840 p.
To support the CEOs relocation from Ireland to Glasgow the CEO received an allowance of 35000 p. until May 2017.
Annual bonus audited The following annual bonus awards were made in respect of the 2017 financial year these were agreed by the Committee having reviewed the Groups results.
Details of the targets used to determine annual bonus in respect of the 2017 financial year and the extent to which they were satisfied are shown in the table below.
These figures are included in the single figure table on the previous page.
2017 saw a strong performance from the Group with significant change as a result of the transformation programme and a focus on building a highperforming customercentric organisation with strong productivity and efficiency.
In our first full year as CYBG we have demonstrated good progress in delivering against the key performance measures set by the Committee underlying profit before tax up by 33% on last year and 15% ahead of target underlying RoTE increased to 7.5% underlying CIR improved by 7% from 74% to 67% underlying costs for the year of 675m were below our target range of 690m to 700m.
The table below sets out the performance of the Group element for determining Executive Directors bonus awards.
Executive Directors Underlying performance measures Weighting Threshold Target Stretch Actual Award as % salary Sustainable returns PBT 22.0% 240m 267m 293m 293m 22% Customer lending growth 18.4% 3.5% 4.5% 6.0% 6.0% 18% NPS 7.3% 20% 22.5% 25% 12.0% 0% Digital adoption 7.3% 35% 39% 43% 38.2% 3% Efficiency Total costs 5% 700m 696m 690m 675m 5% CIR 5% 72% 69% 65% 67% 4% Capital optimisation RoTE 10% 5.8% 6.4% 7.0% 7.1% 10% Customerfocused culture Colleague engagement 5% 72% 77% 82% 72% 2% 80.0% 64% 1 The underlying PBT excludes exceptional items which have reduced the statutory PBT by 25m a reconciliation of underlying profit before tax to statutory profit before tax is provided in the Financial results section.
The bulk of this reduction is driven by a combination of legacy conduct issues in respect of PPI other conduct matters separation costs and restructuring expenses.
The underlying PBT was not adjusted by the incremental yearonyear change in the prudent valuation adjustment PVA figure for 2017.
The PVA figure reduced by 3m year on year from 7m in 2016 to 4m in 2017.
No upward adjustment to underlying PBT has been considered.
2 To reflect the under performance of NPS and Colleague Engagement the Committee reduced the arithmetic out turn of 64.3% to 62% for calculating Executive Directors bonus awards.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 111 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Committee determined the personal award for each Executive Director should be at the maximum as set out below.
This reflects the Committees assessment of a strong performance against every category of their personal score card and the demonstration of the required behaviours for their role together with the pivotal role the Executive Directors played in the successful delivery of our strategy in our second year as a standalone PLC.
Executive Director
Group award % salary Total award % salary Total award David Duffy 20% 62% 82% 820000 Ian Smith 20% 62% 82% 377000 Debbie Crosbie 20% 62% 82% 369000 In assessing the Groups performance the Committee reviewed a report from the Chair of the Risk Committee on any risk issues within the business and determined that no adjustments were required to the bonus pool or to individual bonus awards for Executive Directors.
Deferral of bonus audited In line with regulatory requirements a portion of the bonus award is subject to deferral to the extent to which the required deferral is not fully met by the LTIP award.
Half of the upfront and deferred elements are also subject to a sixmonth retention period.
As such the Executive Directors awards were made as follows.
David Duffy Ian Smith Debbie Crosbie Upfront cash 284000 130600 127800 Upfront shares 284000 130600 127800 Deferred shares 252000 115800 113400 Total 820000 377000 369000 1 Awarded as conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares which will be released at the end of the sixmonth retention period.
2 Awarded as conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares or other instruments with vesting after 12 months in line with regulatory requirements after taking account of the LTIP award.
Half will be released on vesting with half subject to an additional 12month retention period.
Once deferred bonus awards are subject to continued service until released the Group can in specific circumstances apply malus andor clawback to all or part of any bonus award.
LTIP awards LTIP awards to be granted in relation to 2017 The following awards were made to Executive Directors to reflect their performance in 2017 and align their interests with those of shareholders.
2017 LTIP award
Face value of award Type of interest awarded End of performance period
Percentage receivable for target performance David Duffy 100% 1000000 Conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares 30 Sep 21% 67% Ian Smith 100% 460000 Debbie Crosbie 100% 450000 1 The award is based on a percentage of salary as at 30 September 2017.
2 21% reflects 9 of the measures vesting at 25% for threshold performance and 2 vesting at 0%.
3 67% reflects 9 of the measures vesting at 60% for target performance and 2 vesting at 100% for target performance.
The award will vest based on the performance over the 2018 to 2020 financial years as set out below.
These objectives are designed to deliver sustainable growth over the next three years and as such deliver returns to shareholders.
Outcomes will be disclosed on a retrospective basis at the end of the performance period.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 112
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration continued 2017 LTIP Underlying performance measures Weighting Threshold Target Stretch Sustainable customer growth Retail NPS 8.33% 21 24 27 Customer lending growth 8.33% 4% 5% 6% Digital adoption 8.33% 50% 52.5% 55.0% Efficiency CIR 20.00% 58% 55% 52%
20.00% 10% 11% 12% IRB accreditation 10.00% Achieved Risk and compliance Bad and doubtful debtaverage loans 6.67%  30bps Cumulative operational risk losses 6.67% 30m 25m 20m Complaints per 1000 6.67% 3.7 3.5 3.3
Colleague engagement 2.50% 72 77 82 Senior leadership diversity 2.50% 38% 40% 42% 1 IRB accreditation based on the full roll out and bad and doubtful debtaverage loans are all or nothing measures with 100% vesting if achieved for these elements.
2 CIR and RoTE are targeted on an underlying basis.
3 Threeyear average.
4 Cumulative figure for 2017 2018 and 2019.
5 CET1 ratio has been removed as a measure for 2017 but will underpin RoTE.
CET1 must achieve 12% before the RoTE element is assessed.
In line with regulator changes to deferral periods LTIP awards to Executive Directors will be released over three to seven years from the date of grant.
Past LTIP awards 2015 demerger LTIP award audited Following the demerger from NAB an award was made to recognise the Executive Directors contribution to the success of the demerger with performance measured against a cumulative underlying PBT target over 2016 to 2018.
Details of the PBT targets will be disclosed after the end of the performance period once these are no longer commercially sensitive.
The PBT outcome will be adjusted by the incremental yearonyear change in the prudent valuation adjustment figure during this period.
Percentage of salary Face value of award Number of shares awarded Type of interest awarded End of performance period
Percentage receivable for target performance David Duffy 150% 1500000 768560 Conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares 30 Sep 0% 100% Ian Smith 100% 450000 230568 Debbie Crosbie 100% 450000 230568 1 The award was based on a multiple of salary as at 30 September 2015.
2 The award price of 1.9517 was calculated based on the average middlemarket share price over the three days before grant.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 113 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 2016 LTIP awards Following the approval of the remuneration policy at the AGM the following awards were made to Executive Directors to reflect their performance in 2016 and align their interests with those of shareholders.
LTIP award
Face value of award Number of shares awarded Type of interest awarded End of performance period
Percentage receivable for target performance David Duffy 100% 1000000 375897 Conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares 30 Sep 20% 68% Ian Smith 100% 460000 172912 Debbie Crosbie 100% 450000 169153 The award is based on a percentage of salary as at 30 September 2016.
2 The award price of 2.6603 was calculated based on the average middlemarket share price over the three days before grant.
20% reflects 80% of the measures vesting at 25% for threshold performance and 20% vesting at 0%.
68% reflects 80% of the measures vesting at 60% for target performance and 20% vesting at 100% for target performance.
The award was granted on 9 March 2017 and will vest based on the performance over the 2017 to 2019 financial years as set out below.
These objectives are designed to deliver sustainable growth over the next three years and as such deliver returns to shareholders.
Outcomes will be disclosed on a retrospective basis at the end of the performance period.
Performance over the period will be assessed against the following measures 2016 LTIP measures Weighting Threshold Target Maximum Sustainable customer growth Clydesdale and Yorkshire Bank NPS 10% 22.5% 25% 27.5% Digital adoption 10% 45% 50% 55% Efficiency CIR 25% 60% 57.5% 55% Capital optimisation CET1 ratio 10% na 12% na
30% 8% 9% 10% IRB accreditation for mortgage book 5% na Achieved na Prudent risk management and governance Bad and doubtful debtaverage loans 5% na 25bps na Cumulative operational risk losses 5% 25m 20m 15m 1 CET1 ratio IRB accreditation for mortgage book and bad and doubtful debtaverage loans are all or nothing measures with 100% vesting if achieved for these elements.
2 CIR and RoTE are targeted on an underlying basis.
3 Threeyear average.
4 Cumulative figure for 2017 2018 and 2019.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 114
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration continued NonExecutive Directors audited The table below sets out the single total figure of remuneration and breakdown for each NonExecutive Director for the year ending 30 September 2017.
Fees Benefits Total Clive Adamson 104 David Bennett David Browne Paul Coby 78 Adrian Grace Fiona MacLeod 81 Jim Pettigrew Dr Teresa RobsonCapps Tim Wade 107 Richard Gregory Total 1250 1 Fees in 2016 include those in respect of increased duties during the demerger.
2 Richard Gregory retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
NonExecutive Directors annual fees The following fees are payable to NonExecutive Directors in line with the rates approved by the Board in November 2015 and reaffirmed by the Board in September 2017.
The NonExecutive Directors are reimbursed for expenses they incur in performing their duties.
Any tax arising on such reimbursed expenses is paid by the Group.
Chairman 350000 NonExecutive Director 70000 Deputy Chairman 60000 Senior Independent Director 30000 Chair Audit Committee 30000 Chair Risk Committee 30000 Chair Remuneration Committee 30000 Member Audit Committee 10000 Member Risk Committee 10000 Member Remuneration Committee 10000 Chair Governance and Nomination Committee 5000 Member Governance and Nomination Committee 5000 NonExecutive Directors fees in 2018 may be reviewed as the Group progresses with its strategic priorities and to reflect any changes in the nature of a NonExecutive Directors role and responsibilities.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 115 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Former NonExecutive Directors and payments to past NonExecutive Directors audited Richard Gregory retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
No additional fees were paid by the Group for his services to the Group.
NonExecutive Directors payments for loss of office audited No payments were made during the year.
Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests audited Executive Directors are required to build up a holding of the Groups shares to the value of 150% of base salary 200% for the CEO.
To support this Executive Directors are required to retain 60% of the net shares received from variable pay awards after the payment of tax and National Insurance until the shareholding requirement is met.
Detailed below are the current beneficial holdings of ordinary shares for each Executive Director together with details of their vested and unvested awards under the CYBG PLC share plans.
Director
Ordinary
Vested awards
Vested LTIP awards
LTIP awards
Expected value pre tax
David Duffy 123747  78299  1144457 1346503 4091 2168 Ian Smith 96356 34408 36086  403480 535922 1628 863 Debbie Crosbie 100736 46113 35296  399721 535753 1628 863 1 Ordinary shares beneficially owned including any shares held via the CYBG PLC Share Incentive Plan and holdings of connected persons.
Ian Smith joined the partnership scheme in April 2017 and purchased 320 shares by 30 September 2017.
2 Includes CHESS Depositary Interests CDIs which represent interests in ordinary shares beneficially owned by David Duffy 4080 and Ian Smith 4502.
Values are based on 30 September 2017 closing price of AUS5.14 300.8p and the average exchange rate on the day AUSGBP 0.5853.
3 Gross number of conditional rights awards which have vested but not yet been released as shares.
4 Unvested awards are subject to continued employment with no business performance conditions.
5 Unvested awards are subject to continued employment and the achievement of business performance conditions.
This applies to the gross number of shares under the 2015 demerger LTIP award which have not yet vested and are subject to business performance conditions and continued employment.
6 The unvested 2015 demerger LTIP and 2016 LTIP awards have been included at 100% of their face value in line with current accounting assumptions.
Values are based on the 30 September 2017 closing price of 303.80 pence.
7 Assumes 47% is deducted from vested and unvested rights to reflect the tax and national insurance due on the release of shares.
The chart below shows the Executive Directors current share holdings and net number of shares they would receive if all the unreleased rights vested and unvested shown above vested in full against their shareholding requirements applicable for Executive Directors 2168k 2000k David Duy Ian Smith Debbie Crosbie Benecially owned net of tax Rights held net of tax Holding requirement 000 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 116
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration continued For the purpose of assessing the Executive Directors holdings against the shareholding requirements at 30 September 2017 unvested awards are excluded.
Director Base salary Requirement as % of base salary
Expected value net of tax
David Duffy 1000000 200% 123747 199250 No Ian Smith 460000 150% 130764 210548 No Debbie Crosbie 450000 150% 146849 236447 No 1 Includes vested awards over CYBG PLC shares which have not yet been released.
2 Values are based on the 30 September 2017 closing price of 303.80 pence with 47% deducted from vested rights to reflect the tax and National Insurance due on the release of shares.
One Executive Director Ian Smith purchases shares via the Share Incentive Plan and currently purchases 150 worth of shares per month.
NonExecutive Directors shareholding audited The beneficial interests of the NonExecutive Directors and their connected persons who held office at 30 September 2017 in the shares of the Group and as at 30 September 2016 are shown below NonExecutive Directors Ordinary shares beneficially owned at 30 September 2016 or date of appointment if later Ordinary shares beneficially owned at 30 September 2017 or date of cessation if earlier Clive Adamson David Bennett 16334 16334 David Browne 5000 5000 Paul Coby Adrian Grace 16220 16220 Fiona MacLeod  7000 Jim Pettigrew 50000 50000 Dr Teresa RobsonCapps Tim Wade None of the NonExecutive Directors holds any awards under the CYBG PLC share plans.
None of the NonExecutive Directors or their connected persons bought or sold shares between 30 September 2017 and the date of this report.
Executive Directors shareholdings under each of the Groups share plans The Group operates four share plans which were approved prior to the demerger namely Deferred Equity Plan DEP Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Share Incentive Plan SIP and Save As You Earn Plan SAYE.
As CYBG PLC is no longer part of the NAB Group no details of outstanding NAB awards are included within this section.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 117 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Deferred Equity Plan DEP Awards were made to Executive Directors under the DEP following the demerger.
DEP awards
Awarded during the year Vested during the year
Unvested at year end Date of grant Grant price Market value at date of grant 000 Notes David Duffy 768560    768560 11 Feb 16 195.17 1500 2015 demerger L TIP 78299   78299 09 Mar 17 266.
375897   375897 09 Mar 17 266.03 1000 2016 L TIP Ian Smith 34408  34408   11 Feb 16 195.17  2015 deferred bonus 230568    230568 11 Feb 16 195.
L TIP 36086   36086 09 Mar 17 266.03 96 2016 deferred bonus 172912   172912 09 Mar 17 266.
Debbie Crosbie 46113  46113   11 Feb 16 195.17  2015 deferred bonus 230568    230568 11 Feb 16 195.
L TIP 35296   35296 09 Mar 17 266.03 94 2016 deferred bonus 169153   169153 09 Mar 17 266.
1 The upfront retained bonus award vested on 9 March 2017 when granted.
2 None of the unvested awards is due to vest in 2017.
3 The value of awards granted under the DEP was based on the threeday midmarket closing price over the preceding three days.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP An award was made on 9 March 2017 in relation to the 2016 LTIP following the approval of the remuneration policy at the AGM.
Share Incentive Plan SIP No awards were made to Executive Directors under the SIP during 2017.
One Executive Director Ian Smith currently participates in the monthly purchase of shares through the SIP.
Save As You Earn plan SAYE No offers under the CYBG PLC SAYE plan have been made.
Total Shareholder Return TSR performance The graph below shows the value of 100 invested in the Groups shares since listing compared with the FTSE 250 Index.
The graph shows the TSR generated by both the movement in share value and the reinvestment over the same period of dividend income.
The
Committee considers the FTSE 250 as representative of the current market capitalisation of the Group.
CYBG TSR FTSE 25tel Feb 16 29 Sep 17 30 Sep 16 Source PwC CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 118
Directors remuneration report Annual report on remuneration continued CEO historic remuneration The table below sets out the total remuneration delivered to the Chief Executive Officer over 2017
Chief Executive Officer 2017 2016
Total single figure 000 2056 2048 Annual short term incentive payment level achieved % of maximum opportunity 82% 80% Longterm incentive vesting level achieved % of maximum opportunity 1 No CYBG LTIP awards vested during 2016 or 2017.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below sets out the relative importance of spend on pay in the 2017 financial year Overall spend
Disbursements from profit in 2016 financial year m
Overall spend on pay including Executive Directors The Directors have recommended a final dividend in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017 of 1p per ordinary share in the Company 2016 Nil to be paid on 16 February 2018 subject to approval of shareholders at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
2 2016 and 2017 figures as per note 2.4 of the consolidated financial statements.
The 2017 overall spend on pay includes a past service credit of 88m as a result of the closure of the defined benefit pension scheme to future accrual for the majority of members.
Change in the CEOs remuneration compared with colleagues The table below shows the percentage change in remuneration for the CEO between 2016 and 2017 compared with the percentage change in the average remuneration of colleagues.
Remuneration compared with colleagues
2016 to 2017
2016 to 2017
2016 to 2017
0% 16% 2.4%
2.6% 0% 5.3% 1 Reflects annual salary at 30 September and average for respective years.
2 Reflects average annual FTE salary of colleagues employed at both 30 September 2016 and 30 September 2017 and average bonus awards for 2016 and 2017.
3 Taxable benefits and other allowances excluding employer pension contributions with the CEOs accommodation allowance ending part way through the year.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 119 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Other remuneration disclosures Our remuneration policy for all colleagues The Group has implemented a firmwide remuneration policy that is designed to attract and retain highcalibre individuals who will promote the delivery of our longterm strategy in line with our business values and risk appetite.
While the levels and elements of the remuneration may differ from that of the Executive Directors they are based on the same principles aligning remuneration which shall not be excessive and ensuring that variable pay is appropriate balanced and calibrated for any impact of risk.
Element Objective Operation Base salary Recruit reward retain and recognise scope of role.
Base salaries are reviewed annually and reflect Group and individual performance skills experience and the scope of the role.
Benefits To provide benefits consistent with role.
The Group provides access to a range of benefits which may vary according to seniority.
Pension To provide benefits consistent with role.
The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme for all colleagues.
The defined benefit scheme closed to new entrants in 2014 with the Scheme closing to future accrual on 31 July 2017 for the majority of colleagues.
Bonus The annual bonus is designed to reward Group and personal performance in line with strategic objectives.
The Group has a single firmwide shortterm incentive plan.
This is discretionary and is based on Group and individual performance within the year.
The determination of measures and their weighting are set annually and awards are determined by the Remuneration Committee at the end of the financial year.
For MRTs deferral is applied in line with PRA Remuneration Code.
Where that does not apply colleagues who have a bonus award of 14000 or more will have part of the award deferred for 12 months.
LTIP Delivery of the Groups strategy and growth in shareholder value.
In line with Executive Directors the Groups Executive Leadership Team is able to influence the Groups performance and they are incentivised to do so through eligibility to equitybased compensation.
Awards are based on a threeyear performance period reflecting a basket of business and shareholder measures aligned with strategic goals.
Awards will vest a minimum of three years after being awarded or longer where required by the PRA Remuneration Code.
Awards may be subject to a discount in determining total variable remuneration under the rules set by the European Banking Authority.
Other share plans Offers opportunity to acquire shares in CYBG PLC As well as the DEP and LTIP the Group operates a SIP under which colleagues may purchase Partnership Shares and the Group may offer free shares and the Group may in the future offer a SAYE plan.
Commencement retention and guaranteed awards Buyout of unvested equity from a previous employer The amount timing and performance hurdles are based on those being forfeited and satisfactory evidence.
Guaranteed incentives or bonus are not provided to existing colleagues.
Total reward consists of both fixed and variable components fixed remuneration provided as cash and benefits including employer pension and variable remuneration reflects both individual and business performance.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 120
Directors remuneration report Other remuneration disclosures continued The mix of fixed and variable reward is balanced to ensure that fixed remuneration provides a sufficient level of remuneration so that the variable reward components can be fully flexible including the possibility of paying no variable reward.
The remuneration mix at target is based on market information and practices.
In any year the actual mix may vary from target given the overlay of business performance and individual performance.
All variable pay awards to MRTs are subject to malus and clawback in line with regulatory requirements.
Control functions Colleagues engaged in control functions i.
Risk Internal Audit and Compliance colleagues are critical to effective management of risk across the Group.
Independence from the business for these colleagues is assured through setting the reward mix so that variable reward is not significant enough to encourage inappropriate behaviours while remaining competitive with the external market and scorecards which are specific to the function.
The Committee reviews remuneration structures for control function colleagues.
Risk adjustment In addition to the Committees review of risks that impact on the level of the bonus pool and the application of malus and clawback as outlined above individual bonus awards are also subject to meeting all compliance requirements and awards made can be reduced to nil where these are not met or where colleagues are subject to disciplinary sanction.
Deferral arrangements Variable rewards bonus LTIP and retention awards are subject to deferral and retention for all MRTs in line with UK regulation at least 60% of total variable reward will be deferred where the total variable reward is 500000 or more and at least 40% of total variable reward will be deferred where the MRT does not meet de minimus conditions.
The period of deferral ranges from one to three years to three to seven years depending on role in line with UK legislation.
The tables below set out the deferral arrangements for those roles classed as MRTs under Articles 2 3 and 4 of the European Banking Authority Guidelines.
These have been grouped under the three classifications within Strengthening Individual Accountability in Banking Senior Manager Function SMF roles under the Senior Manager Regime.
This includes Executive Directors SMF NonExecutive Directors Chairman Senior Independent NED and the Chairman of Remuneration Risk Audit and Nomination Committees and other SMF leadership team members and senior managers.
Risk Manager roles which includes but not exclusively leadership team members not classified as SMF the senior management responsible for material business units for management of specific risk categories such as liquidity operational or interest rate risk and for control functions who are responsible for the daytoday management of the business its risks or its control functions.
Other MRT which are roles considered to have material impact on the risk profile of the Group.
Financial year 2018 Year 0
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8 Senior managers Vesting Minimum 60% of 2018 variable remuneration Risk managers
Year of award Vesting Minimum 40% of 2018 variable remuneration Other MRT Vesting Minimum 40% of 2018 variable remuneration Award subject to additional holding period in line with regulatory requirements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 121 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Remuneration of MRTs for 2017 This section discloses the remuneration awards made by the Group to 157 MRTs 2016 149 in respect of the 2017 performance year.
Additional information summarising the Groups decisionmaking policies for remuneration are also provided.
These disclosures deliver the requirements of Capital Requirements Regulation CRR Article 450.
The following groups of individuals have been identified as meeting the criteria for MRTs including those who may have a material impact on the Groups risk profile senior management Executive Board Directors members of the Executive Leadership Team NonExecutive Directors and other individuals whose activities could have an impact on the Groups risk profile.
Aggregate remuneration of MRTs by business area Banking
Corporate functions
Number of MRTs Total fixed remuneration m 5.6 12.1 4.7 22.4 1 Includes colleagues in the Customer Banking Division and the Customer Banking Director.
2 Includes Executive Directors NonExecutive Directors and colleagues within Risk Internal Audit and Compliance functions.
3 Includes Human Resources Finance Marketing Products and other corporate functions.
Total value of MRTs remuneration awards
Other MRTs Total m Number of MRTs 24 133 157 Fixed remuneration Variable remuneration cash 1.3 2.4 3.7 Variable remuneration shares 1.3 1.1 2.4 Deferred remuneration cash Deferred remuneration shares Longterm incentive shares Total variable remuneration Total remuneration 14.4 22.5 36.9 1 Includes the Executive Directors members of the Executive Leadership Team and those holding a Senior Management Function under the Senior Management Regime.
2 Includes NonExecutive Directors colleagues identified as MRTs under the FCAPRA criteria and any colleagues who the Group consider to have responsibility and accountability for activities that could have a material impact on the Groups business risk profile or credit exposure and colleagues in independent Risk Internal Audit and Compliance function roles.
3 Excludes termination awards made under the Group redundancy policy together with PILON and any pension augmentation.
4 Deferred bonuses awarded in cash.
5 All awards are made as conditional rights to the Groups shares.
6 Reflects the face value of the 2017 LTIP award to be made.
7 Includes current year commencement awards awarded in 2017.
Deferred remuneration
Other MRTs m Total m Deferred remuneration at 30 September 2017 Outstanding vested 2.4 1.7 4.0 Outstanding unvested 9.1 3.0 12.1 Awarded during the financial year Releasedpaid out during the financial year Reduced through performance adjustments 1 Value at date of award.
Figures including 2015 and 2016 deferred awards LTIP Bonus and commencement plus 2017 awards.
2 Includes 2016 deferred bonus awards 2016 LTIP and 2017 commencement awards.
3 Reflects deferred elements of 2015 and 2016 bonuses.
4 This figure does not include the adjusted value of awards which were forfeited by colleagues upon leaving the Group.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 122
Directors remuneration report Other remuneration disclosures continued Other remuneration
Commencement awards m Number of beneficiaries  5 5 Highest award to single beneficiary m  0.4 Termination awards m Number of beneficiaries  8 8 Highest award to single beneficiary m  0.7 1 Current year commencement awards and prior year buyout awards granted in 2017.
2 Awards made under the Group redundancy policy together with PILON and any pension augmentation.
Remuneration band m
More than 3.5m Less than 0.5m 14 130 144 Total remuneration has been calculated including fixed remuneration allowances variable remuneration including 2017 LTIP at face value in relation to the performance year and fees for NonExecutive Directors.
Variable remuneration includes the annual shortterm incentive award in respect of the 2017 financial year.
Bands have been converted using a rate of 1 GBP  1.08401 EUR consistent with the European Commissions currency converter for September 2017.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 123 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Corporate governance report The Corporate governance report found on pages 49 to 122 together with this report of which it forms part fulfils the requirements of the Corporate Governance Statement for the purpose of the FCAs Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR.
Company background The Company was incorporated in England and Wales on 18 May 2015 as a public company limited by shares under the Companies Act 2006 with the name Pianodove PLC.
Pianodove PLC changed its name to CYBG PLC on 1 October 2015.
The registered office of the Company is at 20 Merrion Way Leeds West Yorkshire LS2 8NZ with the Head Office and principal place of business of the Company being 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL.
Directors
The current Directors of the Company and their biographical details are shown on pages 55 to 59.
As previously announced Richard Gregory Senior Independent NonExecutive Director retired from the Board on 10 January 2017.
Particulars of Directors emoluments and interests in shares in the Company are given on pages 108 to 118 of the Directors remuneration report.
During the year no Director had a material interest in any contract of significance to which the Company or a subsidiary undertaking was a party.
Board composition changes Changes to the composition of the Board since 1 October 2016 and up to the date of this report are shown in the table below.
Further details of Board changes can be found on page 67 of the Corporate governance report and on page 76 of the Governance and Nomination Committee report.
Name Role Date of retirement Richard Gregory Senior Independent
Director
10 January 2017 Annual general meeting AGM The Companys 2018 AGM will be held at 10am GMT on Wednesday 31 January 2018 at the offices of Pinsent Masons LLP 30 Crown Place Earl Street London EC2A 4ES United Kingdom.
Details of the meeting venue and the resolutions to be proposed together with explanatory notes are set out in a separate Notice of AGM which accompanies this Annual Report and Accounts and is published on the Companys website site The AGM will be webcast live at 10am GMT on Wednesday 31 January 2018 on the Companys website site and a recording will also be available shortly after the conclusion of the
Please note that viewing the live webcast does not enable shareholders to ask questions or vote during the AGM.
The webcast may include a question and answer session with shareholders present at the AGM in addition to background shots of those in attendance.
Photographs may also be taken at the AGM and used in future Group publications.
If you attend the AGM in person you may be included in the webcast recording andor photographs.
Election and reelection of Directors at the forthcoming AGM Following recommendations from the Governance and Nomination Committee the Board considers all Directors continue to be effective committed to their roles and have sufficient time available to discharge their duties.
In accordance with the Code all Directors will retire and seek reelection at the 2018 AGM.
Directors indemnities The Directors have each entered into individual deeds of access insurance and indemnity with the Group which among other things and subject to certain exceptions indemnify the Directors to the maximum extent permitted by law and regulation against liabilities to a person other than the Company or an associated company that they may incur as an officer of the Company and any other subsidiary of the Group.
Each such provision constitutes a thirdparty indemnity provision and a qualifying indemnity provision for the purposes of section 234 to 236 of the Companies Act 2006.
These provisions are in force for the benefit of the Directors at the date of this report and were in force when this report was approved and during the financial year to which this report relates.
Such deeds are available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
The Group has an insurance policy in place for the benefit of all trustees colleagues Directors officers members and partners of the Company while acting in the capacity of a trustee or administrator of employee benefit or pension plans.
This policy therefore indemnifies the Directors of Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Trustee Limited and YCB DC Trustee Limited each a Trustee Company the trustees of two occupational pension schemes operated by the Group against liability incurred by them in connection with the management and administration of the pension schemes.
This insurance policy constitutes a pension scheme indemnity provision and a qualifying indemnity provision for the purposes of sections 235 to 236 of the Companies Act 2006.
These provisions are in force for the benefit of the Directors of Trustee Companies at the date of this report and were in force when this report was approved and during the financial year to which this report relates.
Such policy is available for inspection at the Companys registered office.
In addition the Group had appropriate Directors and Officers Liability Insurance cover in place throughout the financial year.
Profits and appropriations The Group profit before tax for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 amounted to 268m 2016 profit of 77m.
The profit attributable to the ordinary shareholders for the year ended 30 September 2017 amounted to 146m 2016 loss of 206m.
As at 30 September 2017 the distributable reserves of the Company were 1002m 2016 1003m.
Governance
Directors report CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 124
Directors report
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 1p per ordinary share in the Company in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 Nil which will subject to approval by shareholders at the 2018 Annual General Meeting be payable on 16 February 2018.
Amendment to the Articles of Association The Company may only amend its Articles of Association if its shareholders pass a special resolution to that effect.
Share capital control and Directors powers Shares in the Company are listed on both the London Stock Exchange LSE and the ASX in the form of CHESS Depositary Interests CDIs and therefore the Company is required to comply with the disclosure requirements of both listing regimes.
Details of the movements in allotted share capital during the year together with the rights and obligations attaching to the Companys shares are shown in note 4.1 to the consolidated financial statements.
There are no restrictions on voting rights of securities in the
The Notice of AGM specifies deadlines for determining attendance and voting entitlements at the AGM.
Where participants in an employee share incentive plan operated by the Company are the beneficial owners of shares but not the registered owners the voting rights are normally exercised at the discretion of participants.
With the exception of restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares under the Companys share incentive plans while the shares are subject to the rules of the plan there are no restrictions which exist on the transfer or holding of securities in the Company under its Articles of Association and there are no shares carrying special rights with regards to the control of the Company.
Subject to the Articles of Association and provisions of relevant statutes the Board may exercise all powers of the Company.
Acquisition of own shares At the AGM of the Company held on 31 January 2017 a resolution was passed that the Directors were authorised to purchase up to a maximum of 88153185 ordinary shares representing approximately 10% of the issued ordinary share capital.
A renewal of authority will be sought at the 2018 AGM.
Further information is set out in the Notice of AGM.
Political donations The Group did not give any money for political purposes nor did it make any political donations to political parties or other political organisations or to any independent election candidates or incur any political expenditure during the year.
At the Annual General Meeting in 2017 shareholders gave authority under Part 14 of the Companies Act to make political donations and incur political expenditure up to a maximum aggregate amount of 100000.
This authorisation was sought for prudence as it is the Groups policy not to make any political donations to political parties or incur political expenditure within the ordinary meaning of those words.
Given the wide definition of donations and expenditure within the Companies Act activities which form part of the regular operations of the Group such as communicating with government at local national and European level and funding events to which politicians are invited may be covered.
Financial risk management objectives and policies Information about internal controls and financial risk management systems in relation to financial reporting and Board review can be found on page 71 of the Corporate governance report.
Information about financial risk management objectives and policies in relation to the use of financial instruments can be found in the Risk report on pages 127 to 175.
Post balance sheet events There have been no material post balance sheet events.
Information included in the Strategic report The following information that would otherwise be required to be disclosed in this report and which is incorporated into this report by reference can be found on the following pages of the Strategic report.
Subject matter
Future developments 13 to 15 Colleague engagement 30 to 32 Emissions reporting 34 to 35 Equality of employment opportunities It is the policy of the Group to promote equality of employment opportunities by giving full and fair consideration to applications from people with disabilities.
If existing colleagues become disabled every effort is made to retain them within the workforce wherever reasonable and practicable.
The Group also endeavours to provide equal opportunities in the training promotion and general career development of disabled persons.
Substantial shareholdings Information provided to the Company pursuant to the FCAs DTR is published on Regulatory Information Services and on the Companys website.
As at 30 September 2017 the following information has been received in accordance with DTR 5 from holders of notifiable interests in the Companys issued share capital.
The information provided below was correct at the date of notification however the date received may not have been within the current financial year.
It should be noted that these holdings are likely to have changed since the Company was notified.
However notification of any change is not required until the next notifiable threshold is crossed.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 125 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Total number of shares % of issued capital with rights to vote in all circumstances at general meetings Perpetual Limited and subsidiaries 83900030 9.49% Cooper Investors Pty Ltd 52888470 5.99% Schroders plc 44572549 5.04% Investors Mutual Limited 45016877 6.17% AMP Life Limited AMP Capital Investors Limited Ipac Asset Management Limited AMP Capital Investors NZ Limited 43908981 4.97% JCP Investment Partners Limited 35251058 3.99% BT Investment Management Limited 27036329 3.06% 1 Percentage correct as at 30 September 2017.
Going concern The Groups Directors have made an assessment of the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and are satisfied that the Group has the resources to continue in business for the foreseeable future.
The Groups use of the going concern basis for preparation of the accounts is discussed in note 1.4 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Viability statement
In accordance with the Code the Directors have assessed the prospects of the Group over a threeyear period to 30 September 2020.
The Directors have determined that a threeyear period is an appropriate period over which to perform the assessment.
This is the period over which forecasts have a greater level of certainty.
The Board monitors a longerterm strategic and financial plan which extends beyond the threeyear period.
This longerterm strategic and financial plan provides less certainty of outcome but provides a robust planning tool against which strategic decisions can be made.
In making this assessment the Directors have considered a wide range of information including the Directors robust review and challenge of the outcomes of the latest ICAAP and the ILAAP which assess the Groups future projections of capital adequacy liquidity and funding.
The Board has also considered the results of stress testing which is performed.
Furthermore the Directors have considered the current state of the balance sheet principal and emerging risks which could impact the performance of the Group and the Groups strategic and financial plan which includes future projections of profitability alongside capital funding and liquidity in a manner aligned to the ICAAP and ILAAP.
The strategic and financial plan makes certain assumptions about the performance of the Group and the economic market and regulatory environments in which it operates.
To support the planning process downside scenario analysis has been performed to consider how the Groups performance would be affected by changing economic and market conditions throughout the planning period.
Information relevant to this assessment can be found in the following sections of the Annual Report and Accounts a financial summary including a review of the latest income statement and balance sheet is provided in the Financial results section pages 38 to 48 the Groups capital position is included in the balance sheet and prudential regulation risks section of the Risk report pages the Groups liquidity position is described in the balance sheet and prudential regulation risks section of the Risk report pages the Groups principal risks and policies and processes for managing those risks are described in the Strategic report on page 19 the Groups business model and strategy are described in the Strategic report pages 10 to 13 and the Groups approach to stress testing and reverse stress testing are described in the Risk report on page 135.
Based upon this assessment the Directors have concluded that there is a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three years to 30 September 2020.
Disclosure of information under Listing Rule LR 9.8.4R Additional information required to be disclosed by LR9.8.4R where applicable to the Group can be found in the following sections of this report Subject matter Page reference Publication of unaudited financial information The disclosures within the Risk report pages 127 to 175 are unaudited unless otherwise stated.
Allotment of equity securities Significant contracts 248 Research and development activities The Group does not undertake formal research and development activities although it does invest in new platforms and products in each of its business lines in the ordinary course of business.
In addition to new products and services the Group also invests in internally generated intangible assets including software and computer systems.
Further details can be found in note 3.10 of the Groups consolidated financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 126
Directors report Change of control The Group is not party to any significant agreements that are subject to change of control provisions in the event of a takeover bid other than the following A Conduct Indemnity Deed with NAB under which NAB has agreed subject to certain limitations to provide CYBG with a capped indemnity in respect of certain historic liabilities relating to relevant conduct matters as defined therein.
The capped indemnity will not automatically cease to apply nor will it automatically terminate upon any takeover.
However prior to any change of control the parties must cooperate in good faith to facilitate an assessment by the PRA to determine whether the capped indemnity should continue at the same amount or whether it should be terminated in whole or part.
Any such assessment will be at the sole discretion of the PRA.
There is a very small number of senior colleagues who are entitled to an enhanced redundancy payment if redundancy arises within the initial period of employment and is a result of a change of control.
The Group has share schemes under which change of control may apply albeit this is not considered to be significant.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that year.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies in accordance with International Accounting Standard IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements of IFRSs is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the financial performance and state that the Group and Company have complied with IFRSs subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic report Directors report Directors remuneration report and Corporate governance statement that comply with that law and those regulations.
Responsibility statement of the Directors in respect of the Annual Report and Accounts The Directors confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting standards give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face.
The Directors consider the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Independent auditor and audit information In accordance with section 485 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution to reappoint Ernst and Young LLP and to authorise the Audit Committee to agree their remuneration will be proposed at the next AGM.
The Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving the Report of the Directors are listed on page 53.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors and of the Groups auditor each of these Directors confirms that to the best of each Directors knowledge and belief there is no information relevant to the preparation of their report of which the Groups auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all the steps a Director might reasonably be expected to have taken to be aware of relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditor is aware of that information.
On behalf of the Board Lorna McMillan Company Secretary 20 November 2017 CYBG PLC.
Registered No.
Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 127 RISK REPORT Risk report 128 Risk classes 137 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 128 Effective management of risk is a key capability for a successful financial services provider and is fundamental to the Groups strategy.
The Group has continued to advance and strengthen its risk capabilities evolving in line with industry developments and best practice.
Risk principles The Groups approach to risk management is based on the principle that risk management capability must be embedded across all areas of the Group to be effective.
This overriding principle embodies the following concepts commercial decisions are made on the basis of proactive consideration of risk and the potential impact on customers business managers use the RMF to support decision making involving risk and reward tradeoffs and colleagues are responsible for risk management in their day to day activities.
Risk culture Central to the Groups risk culture is the fair treatment of customers and meeting obligations to stakeholders including shareholders regulators and colleagues.
The Board and senior management are responsible for setting and clearly communicating a strong risk culture through their actions and words and proactively addressing any identified areas of weakness or concern.
Culture is shaped by many aspects including tangible components such as the Groups code of conduct operating principles policies standards the risk management operating model and an approved articulation of risk appetite that aligns to and supports the strategic objectives of the Group.
The Group strives to instil a culture that supports compliance with all relevant laws codes and policies and builds constructive regulatory relationships.
Initiatives that support appropriate risk culture include the performance management framework the formal whistleblowing framework that allows colleagues in confidence and anonymously to raise concerns about matters of conduct and messaging from the CEO and members of the Executive Leadership Team emphasising the importance of risk identification management and mitigation.
Underpinning the RMF and at the heart of the Groups risk culture is the concept of personal accountability for risk management at source.
This is enabled through a risk management accountability model and a formal delegation framework through which colleagues are able to make risk based decisions.
Risk strategy The Group has a clearly defined strategy in order to manage and mitigate risk in the daily course of its business.
The strategy consists of ensuring all principal and emerging risks are identified and assessed ensuring risk appetite is clearly articulated and influences the Groups strategic plan a clearly defined risk culture which emphasises risk management throughout all areas of the business while maintaining independent oversight ongoing analysis of the environment in which the Group operates to proactively address potential risk issues as they arise and supporting commercial decisions and people with appropriate risk processes systems and controls.
Risk appetite statement RAS Risk Appetite is defined as the level and types of risk the Group is willing to assume within the boundaries of its risk capacity to achieve its strategic objectives.
The RAS articulates and supports communication of the Groups appetite to stakeholders.
This is important as it provides the definitive view of risk taking activity the Board is comfortable that the Group undertakes and allows decision makers including those with delegated authority and also those providing oversight to exercise judgement with greater confidence and speed.
The RAS aligns to the risks identified and defined in the RMF.
The design and structure of the RAS has taken into consideration best practice articulated by the European Central Bank which is aimed at ensuring Boards should be strongly involved in the validation process and monitoring of the RAS.
The Groups RAS is prepared by the Group CRO with consideration of the strategic objectives and business model as well as the environment in which the Group operates.
Monthly reporting to Executive Committees and Board includes details of performance against relevant RAS settings breaches and trends.
Risk report Risk report CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 129 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Risk policies and procedures The policy framework is a key component of the Groups RMF providing structure and governance for the consistent effective management of policies.
In developing the policy framework the Group sets the tone that demonstrates the risk culture expected across the organisation.
This aligns with the behavioural expectations for all colleagues which form a core part of our performance management approach.
Policy statements and supporting policy standards define the minimum control requirements which must be observed across the Group to manage material sources of risk within risk appetite.
Achievements in 2017 Progressing the IRB journey In April 2017 the Group submitted an application to the PRA for permission to adopt the IRB approach for the calculation of Credit Risk Weighted Assets RWAs.
The Group is now in active dialogue with the PRA in relation to the application.
The IRB programme is also supporting changes in the Collective Provision calculations required by IFRS 9 which will be adopted on 1 October 2018 the programme is on track to commence parallelrun activities in early FY2018.
For further information on IFRS 9 please refer to page 194.
Transitional Service Agreement TSA exits Significant progress has been made with the build and implementation of a new Credit Risk Engine to support the TSA exit strategy and also to support the IRB programme.
The new Credit Risk Engine is now well into parallelrun with successful delivery on schedule.
Investing in risk capabilities Following the appointment of the Group Chief Risk Officer CRO in September 2016 the Risk Management function has restructured to enable a stronger and more granular focus on specific categories of Risk.
In addition several external appointments have been made which have strengthened the Risk teams capabilities introduced a broader range of external experience and a variety of succession options.
Supporting sustainable growth and operational resilience Progressive change continues to be made to support sustainable growth.
This has included actions to influence safe lending growth enhanced policies and controls around regulatory prudential and operational disciplines including implementation of improvements to the Groups resilience framework.
These enhancements have enabled the Groups digital strategies as well as providing proactive support to achieve a number of the efficiencies and enhancements to the customer journeys ensuring the Group provides a continuity of service for critical processes.
Embedding the RMF The Group rolled out a revised RMF at the start of FY2017.
Across the year there has been a focus on embedding the RMF with actions taken across all three Lines of Defence to align to and enhance practices to ensure the RMF has been progressively adopted into routine risk processes and practices.
Risk reporting for example to the Executive and Board Risk Committees has also been improved to ensure that risk owners in the 1st Line of Defence are monitoring remediating and reporting their own risks in line with the responsibilities defined within the Senior Managers
Risk reporting has also incorporated an increasingly forward looking perspective with a greater focus on not only principal risks but also on emerging risks through the implementation of a Top and Emerging Risks dashboard.
Risk appetite setting The approach to Risk Appetite setting was assessed during the year with a number of improvements now adopted within the Board approved RAS for FY2018.
This includes an increase in the number of measures greater coverage of all risk categories particularly covering nonfinancial risks and a tiered approach to the monitoring of RAS limits to provide earlier warning of any potential breaches.
Priorities for 2018 IRB journey The Group will continue to work towards achieving approval to adopt the IRB approach alongside delivering IFRS 9 implementation.
Digitisation and raising cyber awareness As the industry and environment in which the Group operates evolves the Groups digital operations continue to be developed through new systems enhanced monitoring including threat monitoring for potential cyber attacks or increase in fraud related activity.
The Group continues to streamline processes whilst raising awareness of potential threats to the Group through training and education stress testing and ongoing assurance reviews of key controls including the management of third party suppliers.
Transitional Service Agreement TSA exits Priorities for early FY2018 include actions to fully implement the new Credit Risk Engine cease the reliance on NAB in relation to the calculation of RWAs and the delivery of the Treasury Management System.
Regulatory change The Group continues to embrace the changing regulatory environment and will remain fully compliant with all applicable current and future regulations.
This includes specific requirements such as the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR and the Group has for example recently taken steps to enhance capabilities in this area by appointing a Group Data Protection Officer DPO as a direct report of the Group CRO.
PSD2 changes start to come into effect in January 2018.
In addition to enhanced protection for consumers PSD2 opens up the competitive landscape and in doing so introduces risk for traditional financial services firms.
A specific material risk for the Group is disintermediation by third parties.
PSD2 also introduces more stringent regulatory requirements for complaint handling and customer authentication increasing the risk of failure to meet regulatory expectations.
The Group is well placed to meet the new requirements and is actively adapting its strategy in light of the increased competition and disintermediation risk.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 130 Risk report Risk report Through 2018 the Group will be taking steps to ensure compliance with ring fencing legislation that will take effect from 1 January 2019.
The Group will achieve compliance with the legislation with no material changes to its business operations or corporate structure and with very little impact on the Groups customers.
The Group is aware of material changes that other firms will need to make and will support our customers to understand the impact that changes made by other firms may have on them.
Balance sheet risks The Group remains focussed on maintaining balance sheet strength with particular attention being paid to regulatory developments including the Countercyclical Capital Buffer CCyB and MREL.
Underpinning this will be a focus on capital including capital management and any efficiencies that can be applied.
The
Group will continue to manage its liquidity requirements and funding profile in a prudent manner.
Risk Management Framework RMF
While considerable progress has been made during FY2017 work will continue in this regard through FY2018.
There will be a continual review with external support to incorporate industry benchmarking with any required revisions to be made quickly reflecting the ongoing and fast pace of change as new risks emerge and evolve.
Cyber and resilience In addition to the ongoing assessment of the RMF specific consideration will be given to the oversight and monitoring of the risks relative to both cyber security and cybercrime and in turn the resilience of the Groups systems and processes.
Growth and efficiency The Group continues to drive growth in the lending portfolios.
Appetite settings will be monitored to ensure controlled growth and regulatory guidance relative to areas such as consumer lending will be considered and addressed.
Equally initiatives to deliver efficiencies and simplification across the Group will be subject to continued risk assessment.
Principal risk categories See page 19 in the Strategic Report for details on the Groups principal risk categories.
Emerging risks The Group monitors the environment in which it operates to identify emerging risks that may have an impact on its operations and strategy.
The Group currently considers its top emerging risks to be Macroeconomic environment With a customer base that remains predominantly UK based the Group is exposed to inherent risks arising from increased geopolitical uncertainty which has the potential to impact the UK macroeconomic outlook.
The banking sector may be placed under increasing pressure as it is exposed to risks relative to credit conditions which may impact the financial performance of the
The Groups credit portfolios will continue to be monitored closely with appetite adjusted where appropriate and risk sensitivity analysis conducted on an ongoing basis.
Regular assessments of strategic plans are undertaken to minimise and negate potential impacts.
The UK vote to leave the EU Brexit The Group continues to monitor developments regarding the UKs withdrawal from the European Union and the potential consequences for our customers products and operating model.
As the period of economic uncertainty and market volatility persists the Group will continue to monitor and assess the external implications and reevaluate our mitigating actions as appropriate.
Consumer credit The Group maintains an awareness of the risk of significant unforeseen credit losses occurring within a short time period which has the potential to have a detrimental impact on earnings and profitability Credit risk strategies appetite and tolerance levels are reviewed and approved by the Board and regular monitoring of the credit portfolio including risk sensitivity analysis and reviews of asset quality metrics is undertaken to ensure early identification and mitigation of potential risk areas.
Early identification and mitigation of risks is an area of considerable regulatory focus and one where the Group is particularly alert to the potential regulatory economic and customer impacts.
Cyber security and IT The Group in line with the industry is subject to increasing levels of attempted cyberattack with criminal groups employing increasingly sophisticated knowledge of financial markets and internal activities processes leading to potential reputational and financial detriment.
The Group continues to invest in and enhance its information security capabilities monitoring the externalinternal threat landscape and the changing risk profile of the business.
Financial crime including cybercrime The Group is exposed to the risk of its products and services being used to facilitate crime against its customers third parties or the Group itself.
The management of Financial Crime remains a key area of regulatory focus and the Group continues to enhance its framework for monitoring management and mitigation of financial crime.
Regulatory change The Group in common with the financial services industry as a whole continues to face a significant agenda of regulatory and legislative change including those pertaining to taxes.
Compliance with the developing regulation remains a key focus.
The Group continues to monitor the emerging requirements and ensure it is well placed to respond with effective regulatory change management.
Specific forthcoming changes such as Open Banking and PSD2 bring both risk and opportunity to the competitive environment in which the Group operates.
Senior management is considering the strategic impacts of these changes for the Group for further detail on key regulatory changes impacting the Group please see page 17.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 131 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Risk Management Framework RMF
The Group identifies and manages risk using the RMF see diagram below which is the totality of systems structures policies processes and people that identify measure evaluate control mitigate monitor and report all internal and external sources of material risk.
Frameworks risk systems policies and standards to manage sources of risk Strategic business and financial performance risk Balance sheet and prudential regulation risk Credit risk Financial crime risk Operational risk Regulatory and compliance risk Conduct risk People risk Policy framework Risk appetite framework Strategic planning including risk appetite setting Roles and responsibilities Three Lines of Defence Risk governance Control effectiveness statement Risk reporting and escalation protocols Risk and event classification matrix Risk categorisation Risk management core components Risk management cycle Risk infrastructure Risk culture
Risk management
Assess control Appetite decision Identify risks Monitor risksmanage events Report CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 132 Risk report Risk report Risk governance and oversight The Groups risk governance structure strengthens risk evaluation and management while also positioning the Group to manage the changing regulatory environment in an efficient and effective manner.
The Groups risk management is governed via a series of committees as represented within the diagram which follows.
During the year the Group commenced a review of the executive governance committee layer in the risk governance structure to ensure it balances regulatory legal and compliance obligations while making timely customer focused decisions that drive the business forward with any changes expected to be made during 2018 to ensure the framework is both optimal and efficient.
Remuneration
Committee
Clydesdale Bank PLC Board
Chief Executive Officer
Risk
Committee
Executive Risk Committee Pension Risk
Committee
Operational
Risk and
Committee
Credit Risk
Portfolio
Management
Committee
Asset and
Committee
Cost Board Disclosure Committee Executive Leadership Team
Committee
Structured
Funding
Programmes
Oversight
Committee
Model
Governance
Committee
Customer
Fairness
Committee
Governance and
Committee
Board Governance Committees Executive Governance Committees Delegating authority reporting and escalation Reporting and escalation CYBG PLC BOARD CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 133 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The following Executive level Committees have been established under the authority of the CEO Committees Risk focus Executive Leadership Team The Executive Leadership Team supports the CEO to lead the Group to be a strong customerfocused bank for its communities by focusing on three business priorities sustainable growth efficiency and capital optimisation Executive Risk Committee The Executive Risk Committee supports the CEO in respect of risk and control accountabilities and serves to provide leadership focus on key risk issues including endorsing the RAS for approval by the Board overseeing and challenging the enterprise wide risk performance and control environment of the Group and business units including the effective use of policy frameworks and tools monitoring the status of regulatory relationships the reputation of the Group in relation to its regulators and the changing state of the regulatory landscape including the impacts for and readiness of the Group monitoring the strength of risk capability and capacity including risk training and education plans to ensure an effective risk and control framework and reviewing and endorsing risk policies frameworks and tools for use across the Group.
Disclosure Committee The Disclosure Committee is responsible for ensuring the Group complies with its continuous disclosure obligations for exchanges on which it has equity and debt securities listed.
The Executive Risk Committee is supported by the following committees
Pension Risk Management
Committee
The Pension Risk Management Committee is responsible for overseeing pension risk management and strategy.
This committee also oversees the interaction with the pension scheme trustees in relation to the risks within the Scheme.
Operational Risk and Compliance
The Operational Risk and Compliance Committee is responsible for ensuring that the RMF and associated policies and standards are fit for purpose and implemented effectively.
Credit Risk Committee The Credit Risk Committee is responsible for ensuring that the Credit RMF and associated policies remain effective.
The committee has oversight of the quality composition and concentrations of the credit risk portfolio and recommends strategies to adjust the portfolio to react to changes in market conditions.
Asset and Liability Committee ALCO ALCO is responsible for monitoring the performance of the Group against the Board approved capital and funding plans.
The committee focuses on the Groups nontraded market risks including capital funding liquidity and interest rate risk to ensure that the Groups activity complies with regulatory and corporate governance requirements and also delivers Group policy objectives.
The impact of pension risk on capital is also assessed by ALCO.
Structured Funding Programmes Oversight Committee The Structured Funding Programmes Oversight Committee is responsible for supporting the ALCO in relation to its risk monitoring and oversight responsibilities for all secured funding programmes and supporting the CFO and Treasurer in relation to the compliance of the Regulated Covered Bond RCB Programme with FCA regulations and the RCB Sourcebook.
Customer Fairness Committee The Customer Fairness Committee oversees the effective execution and ongoing development of the Conduct Framework and Customer Fairness Model.
It also ensures conduct issues and remediation activities are effectively managed at the appropriate level.
Model Governance Committee The Model Governance Committee supports the Board in fulfilling its governance responsibilities for material models and rating systems.
The Committee oversees the integration and ongoing use of models across the Group specifically considering the fitness for purpose usability and scalability of models.
The Executive Leadership Team is supported by the following committees Portfolio Management Committee The Portfolio Management Committee is responsible for the oversight and management of capital allocation and funding decisions for the product portfolio related to pricing and sustainable returns.
Cost Board The Cost Board is the primary forum for the management of costs across the Group.
Its
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 134 Risk report Risk report Three Lines of Defence Effective operation of a Three Lines of Defence model is integral to the Groups approach to risk management and is based on the overriding principle that risk capability must be embedded within the first line of defence teams to be effective.
This principle embodies the following concepts commercial decisions are made on the basis of proactive consideration of risk and the impact on customers risk management activities are focused on enhancing sustainable business performance management must use the RMF to support decision making involving risk and reward tradeoffs regular assessments are undertaken to confirm the effectiveness of the risk and control frameworks in relation to both the current and emerging risk profile and risk management responsibilities are clearly understood by all colleagues when carrying out their day to day activities.
Control is exercised through a clearly defined delegation of authority with communication and escalation channels throughout the Group.
Internal Audit Internal Audits role is to provide independent assurance over the governance risk management and control framework.
Risk Management
The risk management team under the Group CRO independently monitors and systematically assesses the Groups risk profile against established risk appetite parameters.
Risk management
RMF.
They also assist the first line business units in the design and implementation of appropriate risk management policies and strategies and work with the business units to promote awareness of the need to manage risk.
Business and enterprise assurance Responsibility for risk management resides with the business unit director in each area.
They are each responsible for ensuring that they have adequate risk coverage and processes in place to ensure they are managing the risks they own within risk appetite and within the guidelines of the RMF.
A monthly report of key risks issues and horizon risks is provided to the Executive Risk
The enterprise assurance function focuses on endtoend assurance of key processes as well as ensuring risks and controls are being managed appropriately.
Reporting is provided to each business unit director as appropriate and to the Executive Risk
1st 2nd 3rd CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 135 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Stress testing Stress testing is an important and recognised risk management tool used to assess the vulnerability of financial institutions through the modelling of adverse scenarios.
The Group undertakes stress testing following the Basel Committee principles and utilising where appropriate scenarios provided by the PRA aimed at understanding potential impacts arising from adverse conditions relevant to its business and to aid the development and understanding of potential management actions and contingency plans.
Stress testing forms an integral part of the overall governance and risk management culture.
Involvement from the Board and senior management in the stresstesting programme is essential for its effective operation.
Methodology
Stress testing within the Group complies with regulatory requirements and is subject to a rigorous review and challenge process.
The Groups approach ensures that a clear link exists between the economic scenarios and stresstesting outputs supported by a structured review and sign off process.
While the stress testing process is underpinned by models it is also reliant on judgements made by senior management and key personnel across the Group who manage the macroeconomic scenario process and prepare and review stressed business plans prepare and review credit stress outputs including impairment charges RWAs and write offs provide funding and liquidity impacts and construct capital plans based on the outcomes of stress testing and guide on potential management actions in response to stress scenario mitigation.
Reverse stress testing Reverse stress testing requires a different approach.
It starts from an outcome of business failure and identifies instances where this might occur.
Severe but plausible scenarios with an unacceptably high risk are used to inform business planning to prevent or mitigate specific business risks.
Reverse stress tests are also utilised as the start point for recovery and resolution planning scenarios.
The Group also monitors a range of early warning indicators to give management early visibility of potential risks that could give rise to the need to invoke actions in recovery plans.
Stress testing within the Groups risk governance and capital framework Stress testing outputs are used to inform the strategic planning process and the RAS.
The plan is subjected to sensitivity analysis forming a key element of the planning process from an overall risk assessment perspective and provides the Board with further detail when looking to approve the plan.
Stress testing informs the assessment and quantification of risk exposures in the course of calculating capital requirements as part of the ICAAP.
The Group runs a number of adverse macroeconomic stresses in order to determine the impacts on the Groups financial and capital position considering changes to impairments margins volumes and costs relative to the base case plan and considers the actions which the Group may choose to deploy in response to such events materialising.
Stress testing is also a key feature of the ILAAP where stress testing scenarios are modelled regularly to provide insight into potential vulnerabilities in the Groups funding and liquidity strategies.
Stresstesting results of liquidity are also reported to ALCO on a monthly basis.
The Executive Leadership Team and Board engages at critical points of the stresstesting cycle to provide a robust challenge in relation to the selection and development of scenarios and thereafter considers how the results are integrated into future strategic decision making contingency planning capital and business planning and risk appetite.
In advance of Board submission ALCO reviews the scenarios assumptions and results of liquidity and capital stress testing and provides an initial review and challenge of outputs.
Risk management and internal controls Assessment of principal risks The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take in order to achieve its strategic objectives.
In line with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code requirements the Directors have performed a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model and future performance solvency or liquidity.
The principal risks the Group actively monitors and manages are described on page 19 of the Strategic report.
Risk management and internal controls The Board actively monitors the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
A review of the effectiveness of those systems has been performed incorporating all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 136 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 137 RISK REPORT RISK CLASSES Credit risk 138 Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks 154 Regulatory compliance and conduct risk 172 Operational risk including people risks 173 Financial crime risk 174 Strategic business and financial performance risk 175 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 138 Risk report Credit risk Strongly performing credit portfolios well positioned for growth Close monitoring robust policies and a wellcontrolled framework support the credit operations of the Group.
Credit risk is the risk that a borrower or counterparty fails to pay the interest or capital due on a loan or other financial instrument.
Credit risk manifests itself in the financial instruments andor products that the Group offers and those in which the Group invests including among others loans guarantees creditrelated commitments letters of credit acceptances interbank transactions foreign exchange transactions swaps and bonds.
Credit risk can be found both on and offbalance sheet.
Risk appetite The Group controls the levels of credit risk it takes by placing limits on the amount of risk accepted in relation to one borrower or group of borrowers and to geographical product and industry segments.
The management of credit risk within the Group is achieved through both approval and monitoring of individual transactions regular asset quality analysis of the performance of the various credit risk portfolios and the independent oversight of credit portfolios across the Group.
Credit strategies and policies Credit risks associated with lending are managed through the application of detailed lending policies and standards which outline the approach to lending underwriting criteria credit mandates concentration limits and product terms.
The Group maintains a dynamic approach to credit management and aims to take necessary steps if individual issues are identified or if credit performance deteriorates or is expected to deteriorate due to borrower economic or sectorspecific weaknesses.
Roles and responsibilities for the management monitoring and mitigation of credit risk within the Group are clearly defined in line with the Groups RMF.
Significant credit risk strategies and policies are approved and reviewed annually by the Credit Risk Committee.
For complex credit products and services the Head of Business Risk Head of Retail Risk and Credit Risk Committee provide a policy framework which identifies and quantifies risks and establishes the means of mitigating such risks.
These policies and frameworks are delegated to and disseminated under the guidance and control of executive management with appropriate oversight through governance committees.
Exposures
Credit risk exposures are categorised as Retail secured and unsecured and SME.
In terms of loans and advances credit risk arises both from amounts loaned and commitments to extend credit to customers.
To ensure appropriate credit limits exist especially for SME lending a single large exposure policy is in place within the Group and forms part of the risk appetite measures that are monitored and reported on a monthly basis.
The overall composition and quality of credit portfolio exposures are monitored and periodically reported to the Board and where required to the relevant supervisory authorities.
Exposures are also managed in accordance with the large exposure reporting requirements of the CRR.
Unless otherwise noted the amount that best represents the maximum credit exposure at the reporting date is the carrying value of the financial asset.
Measurement
The Group uses statistical models to measure credit risk exposures.
Models are supported by both internal and external data.
The probability of default PD that borrowers will not meet their contractual obligations current exposures and the likely loss ratio on defaulted obligations are calculated to measure and mitigate credit risk.
Portfolios are assessed using segmentation for measurement reporting and monitoring purposes.
Subject to regulatory approval the Group is progressing toward attaining permission to use IRB models to measure the credit risk of loans and advances to customers.
Meantime all exposures are measured under the standardised approach for regulatory capital.
Note 3.6 provides details of the Groups approach to the impairment of financial assets and the calculation of impairment charge.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 139 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Key credit metrics audited 2017 2016 Impairment charge on credit exposures m SME lending including lease finance 33 31 Retail lending Of which Specific charge for impairment losses 46 25 Collective charge for impairment losses Impairment provisions held on credit exposures m SME lending including lease finance 154 157 Retail lending Of which Specific provision 56 64 Collective provision 15telCredit risk adjustments held on loans at fair value m SME lending 11 24 Of which Individually assessed credit risk adjustments 2 8 Collectively assessed credit risk adjustments Impairment credits on loans held at fair value 6 11 Past due and impaired assets m 90 DPD assets 161 150 Impaired assets Asset quality measures % 90 DPD plus impaired assets to customer loans 1.06% 1.27% Specific provisions to impaired assets 32.6% 30.8% Net writeoffs to customer loans 0.18% 0.18% Total provision to customer loans 0.69% 0.79% Total impairment charge to average customer loans cost of risk 0.14% 0.09% 1 Impaired assets for September 2017 and September 2016 includes 4m and 19m of impaired fair value loans respectively.
2 Total specific provision includes the individually assessed credit risk adjustments on loans at fair value.
3 Net writeoffs includes loans at fair value.
4 Total provision to customer loans includes the credit risk adjustments on loans at fair value through profit and loss.
5 Total impairment charge to average customer loans includes loans held at fair value through profit and loss.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 140 Risk report Credit risk The Groups appetite for lending is strictly defined and adhered to and the strength of the loan book is underpinned by the continued focus on and maintenance of high underwriting standards plus early and proactive identification of customers experiencing financial difficulty.
The strong lending growth in the year has been delivered in the context of a benign economic environment which together have contributed to a reduction in the level of impaired loans from 233m to 179m and resulted in the 90 DPD plus impaired asset ratio falling from 1.27% to 1.06%.
While a level of sensitivity to economic shocks remains no material effects have yet been observed however it is accepted a more challenging credit environment is likely to lead to increased impairment from the current low levels.
The increase in impairment charge from 39m to 48m reflects a modest increase in charges taken on our unsecured Retail portfolios together with impairment of a small number of historically originated SME exposures.
Excluding the individually significant provisions the underlying level of impairment within the portfolio has remained stable with no sign of material deterioration.
The cost of risk has consequently increased by 5bps but remains low relative to the size of the portfolio.
Within the Retail portfolio the level of impaired mortgage lending remains modest against a growing book.
This reflects the strong credit quality of the portfolio supported by the low interest rate environment and stable house price indices.
The level of 90 DPD has seen a marginal increase for both secured and unsecured portfolios.
SME asset quality measures continued to improve reflective of the focus on responsible credit decisions and controlled risk appetite which leads to a wellbalanced and diverse portfolio.
This portfolio will be most susceptible to any material economic downturns following Brexit in particular any industry specific shocks e. agriculture.
The ratio of total provisions to customer loans reduced by 10bps to 0.69% in the year driven by the reduced level of specific provisions held for amortised cost and lower collective provision for assets held at fair value.
The continued growth in the portfolio has also influenced the decrease in ratio.
Maximum exposure to credit risk audited The table below shows the maximum exposure to credit risk including derivatives.
The maximum exposure is shown gross before the effect of mitigation through use of master netting and collateral agreements.
The table also shows the maximum amount of commitments from the Groups banking operations.
Cash and balances with central banks note 3.1 6937 5955 Due from other banks 1174 952 Financial assets available for sale note 3.2 2076 1731 Other financial assets at fair value note 3.3 477 750 Derivative financial assets note 3.4 282 585 Loans and advances to customers note 3.5 31293 29202 Due from customers on acceptances 4 4 42243 39179 Contingent liabilities note 5.1 111 123 Other credit commitments note 5.1 8408 7690 Maximum credit risk exposure 50762 46992
The management and mitigation of credit risk within the Group is achieved through both approval and monitoring of individual transactions and asset quality analysis of the performance of the various credit risk portfolios and the independent oversight of credit portfolios across the Group.
Portfolio monitoring techniques cover such areas as product industry or geographic concentrations and delinquency trends.
There is regular analysis of the borrowers ability to meet their interest and capital repayment obligations with early support and mitigation steps taken where required.
Credit risk mitigation is also supported in part by obtaining collateral and corporate and personal guarantees where appropriate.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 141 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Other mitigating measures are described below Specialist expertise Credit quality is managed and monitored by skilled teams including where required specialists who provide dedicated support for customers experiencing financial difficulty.
Credit decisions utilise credit scoring techniques and manual underwriting as appropriate.
These tasks are performed by skilled and competent specialists acting within agreed delegated authority levels set in accordance with their experience and capabilities.
Credit policy and adherence to policy standards Specialist teams oversee credit portfolio performance as well as adherence to credit risk policies and standards.
Activities include targeted riskbased reviews providing an assessment of the effectiveness of internal controls and risk management practices.
Bespoke assignments are also undertaken in response to emerging risks and regulatory requirements.
Independent
Portfolio oversight Portfolios of credit and related risk exposures and the key benchmarks behaviours and characteristics by which those portfolios are managed in terms of credit risk exposures are regularly reviewed.
This entails the production and analysis of regular portfolio monitoring reports for review by senior management.
Controls over rating systems The Group has an Independent Model Validation Unit that sets common minimum standards.
The standards are designed to ensure risk models and associated rating systems are developed consistently and are of sufficient quality to support business decisions and meet regulatory requirements.
Stress testing Stress test scenarios are regularly prepared with the outcomes reviewed and relevant actions taken.
Outputs will typically include impairment charges RWA and writeoffs.
Management will consider how each stress scenario may impact on different components of the credit portfolio.
The primary method applied uses migration matrices modelling the impact of PD rating migrations and changes in portfolio default rates to changes in macroeconomic factors to obtain a stressed position for the credit portfolios.
Loss given default LGD is stressed based on property price movements.
The Group also utilises other instruments and techniques across its wider balance sheet.
These are summarised below
The Group maintains control limits on net open derivative positions.
At any one time the amount subject to credit risk is limited to the current fair value of instruments that are favourable to the Group i. instruments outstanding.
This credit risk is managed as part of the customers overall exposure together with potential exposures from market movements.
Master netting agreements The Group further restricts its exposure to credit losses by entering into master netting arrangements with counterparties with whom it undertakes a significant volume of transactions.
Master netting arrangements do not generally result in an offset of balance sheet assets and liabilities as transactions are usually settled on a gross basis.
However credit risk associated with the favourable contracts is reduced by a master netting arrangement to the extent that if any counterparty failed to meet its obligations in accordance with the agreed terms all amounts with the counterparty are terminated and settled on a net basis.
Derivative financial instrument contracts are typically subject to the International Swaps and Derivatives Association ISDA master netting agreements as well as Credit Support Annexes CSA where relevant around collateral arrangements attached to those ISDA agreements.
Derivative exchange or clearing counterparty agreements exist where contracts are settled via an exchange or clearing house.
Credit assessment and mitigation for Retail and SME customers The Group uses a variety of lending criteria when assessing applications for Retail customers.
The approval process uses credit scorecards as well as manual underwriting and involves a review of an applicants previous credit history using information held by credit reference agencies.
The Group also assesses the affordability of the borrower under stressed scenarios including increased interest rates.
In addition the Group has in place quantitative thresholds such as maximum limits on the level of borrowing to income and the ratio of borrowing to collateral.
Some of these limits relate to internal approval levels and others are hard limits above which the Group will reject the application.
For residential mortgages the Groups policy is to accept only standard applications with a LTV less than 95%.
The Group has maximum percentage LTV limits which depend upon the loan size.
Product types such as BTL and residential interestonly mortgages are controlled by transactional limits covering both LTV and value.
For SME customers credit risk is managed in accordance with lending policies the Groups risk appetite and the RMF.
Lending policies and performance against risk appetite are reviewed regularly.
Credit risk is further mitigated by focusing on business sectors where the Group has specific expertise and through limiting exposures on higher value loans and to certain sectors.
When making credit decisions for SME customers the Group will routinely assess the primary source of repayment most typically the cash generated by the customer through its normal trading cycle.
Secondary sources of repayment are also considered and while not the focus of the lending decision collateral will be taken when appropriate.
The Group seeks to obtain security cover and where relevant personal guarantees from borrowers.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 142 Risk report Credit risk
Credit policies and procedures which are subject to ongoing review are documented and disseminated in a form that supports the credit operations of the Group.
Credit Risk Committee CRC The CRC ensures that the credit RMF and associated policies remain effective.
The Committee has oversight of the quality composition and concentrations of the credit risk portfolio and considers strategies to adjust the portfolio to react to changes in market conditions.
RAS measures Measures are monitored monthly and reviewed biannually at a minimum to ensure that the measures accurately reflect the Groups risk appetite strategy and concerns relative to the wider macro environment.
All measures are subject to extensive engagement with the Executive Leadership Team and the Board and are subject to endorsement from executive governance committees prior to Board approval.
Regulatory engagement is also scheduled as appropriate.
Risk concentration Concentration of risk is managed by clientcounterparty product geographical region and industry sector.
In addition single name exposure limits exist to control exposures to a single entitycounterparty.
Concentrations are also considered through the RAS process focusing particularly on comparing the portfolio against market benchmarks.
Single large exposure excesses All excesses are reported to the Transactional Credit Committee TCC and relevant Head of Risk.
Any exposure which continues or is expected to continue beyond 30 days will also be submitted to the TCC with proposals to correct the exposure within an agreed period not to exceed 12 months.
Concentrations
Loans and advances to customers audited Overdrafts 1524 1536 Credit cards 396 400 Lease finance 594 515 Mortgages 23480 21836 Other term lending  SME 4762 4393 Other term lending  Retail 709 690 Trade finance 23 26 Gross loans and advances to customers 31488 29396 Accrued interest receivable 75 76 Unearned income 28 26 Deferred and unamortised fee income 32 29 Impairment provisions on credit exposures note 3.6 210 215 31293 29202 The Group also has a portfolio of fair valued business loans and advances of 477m 2016 750m note 3.3.
Combined with the above this is equivalent to total loans and advances of 31770m 2016 29952m.
Retail secured credit by loan size concentration audited 2017 2016 m % m % 099k 4207 17.9% 4456 20.4% 100k249k 6962 29.7% 6807 31.2% 250k499k 7004 29.8% 6153 28.2% 500k999k 4259 18.1% 3572 16.3% 1m2.49m 1006 4.3% 806 3.7% 2.5m 42 0.2% 42 0.2% Total 23480 100% 21836 100% CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 143 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Retail secured credit average LTVs by loan size unaudited 2017 2016 Residential BTL Total Residential BTL Total 099k 46.6% 52.9% 47.7% 47.5% 51.7% 48.2% 100k249k 59.1% 58.6% 58.9% 58.2% 56.4% 57.6% 250k499k 60.6% 60.7% 60.6% 57.7% 60.4% 58.9% 500k999k 60.0% 58.2% 59.4% 56.1% 59.9% 57.5% 1m2.49m 61.1% 48.7% 59.3% 54.6% 49.0% 53.7% 2.5m 58.1% 44.7% 57.1% 50.0% 44.2% 49.6% Total 56.9% 58.6% 57.5% 54.7% 57.8% 55.8% 1 LTV of the mortgage portfolio is defined as mortgage portfolio weighted by balance and indexed using the MIAC Acadametrics indices at a given date.
Prior period comparatives have been restated on the new basis of indexation the previous basis adopted the Halifax House Price Index.
Industry concentration of assets The following tables show the levels of industry concentration of credit risk as at 30 September Gross loans and advances to customers including loans designated at fair value through profit or loss audited Government and public authorities 32 36 Agriculture forestry fishing and mining 1454 1458 Financial investment and insurance 650 698 Property  construction 279 262 Manufacturing 574 577 Instalment loans to individuals and other personal lending including credit cards 1274 1344 Property  mortgage 23480 21836 Asset and lease financing 594 515 Other commercial and industrial 3630 3421 31967 30147 Contingent liabilities and creditrelated commitments audited Government and public authorities 426 422 Agriculture forestry fishing and mining 375 382 Financial investment and insurance 165 125 Property  construction 154 156 Manufacturing 588 658 Instalment loans to individuals and other personal lending including credit cards 1945 1931 Property  mortgage 2305 1780 Asset and lease financing 125 98 Other commercial and industrial 2436 2261 8519 7813 1 Includes balances due from customers on acceptances and excludes accrued interest.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 144 Risk report Credit risk Mitigation and management of credit risk Credit quality of loans and advances For SME lending the Group has an internally developed credit rating system as defined under the Groups credit risk management policy which uses data drawn from a number of sources to assess the potential risk in lending to the Groups customers.
This system assigns an indication of the PD for each customer and can be broadly mapped to external agencies rating scales.
Impaired assets consist of SME lending and secured Retail lending where current circumstances indicate that losses of loan principal andor interest may be incurred.
Description eCRS
Senior investment grade 1 to 5 0  0.11 Investment grade 6 to 11 0.11  0.55 Subinvestment grade 12 to 23 0.55  99.99 1 eCRS  electronic Customer Rating System.
The credit quality of the portfolio of loans and advances that were neither past due nor impaired can be assessed by reference to the Groups standard credit rating system.
The credit rating system is supported by a variety of financial analytics combined with processed market information to provide the main inputs for the measurement of counterparty risk.
All internal risk ratings are tailored to the various categories and are derived in accordance with the Groups ratings policy.
The table below represents the credit quality of SME loans and advances that are neither past due nor impaired
Senior investment grade 946 1077 Investment grade 1807 1557 Subinvestment grade 3873 3533 6626 6167 Credit quality of loans held at fair value through profit and loss that are neither past due nor impaired
Senior investment grade 3 6 Investment grade 231 259 Subinvestment grade 23telFor Retail lending the Group has developed specific credit rating systems for both origination of new lending and for ongoing customer and account management purposes.
These systems assign risk estimates to all Retail lending and enable active management of customer exposures and portfolios.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 145 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Collateral held as security and other credit enhancements The Group evaluates each customers creditworthiness on a casebycase basis.
The amount of collateral obtained if deemed necessary by the Group upon extension of credit is based on managements credit evaluation of the counterparty.
Collateral held can vary but may include specific charges over defined assets of the counterparty a floating charge over all assets and undertakings of an entity including uncalled capital and called but unpaid capital specific or interlocking guarantees and loan agreements which include affirmative and negative covenants and in some instances guarantees of counterparty obligations.
Generally the Group does not take possession of collateral it holds as security or call on other credit enhancements that would result in recognition of an asset on its balance sheet.
It is the Groups policy to dispose of repossessed properties with the proceeds used to reduce or repay the outstanding balance.
In general the Group does not occupy repossessed properties for its own business use.
The LTV ratio of Retail mortgage lending coupled with the relationship of the debt to customers income is key to the credit quality of these loans.
The table below sets out the indexed LTV analysis of the Groups Retail mortgage stock.
LTV audited % % Less than 50% 33 34 50% to 75% 49 50 76% to 80% 7 6 81% to 85% 4 4 86% to 90% 4 2 91% to 95% 1 1 96% to 100% Greater than 100% Unknown 1 LTV of the mortgage portfolio is defined as mortgage portfolio weighted by balance and indexed using the MIAC Acadametrics indices at a given date.
Unknown represents loans where data is not currently available due to front book data matching still to be completed and a de minimis amount due to weaknesses in historic data capture processes.
Prior period comparatives have been restated on the new basis of indexation previous basis adopted the Halifax House Price Index.
Residential mortgages Residential property is the Groups main source of collateral and means of mitigating loss in the event of the default credit risk inherent in its residential mortgage portfolios.
All lending activities are supported by an appropriate form of valuation using either professional or indexed subject to policy rules and confidence levels valuations.
Commercial property Commercial property is the Groups main source of collateral on SME lending and means of mitigating loss in the event of default.
Collateral for the majority of commercial loans comprises first legal charges over freehold or long leasehold property including formal Companies House registration where appropriate.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 146 Risk report Credit risk Nonproperty related collateral In addition to residential and commercial property based security the Group also takes other forms of collateral when lending.
This can involve obtaining security against the underlying loan through the use of cash collateral andor netting agreements both of which reduce the original exposure by the amount of collateral held subject to volatility and maturity adjustments where applicable.
The Group also operates a policy of obtaining security against the underlying loan via the use of guarantees which can be either limited or unlimited making the guarantor liable for only a portion or all of the debt.
The following table shows the total nonproperty collateral held by sector at 30 September in terms of cash guarantees these guarantors are predominantly other financial institutions who are considered to be of a high credit quality and netting.
The exposure amount shown below is the total gross exposure before any credit risk mitigation and credit conversion factors have been applied where applicable for arrangements which have some form of associated collateral held against it and is not the total exposure for each asset class as disclosed elsewhere in this section.
2017 audited
Guarantee
Netting
Total
Exposure
Central government or central banks 3264   3264 4629
Financial institutions 874   874 970 Past due items     4 Public sector entities Regional government or local authorities   59 59 59
Secured by mortgages on commercial real estate 3  31 34 74 Secured by mortgages on residential property 1  3 4 9 4169 25 135 4329 5849 2016 audited
Guarantee
Netting
Total
Exposure
Central government or central banks 721   721 1027
Financial institutions 504   504 600 Past due items     3 Public sector entities Regional government or local authorities   94 94 94
Secured by mortgages on commercial real estate 4  35 39 107 Secured by mortgages on residential property 2  3 5 12 1280 40 164 1484 1978 The increase in cash collateral held and corresponding exposure is due to increased repurchase repo and similar transactions outstanding at 30 September 2017 including TFS drawings reflected within Central Governments or Central Banks.
The increase in cash collateral held and corresponding exposure in financial institutions is due to an increase in the reimbursement receivable from NAB in relation to the conduct indemnity deed described further in note 3.14.
Corporates is the largest sector utilising other risk mitigation techniques with all three methods utilised dependent on credit quality.
The extent to which these will be used is dependent on the specific circumstances of the customer.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 147 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Forbearance is considered to take place when the Group grants concessions to assist customers who are experiencing or who are about to experience difficulties in meeting their financial commitments to the Group.
The Groups forbearance policies and definitions comply with the guidance established by the European Banking Authority for financial reporting.
Forbearance concessions include the granting of more favourable terms and conditions than those provided either at drawdown of the facility or which would not ordinarily be available to other customers with a similar risk profile.
Forbearance parameters are regularly reviewed and refined as necessary to ensure they are consistent with the latest industry guidance and prevailing practice as well as ensuring that they adequately capture and reflect the most recent customer behaviours and market conditions.
The Group makes every effort to treat customers fairly and aligns its forbearance practices to that principle.
While forbearance alone is not necessarily an indicator of impaired status it is a trigger for the review of the customers credit profile and forbearance is only granted when there is a realistic prospect of the customer repaying all facilities in full.
If there is any concern over future cash flows and the Group incurring a loss then forborne loans will also be classified as impaired in accordance with the Groups impairment policy.
Exposures classified as forborne and performing at the date forbearance measures are granted continue to be reported as subject to forbearance for a minimum period of two years from that date the probation period.
Exposures classified as forborne and which are nonperforming when customers were granted forbearance cannot exit nonperforming status for a minimum of 12 months from the date forbearance was granted and cannot exit forbearance status for a further two years from the date of returning to performing status three years in total.
The Group has identified a number of situations that in isolation are not considered to be forbearance facilities that have been temporarily extended pending review and where no concession has been granted for reasons relating to the actual or apparent financial stress of a customer a reduction in asset quality to a level where actual or apparent financial stress is not evident where changes are made to the terms of a borrowers interest structure or repayment arrangement on a commercial basis and late provision of financial information in the absence of other indicators of financial difficulty is not in all cases considered a non commercial breach of nonfinancial covenants.
For both Retail and SME where the Group has made a demand for repayment the customers facilities have been withdrawn or where a debt repayment process has been initiated the exposure is classified as forborne if the debt is subject to any of the mentioned forbearance concessions.
Retail forbearance The Group utilises various forbearance measures for retail customers specific to the individual customer and their circumstances.
Customers may potentially be subject to more than one forbearance strategy at any one time where this is considered to be the most appropriate course of action.
Debt management for mortgage customers in financial difficulty To support customers who are encountering financial difficulties cases are managed on an individual basis with the circumstances of each customer considered separately and the action taken judged as being affordable and sustainable for the customer.
Operationally
These include the application of an appropriate policy framework controls around the execution of policy regular review of the different treatments to confirm that they remain appropriate monitoring of customers performance including the level of payments received and management visibility of the nature and extent of assistance provided and the associated risk.
Help is provided through the Financial Care Team where tailored repayment programmes can be agreed.
Customers are actively supported and referred to free money advice agencies when they have multiple credit facilities including those at other lenders that require restructuring.
One component of the Groups approach is to contact customers showing signs of financial difficulty to discuss their circumstances and offer solutions to prevent their accounts falling into arrears.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 148 Risk report Credit risk The tables below summarise the level of forbearance in respect of the Groups mortgage portfolio at 30 September As at 30 September 2017 audited Total Retail loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Impairment allowance on Retail loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Number of loans Gross carrying amount m % of total portfolio
Coverage % Formal arrangements 1614 164 0.69 3.9 2.43 Temporary arrangements 1418 174 0.74 3.0 1.72 Interestonly conversion 202 30 0.13 0.2 0.56 Term extension 149 12 0.05 0.1 0.51 As at 30 September 2016 audited Total Retail loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Impairment allowance on Retail loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Number of loans Gross carrying amount m % of total portfolio
Coverage % Formal arrangements 1843 169 0.78 5.5 3.27 Temporary arrangements 1460 160 0.73 2.7 1.68 Interestonly conversion 154 22 0.10 0.1 0.26 Term extension 123 11 0.05 0.1 0.61 The Group also has a number of customers with interestonly mortgages past maturity not subject to forbearance.
The Group has formal processes embedded to proactively track and facilitate prematurity customer engagement to bring the cases to a formal conclusion which is generally aimed to be achieved within six months after the loan has reached maturity.
Complex cases can take longer than this to reach conclusion.
At 30 September 2017 the Group had 97 2016 102 customers with interestonly mortgages not subject to forbearance and which were post sixmonth maturity with a total value of 14m 2016 12m.
A further forbearance reserve of 4m 2016 4m is presently held within the overall collective provision.
The effect of this on the above tables would be to increase the impairment allowance noted above to 12.1m 2016 13.5m and to increase overall coverage to 3.05% 2016 3.52%.
When all other avenues of resolution including forbearance have been explored the Group will take steps to repossess and sell underlying collateral.
In the year to 30 September 2017 there were 50 repossessions of which 13 were voluntary 2016 78 including 27 voluntary.
Retail forbearance  unsecured consumer credit The Group currently exercises limited forbearance strategies in relation to other types of consumer credit including current accounts unsecured loans and credit cards.
The Group has assessed the total loan balances subject to forbearance on other types of consumer credit to be 11m at 30 September 2017 2016 14m representing 1.02% of the unsecured Retail portfolio 2016 1.33%.
Impairment provisions on forborne balances totalled 3.1m at 30 September 2017 2016 4.2m providing overall coverage of 27.18% 2016 29.02%.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 149 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information SME forbearance Forbearance is considered to exist for SME customers where one or more concessions are granted on a noncommercial basis.
The
Group reports SME forbearance at a customer level and at a value which incorporates all facilities and the related impairment allowance irrespective of whether each individual facility is subject to forbearance.
Authority to grant forbearance measures for SME customers is held by the Groups Strategic Business Services unit and is exercised where appropriate on the basis of detailed consideration of the customers financial position and prospects.
Where a customer is part of a larger group forbearance is exercised and reported across the Group at the individual entity level.
Where modification of the terms and conditions of an exposure meeting the criteria for classification as forbearance results in derecognition of loans and advances from the balance sheet and the recognition of a new exposure the new exposure shall be treated as forborne.
The tables below summarise the total number of arrangements in place and the loan balances and impairment provisions associated with those arrangements.
As at 30 September 2017 audited Total SME loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Impairment allowance on SME loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Number of loans Gross carrying amount m % of total portfolio
Coverage % Term extension 206 190 2.58 12.8 6.71 Deferral of contracted capital repayments 109 141 1.91 20.4 14.47 Reduction in contracted interest rate 3 1 0.02  3.37 Alternative forms of payment 5 28 0.37 8.1 29.40 Debt forgiveness 3 11 0.15 1.4 12.70 Refinancing 19 33 0.44 4.4 13.41 Covenant breachresetwaiver 50 155 2.11 8.1 5.24 As at 30 September 2016 audited Total SME loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Impairment allowance on SME loans and advances subject to forbearance measures Number of loans Gross carrying amount m % of total portfolio
Coverage % Term extension 350 320 4.43 25.3 7.90 Deferral of contracted capital repayments 118 143 1.99 18.2 12.69 Reduction in contracted interest rate 7 8 0.12 0.6 7.01 Alternative forms of payment 7 35 0.48 11.2 32.37 Debt forgiveness 8 26 0.36 2.4 9.16 Refinancing 22 51 0.70 4.9 9.76 Covenant breachresetwaiver 62 208 2.88 8.6 4.12 Included in other financial assets at fair value is a portfolio of loans that is included in the above table.
The value of fair value loans subject to forbearance at 30 September 2017 is 45m 2016 101m representing 0.61% of the total SME portfolio 2016 1.40%.
Impairment
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 150 Risk report Credit risk Credit quality of customer lending An assessment of the credit quality of loans and advances to customers is shown below Distribution of loans and advances to customers by credit quality audited As at 30 September 2017
Credit cards Other retail lending
Lease finance
Total
Gross loans and advances Neither past due nor impaired 51 384 635 23104 572 6054 30800 Past due but not impaired Impaired    49   23480 594 6309 31488 As at 30 September 2016
Credit cards Other retail lending
Lease finance
Total
Gross loans and advances Neither past due nor impaired 57 388 612 21485 502 5665 28709 Past due but not impaired Impaired     21836 515 5955 29396 1 SME lending includes business overdrafts.
Credit risk categorisation Description Neither past due nor impaired Loans that are not in arrears and where there is no objective evidence of impairment.
Past due but not impaired Loans that are in arrears but have not been individually assessed as impaired.
Impaired Loans which have been individually assessed for impairment as there is objective evidence of impairment including changes in customer circumstances.
Loans and advances which were past due but not impaired Loans and advances that are past due but not impaired are classified as such for secured lending where the net current market value of supporting security is sufficient to cover all principal interest and other amounts including legal enforcement realisation costs etc. on the facility.
Unsecured retail lending and credit cards are written off when they reach 180 DPD and are not designated as impaired in compliance with the EU Payment Accounts Directive.
The distribution of gross loans and advances that are past due but not impaired is analysed below 2017 audited
Credit cards
Mortgages
Lease finance
Total
1 to 29 DPD to 59 DPD  10 48 Past due 90 days and over   CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 151 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 2016 audited
Credit cards
Mortgages
Lease finance
Total
1 to 29 DPD to 59 DPD  2 3 65  27 97 Past due 90 days and over Movement in impairment provisions throughout the year 2017 audited
Credit cards
Mortgages
Lease finance
Total
Opening balance Charge for the year 2 6 9 2  33 48 Amounts written off 4 9 13 4  45 75 Recoveries of amounts written off in previous years 3 4 6   5 18
Closing balance Specific    13  43 56 Collective  2tel audited
Credit cards
Mortgages
Lease finance
Total
Opening balance Charge for the year 1 Amounts written off 4 9 14 2  39 68 Recoveries of amounts written off in previous years  1 18
Closing balance Specific    Collective 1 SME lending includes business overdrafts.
2 Other includes the recognition of certain impaired loans which were previously recorded at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss the unwind of net present value elements of specific provisions and other minor movements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 152 Risk report Credit risk Movement in gross impaired loan balances throughout the year unaudited Opening balance 214 238 New 72 96 Writeoff 49 41 Returned to performing 62 79 Closing balance 175 214 In addition to the gross impaired loans there were also 4m and 19m impaired fair value loans for September 2017 and September 2016 respectively.
Other credit risks The Group is exposed to credit risk on its other banking activities which are subject to mitigation and monitoring.
No provisions are currently held for these exposures.
The table below shows the maximum exposure to credit risk for the components of the balance sheet excluding loans and advances to customers and other financial assets at fair value.
The maximum exposure is shown gross before the effect of mitigation through use of master netting and collateral agreements.
The table also shows the maximum amount of commitments from its banking operations.
Maximum exposure to credit risk audited Cash and balances with central banks note 3.1 6937 5955 Due from other banks 1174 952 Financial assets available for sale note 3.2 2076 1731 Derivative financial assets note 3.4 282 585 10469 9223 Contingent liabilities note 5.1 111 123 Other credit commitments note 5.1 8408 7690 Maximum credit risk exposure 18988 17036 5.9bn of cash is held with the BoE.
Due from other banks is all with senior investment grade counterparties.
Available for sale financial assets and the credit rating of counterparties are discussed in note 3.2.
Offsetting of financial assets and liabilities The Group does not have any financial assets or financial liabilities that are offset with the net amount presented on the balance sheet.
This is because IAS 32 Financial Instruments  Presentation states that there should be both an enforceable right to set off and the intention either to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Neither of these conditions are met by the Group.
The table below illustrates the amounts for financial instruments that are covered by enforceable netting arrangements i. offsetting agreements and any related financial collateral.
The table excludes financial instruments not subject to offset and that are only subject to collateral arrangements e. loans and advances.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 153 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The net amounts presented in the table are not intended to represent the Groups exposure to credit risk as the Group will use a wide range of strategies to mitigate credit risk in addition to netting and collateral.
2017 audited Gross amounts Net amounts not offset on balance sheet
Net amounts presented on balance sheet
Cash collateral pledged received
Assets
Derivative financial instruments
Derivative financial instruments Securities sold under repurchase agreement 1864  1864 1864 2016 audited Gross amounts Net amounts not offset on balance sheet
Net amounts presented on balance sheet
Cash collateral pledged received
Assets
Derivative financial instruments
Derivative financial instruments Securities sold under repurchase agreement 1226  1226 1226 1 Collateral amounts cash and noncash financial collateral are reflected at their fair value however this amount is limited to the net balance sheet exposure in order to exclude any over collateralisation.
2 Derivative financial instruments comprise both trading and hedging derivative assets and liabilities.
Derivative financial instrument contracts are typically subject to ISDA master netting agreements as well as CSAs where relevant around collateral arrangements attached to those ISDA agreements or derivative exchange or clearing counterparty agreements if contracts are settled via an exchange or clearing house.
The amounts included in the Financial instruments column refer to amounts that are subject to relevant close out netting arrangements under a relevant ISDA agreement.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 154 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Strong foundations supporting resilience and growth A robust balance sheet position underpinned by the alignment of risk appetite to strategy and a proactive approach to addressing the impact of changing regulatory obligations.
Balance sheet risks in the financial services industry are highly regulated with ongoing changes in the regulatory environment expected to influence the risks and their management.
The key risks include capital liquidity and funding risks market risk which in the case of the Group is nontraded market risk incorporating interest rate and foreign exchange risks pension risk and non traded equity risk.
Risk appetite The primary objective for the management of balance sheet risks is to maintain the risk profile within approved risk limits to maintain the confidence of the Groups customers and other stakeholders.
Balance sheet risks are also managed to protect current and future earnings from the impact of market volatility.
The Group applies a prudent approach to balance sheet risks in order to safeguard the ongoing strength and resilience of the balance sheet.
Risk appetite is approved for balance sheet risks by the Board with authority delegated to ALCO for subsequent implementation and monitoring.
The Board has established a range of measures of risk appetite for capital including CET1 leverage and minimum holdings of capital.
Measures for funding and liquidity risks consider the structure of the balance sheet and include among others measures relating to the proportion of customer funding the Groups overall funding profile and an overall liquidity adequacy rule OLAR.
The OLAR covers the Boards appetite in relation to regulatory liquidity requirements and also covers the need to maintain access to liquidity resources sufficient to accommodate outflows of funds in a range of stress scenarios over a three month period.
The Groups participation in wholesale markets along with its use of financial instruments is to fund its banking activities and to manage the liquidity and interest rate risks arising from these activities.
The Group establishes an appetite for these risks based on an overriding principle that the Group will not engage in proprietary risk taking.
Capital
Capital is held by the Group to protect its depositors to cover inherent risks in a normal and stressed operating environment and to support the Groups strategy of sustainable growth.
Capital risk is the risk that the Group has insufficient quantity or quality of capital to support its operations.
Mitigation measures The Groups Capital Risk Policy Standard provides the framework for the manner in which capital is managed within the Group.
The objectives of the policy standard are to manage efficiently the capital base to optimise shareholder returns while maintaining robust capital adequacy meeting regulators requirements managing the ratings agencies assessment of the Group and ensuring that excessive leverage is not taken.
A shortfall in capital resources would occur when the Group exceeds its risk appetite and is at risk of not having sufficient capital to support future growth objectives.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 155 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
The Group manages capital in accordance with prudential rules issued by the PRA and FCA which implemented CRD IV legislation with effect from 1 January 2014.
The Groups approach to Pillar 1 is to use the standardised approaches to calculating RWAs.
The standardised approaches are inherently conservative and the Group is developing the capability to utilise IRB methods for the calculation of credit risk capital.
A waiver to utilise IRB models was submitted to the PRA during 2017.
A rigorous approach is taken to assess risks that are not adequately covered by Pillar 1 including interest rate risk and pension risk.
The
Group also undertakes a range of stress scenarios in order to test the impact on capital arising from severe yet plausible scenarios.
These approaches to capital are thoroughly documented in the Groups ICAAP and this is subject to review challenge and approval by the Board.
Capital buffers The regulatory capital buffer framework is intended to ensure firms maintain a sufficient amount of capital above their regulatory minimum in order to withstand periods of stress.
The UK is implementing the provisions on capital buffers outlined in the CRD to create combined capital buffers including a Capital Conservation Buffer CCB a Countercyclical Capital Buffer CCyB a Global Systemically Important Institution Buffer and a Systemic Risk Buffer SRB.
In the UK the CCB has been introduced with transitional provisions from 2016 0.625% to 2019 2.5%.
The CCyB has been effective from 1 May 2014 and is dependent upon the BoE view of credit conditions in the economy.
On 27 June 2017 the BoE Financial Policy Committee FPC increased the UK CCyB rate to 0.5% from 0% to take effect from 27 June 2018.
Absent a change in the outlook and consistent with its stated policy for a standard risk environment and of moving gradually the FPC expects to increase the rate to 1% at its November 2017 meeting which will take effect in November 2018.
The Groups capital planning considers the impact of all relevant capital buffers.
The PRAs final rules on the approach to identifying other systemically important institutions OSII were published in February 2016.
In line with expectations the Groups principal subsidiary Clydesdale Bank PLC was not designated an OSII.
Similarly the FPC issued its final framework for setting the SRB in May 2016.
This confirmed that banks with total assets of less than 175bn which includes the Group will be subject to a 0% SRB.
Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities MREL In November 2016 the BoE provided additional information on how MREL will be applied to firms that are subject to the use of resolution tools that the BoE would employ in the event of a firm entering resolution.
From 1 January 2022 those firms which include the Group will be required to hold both their goingconcern requirements together with additional MREL of an amount equal to those going concern requirements.
The timetable for meeting MREL has been extended to 2022 and the BoE will review calibration and transition by the end of 2020 before setting endstate MREL.
Interim MREL has been established for the transitional period.
Monitoring
The capital plan is approved by the Board on an annual basis.
The Groups ALCO monitors the capital plan and forecast positions on a monthly basis.
This ensures that performance trends are appropriately reviewed and that there is transparency on the impact on capital ratios risk appetite and the future outlook.
Recent developments Information on banking reform ringfencing and resolution all of which may impact the Groups capital and funding structures are provided in the regulatory and political environment update on page 17.
CET1
12.4% 2016 12.6%
115% 2016 112%
164% 2016 140% CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 156 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Capital position The Groups capital position as at 30 September is summarised below Regulatory capital unaudited CET1 capital Capital instruments 88 88 Retained earnings and other reserves 2854 2673 Regulatory adjustments and deductions Defined benefit pension fund assets Prudent valuation adjustment Intangible assets Deferred tax asset relying on future profitability Cash flow hedge reserve 1 66 2437 2397 Tier 1 capital Additional Tier 1 AT1 capital instruments 450 450 Total Tier 1 capital 2887 2847 Tier 2 capital Subordinated debt 473 474 Credit risk adjustments 154 151 Total Tier 2 capital 627 625 Total capital 3514 3472 1 This table shows the capital position on a CRD IV fully loaded basis.
2 The defined benefit pension fund asset net of deferred tax liabilities does not qualify as capital for regulatory purposes.
3 A prudent valuation adjustment is applied in respect of fairvalued instruments as required under regulatory capital rules.
4 Intangible assets shall be deducted from capital for regulatory purposes.
5 Under CRD IV deferred tax assets that rely on future profitability are deducted from CET1 capital.
Reconciliation of statutory total equity to regulatory capital unaudited Statutory total equity 3402 3211 Deductions from capital 478 263 Deferred tax asset relying on future profitability 28 35 Cash flow hedge reserve 1 66 Foreseeable AT1 dividends and charges 10 Regulatory Tier 1 capital 2887 2847 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 157 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Regulatory capital flow of funds unaudited CRD IV CRD IV CET1 capital CET1 capital at 1 October 2397 2405 Share for share exchange and nominal reduction  135 Share premium  670 Retained earnings and other reserves including structured entities 181 576 Prudent valuation adjustment 3 2 Intangible assets 83 9 Deferred tax asset relying on future profitability 7 238 Defined benefit pension fund assets 135 42 Cash flow hedge reserve 67 66 CET1 capital at 30 September 2437 2397 Tier 1 capital Tier 1 capital at 1 October 450 450 Capital instruments repurchased Perpetual Capital Notes  450 Capital instruments issued Perpetual Subordinated Contingent Convertible Notes  450 Tier 1 capital at 30 September 450 450 Total Tier 1 capital 2887 2847 Tier 2 capital Tier 2 capital at 1 October 625 598 Credit risk adjustments 3 13 Other movements 1 Capital instruments repurchased subordinated debt  475 Capital instruments issued subordinated debt  474 Removal of minority interest deduction on subordinated debt  15 Tier 2 capital at 30 September 627 625 Total capital 3514 3472 Minimum Pillar 1 capital requirements unaudited Credit risk 1420 1352 Operational risk 130 130 Counterparty risk 11 17 Credit valuation adjustment 13 23 Tier 1 regulatory capital requirements 1574 1522 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 158 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks RWA movements RWA flow statement unaudited RWAs at 1 October 19029 18227 Book size growth 529 619 Book quality improvementdeterioration Methodology and policy RWAs at 30 September 19678 19029 1 The improvement in book quality is primarily due to the continued diversification in the Liquid Asset Buffer where we are investing in a number of high quality liquid assets from AAA rated issuance programmes.
2 The definition of default was enhanced to capture a broader interpretation of the regulatory requirements as part of the Groups programme of activity to prepare for IRB accreditation which led to an increase in RWAs.
This change does not reflect any movement in the underlying risk profile of the portfolio and is only a reporting and Probability of Default model build enhancement.
Pillar 1 RWAs and capital requirements by business line unaudited Capital requirements for calculating RWAs At 30 September 2017 At 30 September 2016
RWA
Exposure
Capital required
Exposure restated Central governments or central banks 12947   8139 Regional governments or local authorities Public sector entities  5 155  5 13 Multilateral development banks   205   195 Financial institutions 13 163 1453 19 234 1344
273 3418 3791 273 3419 3732 Retail 72 905 1207 72 897 1196 Secured by mortgages on immovable property 961 12001 28203 897 11242 26482 Exposures in default Collective investments undertakings  1 1  3 3 Equity exposures Items associated with particularly high risk Covered bonds Other items Total credit risk 1420 17752 49692 1352 16906 42473 Operational risk 130 1621 130 1623 Counterparty risk Credit valuation adjustment 574 19678 1522 19029 The Exposure amounts disclosed above are post credit conversion factors and pre credit mitigation.
1 FY2016 comparatives have been restated for the following with no impact to total RWA or capital requirement 1.1bn of BoE backing assets reallocated from Other items to Central government or central banks asset class and 114m exposure reallocated from Corporates to Other items asset class.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 159 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Capital position and CET1 unaudited
Retail mortgages 8646 7998 Business lending 7359 7087 Other retail lending 932 915 Other lending 148 152
Credit risk 17752 16906 Credit valuation adjustment 167 286 Operational risk 1621 1623 Counterparty risk 138 214 Total RWAs 19678 19029 Capital ratios CET1 ratio 12.4% 12.6% Tier 1 ratio 14.7% 15.0% Total capital ratio 17.9% 18.2% 1 RWAs are calculated under the standardised approach.
2 The items included in the Other exposure class that attract a capital charge include items in the course of collection cash in hand fixed assets and deferred tax assets that are not deducted.
3 CET1 capital is comprised of shares issued and related share premium retained earnings and other reserves less specified regulatory adjustments.
While RWAs increased by 649m driven by growth in mortgages underlying capital generation post AT1 distribution of 13bps before the net impact of pension movements and belowtheline charges such as the Groups proportion of conduct provision charges and exceptional restructuring charges ensured the CET1 ratio remained robust at 12.4%.
As announced in the Strategic report the Board has recommended a 1p per share dividend.
The dividend would equate to approximately 9m of CET1 equivalent to 4bps of CET1 based on RWAs as at 30 September 2017.
Leverage ratio unaudited Total Tier 1 capital for the leverage ratio Total CET1 capital 2437 2397 AT1 capital 450 450 Total Tier 1 2887 2847 Exposures for the leverage ratio Total assets as per published financial statements 43231 39929 Adjustment for offbalance sheet items 2019 1982 Adjustment for derivative financial instruments 228 399 Adjustment for securities financing transactions SFTs 1461 601 Other adjustments 505 364 Leverage ratio exposure 45978 41749 Leverage ratio 6.3% 6.8% Modified leverage ratio 7.4% 8.0% 1 The Groups leverage ratio on a modified basis excluding qualifying central bank claims from the exposure measure in accordance with the policy statement issued by the PRA in October 2017.
The Group is currently excluded from the full reporting requirements of the UK leverage ratio framework.
The leverage ratio is monitored against a Board set RAS with the responsibility for managing the ratio delegated to ALCO which monitors it on a monthly basis.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 160 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks The leverage ratio is the ratio of Tier 1 capital to total exposure defined as capital Tier 1 capital defined according to CRD IV on an end point basis assuming the full impact of CRD IV requirements on Tier 1 capital were in force with no transitional provisions and exposures total on and offbalance sheet exposures subject to credit conversion factors as defined in the delegated act amending CRR article 429 Calculation of the Leverage Ratio which includes deductions applied to Tier 1 capital.
Other regulatory adjustments consist of adjustments that are required under CRD IV to be deducted from Tier 1 capital.
The removal of these from the exposure measure ensures consistency is maintained between the capital and exposure components of the ratio.
The Groups leverage ratio is 6.3% which exceeds the Basel Committees proposed minimum of 3% applicable from 2018.
The UK leverage ratio framework which came in to force on 1 January 2016 is relevant to PRA regulated banks and building societies with consolidated retail deposits equal to or greater than 50bn.
The Group is currently excluded from these requirements.
On
3 October 2017 the PRA published a policy statement  UK Leverage Ratio treatment of claims on central banks.
The PRA Rulebook has been amended to align with its July 2016 modification by consent to exclude central bank claims matched by deposits in the same currency and of identical or longer maturity from the definition of the total leverage exposure measure in the UK leverage ratio framework increase the minimum leverage ratio requirement from 3% to 3.25% of total exposures and align the UK leverage ratio reporting and disclosure requirements to the proposed definition of the total exposure measure and 3.25% minimum leverage ratio requirement.
If these modifications are applied to the Group this results in an increase in the leverage ratio from 6.3% under CRD IV to 7.4% on the PRA modified basis as a result of the Groups significant exposures to central banks within its liquid asset portfolio and Note cover.
Funding and liquidity risk Funding risk relates to the impact on the Groups strategy of being unable to raise funds from customers and the wholesale markets of sufficient quantity and of appropriate mix and tenor.
An inability to raise sufficient funds may lead to a reduction in lending growth or a requirement to raise the price paid for deposits both outcomes having an adverse effect on shareholder value.
Where funding risk manifests itself in an adverse effect on mix and tenor for example a high proportion of shortterm wholesale deposits there is an increased liquidity risk to the Group.
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group is unable to meet its current and future financial obligations as they fall due at acceptable cost.
These obligations include the repayment of deposits on demand or at their contractual maturity dates the repayment of borrowings and loan capital as they mature the payment of operating expenses and tax the payment of dividends and the ability to fund new and existing loan commitments.
Risk assessment The framework for the Groups approach to funding risk leads to the development of a Group funding plan that is subject to approval by the Board and is consistent with risk appetite and the Groups strategic objectives.
The development of the Groups funding plan is informed by the requirements of the Groups Balance Sheet Risk Policy Standards.
Liquidity risk exposures are subject to assessment under both regulatory and internal requirements.
Exposures relate to the outflow of funds under a series of stress scenarios less the impact of inflows from assets liquidation of highquality liquid assets or through other actions instigated by the Group.
Liquidity within the Group is managed in accordance with the ILAAP that is approved by the Board.
The
ILAAP documents the manner in which the Group meets its OLAR which covers all regulatory and internal liquidity requirements.
In addition the Group has a policy standard which details among other items the control standards and risk measurement requirements for liquidity authorities and responsibilities.
Oversight of liquidity risk is undertaken by ALCO.
To meet the requirements of regulatory authorities the liquidity of the Group is managed on a daily basis using a combination of cumulative cash flow mismatch scenario analysis and stress tests to ensure that normal daily cash requirements are met and to ensure adequate sources of liquidity are available to support unforeseen cash outflows.
ALCO delegates daily management responsibilities to the Treasury function within agreed tolerances.
All balance sheet risks are subject to independent oversight from the second line balance sheet and liquidity risk oversight function.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 161 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Stress testing of the Groups liquidity risk is undertaken on a frequent basis and results are provided to ALCO and the Board.
The ILAAP is used to establish key risk drivers and assumptions for liquidity risk and these provide the framework for ongoing stress testing.
Stress testing considers the impact of severe yet plausible scenarios to consider the potential impact on the Groups funding and liquidity profile.
The Group holds a portfolio of highquality assets that acts as a buffer against the impact of liquidity risk.
Funding plans take a longterm view and these consider the impact of prolonged periods of market disruption in order to identify potential vulnerabilities in the profile of the Groups funding.
A Contingency Funding Plan has been established for management of an escalated liquidity requirement if the Group experiences either restricted access to wholesale funding or a large increase in the withdrawal of funds.
The plan identifies triggers for escalation details the action required allocates the key tasks to individuals provides a time frame and defines a management committee to manage the action plan.
The Group has a number of different sources of funding which are considered to be well diversified in terms of the type of instrument and product counterparty term structure and market.
The Group can source funding through a range of channels including the following customer deposits access to shortterm money market funding term structured funding through Lanark residential mortgage securitisation programme owner occupied Lannraig BTL mortgage securitisation programme regulated covered bond RCB programme senior unsecured funding and access to facilities within the BoE Sterling Monetary Framework and the TFS the TFS closes to new drawings in February 2018.
The Groups securitisation and covered bond programmes offer investors the opportunity to purchase mortgagebacked debt.
These sources are focused on a range of different investors and depositors with a range of maturities.
Funding is typically raised in GBP USD and EUR and is swapped back to GBP to fund the predominantly GBP balance sheet.
Monitoring
The Treasury function is responsible for the development and execution of strategy subject to oversight from the risk management function.
In relation to funding and liquidity risk the primary management committee is ALCO.
ALCO meets monthly and reports to the Executive Risk Committee.
The Group continues to have a strong funding and liquidity position and seeks to achieve an appropriate balance between profitability and liquidity risk.
Funding is predominantly provided by Retail and SME customers and this is supported by mediumterm secured funding issuance from the Groups Lanark and Lannraig securitisation programmes and its RCB platform and TFS.
These funding programmes are a source of strength for the Group and leverage the Groups highquality mortgage book as a source of collateral for secured funding.
The Group monitors liquidity and funding with reference to a number of measures including LCR LDR and NSFR see financial results section.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 162 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Sources of funding audited The table below provides an overview of the Groups sources of funding as at 30 September.
Total assets 43231 39929 Less other liabilities 3509 3818 Funding requirement 39722 36111 Funded by Due to customers 27718 27090 Due to other banks 3817 1309 of which Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 1864 1226 Term Funding Scheme 1901 Other 52 83 Debt securities in issue 4785 4501 Equity 3402 3211 Total funding 39722 36111 The Groups funding objectives are to prudently manage the sources and tenor of funds in order to provide a sound base from which to support sustainable customer growth.
At 30 September 2017 the Group had a funding requirement of 39722m 2016 36111m with the primary funding requirement being to support loans and advances to customers.
Due to customers The majority of the Groups funding requirement was met by customer deposits of 27718m 2016 27090m.
Customer deposits are comprised of noninterest bearing demand deposits interest bearing deposits and term deposits from a range of sources including Retail SME and other corporate customers.
The increase of 628m in 2017 was predominantly due to growth in noninterest bearing deposits 388m and term deposits 503m offset by a managed reduction in higher rate interest bearing deposits 198m.
Due to other banks and debt securities in issue wholesale funding Due to other banks of 3817m 2016 1309m was primarily comprised of 1864m of securities sold under agreement to repurchase and 1901m of drawings under the TFS.
Debt securities in issue of 4785m 2016 4501m was primarily comprised of 2834m of residential mortgagebacked securities issued through the Groups Lanark programme 327m of securities issued through the Groups BTL securitisation programme Lannraig 700m of regulated covered bonds 300m of senior debt and 475m of subordinated debt.
Equity
Equity of 3402m 2016 3211m was also used to meet the Groups funding requirement.
Equity is comprised of ordinary share capital retained earnings other equity investments and a number of other reserves.
For full details on equity refer to section 4 of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements.
External credit ratings The Groups credit ratings have remained unchanged over the past year.
SandP assigns a longterm credit rating of BBB to the Group two notches below that of Clydesdale Bank PLC reflecting their nonoperating holding company methodology.
Fitch assigns an issuer default rating of BBB in line with that of Clydesdale Bank PLC again reflecting their holding company methodology.
Fitch announced the outcome of their annual review of Clydesdale Bank PLC and CYBG PLC ratings on 7 September 2017.
All current ratings were affirmed with a stable outlook.
On 15 September 2017 Moodys placed the longterm ratings of Clydesdale Bank PLC on review for upgrade.
The review will focus on progress in the execution of the Groups strategic plan as well as the extent to which enhancements in management risk and control frameworks and processes have been embedded.
On 15 November 2017 SandP moved the outlook on Clydesdale Bank PLC and CYBG PLC back to stable from negative as a result of an update to an industrywide exercise following the EU referendum.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 163 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Groups longterm credit ratings are summarised below Outlook as at 20 Nov 2017 30 Sep 2017 30 Sep 2016 CYBG PLC Fitch Stable BBB BBB Standard and Poors Stable BBB BBB Clydesdale Bank PLC Fitch Stable BBB BBB Standard and Poors Stable BBB BBB
Review for upgrade Baa2 Baa2 1 For detailed background on the latest credit opinions by SandP and Fitch please refer to the respective rating agency websites.
2 Longterm deposit rating.
Additional collateral to be provided in the event of a notch downgrade The Group monitors the movements in its credit ratings and the related requirement to post collateral for payment systems and clearing houses.
These figures are not considered material compared to the volume of unencumbered liquid assets.
Liquid assets The quantity and quality of the Groups liquid assets are calibrated to the Boards view of liquidity risk appetite and remain at a prudent level above regulatory requirements.
The Group was compliant with all internal and regulatory liquidity metrics at 30 September 2017.
The liquid asset portfolio provides a buffer against sudden and potentially sharp outflows of funds and liquid assets must therefore be of a high quality so they can be realised for cash and cannot be encumbered for any other purpose e. systems.
Details on encumbered assets are provided in the following section.
The liquid asset portfolio is primarily comprised of cash at the BoE UK Government Securities Gilts and listed securities e. issued by supranationals and AAA rated covered bonds.
Liquid asset portfolio Cash and balances with central banks 4367 3702 UK government treasury bills and gilts 1129 1187 Other debt securities 829 399 Total 6325 5288 The liquid asset portfolio has seen some diversification over 2017 with an increase in Other Debt securities.
Before investing in any security an assessment is completed for both the credit quality and the treatment for liquidity purposes.
ALCO oversees the composition of the liquid asset portfolio.
Further information can be found in sections 3.1 and 3.2 of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3.1 Cash and balances with central banks of 6937m include 2570m of assets that are encumbered to support issuance of Scottish bank notes and to support payments systems and 44m of mandatory central bank deposits section 3.2 Listed securities of 2066m comprises 1221m of UK Government Treasury Bills and Gilts of which 92m is encumbered to support payments systems and 845m of Other debt securities listed securities of which 16m is encumbered to support payment systems.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 164 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Encumbered assets by asset category Examples of reasons for asset encumbrance include among others supporting the Groups secured funding programmes to provide stable term funding to the Group use of assets as collateral for payments systems in order to support customers transactional activity and providing security for the Groups issuance of Scottish bank notes.
The Group monitors the level of asset encumbrance to ensure an appropriate balance is maintained.
Encumbered assets by asset category audited September 2017 Assets encumbered with noncentral bank counterparties Positioned at the central bank including encumbered Other assets
Assets not positioned at the central bank
Readily available for encumbrance Other assets capable of being encumbered Cannot be encumbered
Securi tisations
Total
Cash and balances with central banks     2850 4087   6937 6937 Due from other banks 4tel  432  432 1174
Other financial assets       477  477 477 Derivatives        282 282 282 Loans and advances to customers 1347 5841  7188 6294 5940 8906 2965 24105 31293 Intangible assets        339 339 339 Deferred tax assets        154 154 154 Other assets       10telTotal assets 1393 6199 338 7930 9239 11998 9915 4149 35301 43231 September 2016 Assets encumbered with noncentral bank counterparties Positioned at the central bank including encumbered Other assets
Assets not positioned at the central bank
Readily available for encumbrance Other assets capable of being encumbered Cannot be encumbered
Securi tisations
Total
Cash and balances with central banks     2468 3487   5955 5955 Due from other banks 15tel  177  177 952
Other financial assets       750  750 750 Derivatives        585 585 585 Loans and advances to customers 1149 5144  6293 2902 3946 13003 3058 22909 29202 Intangible assets        256 256 256 Deferred tax assets        183 183 183 Other assets       12telTotal assets 1305 5426 337 7068 5471 9027 14088 4275 32861 39929 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 165 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Assets and liabilities by maturity The following tables represent a breakdown of the Groups balance sheet according to the assets and liabilities contractual maturity.
Many of the longerterm monetary assets are variable rate products with behavioural maturities shorter than the contractual terms.
Accordingly this information is not relied upon by the Group in its management of interest rate risk.
The Group has disclosed certain term facilities within loans and advances to customers with a revolving element at the maturity of the facility as this best reflects their contractual maturity.
2017 audited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years No specified maturity
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 5430     1507 6937 Due from other banks 701 473     1174 Financial assets available for sale  3 256 1334 473 10 2076 Other financial assets at fair value   477 Derivative financial instruments   282 Loans and advances to customers 1783 292 764 5048 23010 396 31293 Due from customers on acceptances  4     4 All other assets  203 49   736 988 Total assets 7914 998 1157 6723 23790 2649 43231
Due to other banks 45 1172 700 1900   3817 Other financial liabilities at fair value    26   26 Derivative financial instruments   376 Due to customers 22185 917 2220 2396   27718 Liabilities on acceptances  4     4 Debt securities in issue  620 503 2613 1049  4785 All other liabilities 2197 174    732 3103 Total liabilities 24427 2908 3454 7067 1241 732 39829 Offbalance sheet items Contingent liabilities  Other credit commitments 8408      8408 Total offbalance sheet items 8519 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 166 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks 2016 audited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years No specified maturity
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 4642     1313 5955 Due from related entities Due from other banks 869 83     952 Financial assets available for sale  7 20 1019 649 36 1731 Other financial assets at fair value   750 Derivative financial instruments   585 Loans and advances to customers 2021 285 648 4271 21577 400 29202 Due from customers on acceptances  4     4 All other assets 111 36 40   563 750 Total assets 7645 495 868 5806 22803 2312 39929
Due to other banks 8tel  1309 Other financial liabilities at fair value  2 11 35   48 Derivative financial instruments   598 Due to customers 21168 1802 1933 2187   27090 Liabilities on acceptances  4     4 Due to related entities Debt securities in issue  18 214 3472 797  4501 All other liabilities 1960 77 132   999 3168 Total liabilities 23211 2367 2674 6317 1150 999 36718 Offbalance sheet items Contingent liabilities   123 Other credit commitments 7690      7690 Total offbalance sheet items 7  7813 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 167 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Cash flows payable under financial liabilities by contractual maturity 2017 audited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years No specified maturity
Due to other banks 44 1173 708 1912   3837 Other financial liabilities at fair value   1 27   28 Trading derivative financial instruments   169 Due to customers 22185 918 2220 2397   27720 Liabilities on acceptances  4     4 Debt securities in issue 32 624 554 2841 1195  5246 All other financial liabilities 2197 174    732 3103 Hedging derivative liabilities Contractual amounts payable   464 Total liabilities 24458 2925 3558 7481 1417 732 40571 2016 audited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years No specified maturity
Due to other banks 8tel  1324 Other financial liabilities at fair value  2 12 40   54 Trading derivative financial instruments   346 Due to customers 21169 1943 1954 2217   27283 Liabilities on acceptances  4     4 Debt securities in issue  23 285 3712 991  5011 All other financial liabilities 1912      1912 Hedging derivative liabilities Contractual amounts payable   320 Total liabilities 23164 2443 2683 6665 1299  36254 The balances in the cash flow tables above will not agree directly to the balances in the consolidated balance sheet as the table incorporates all cash flows on an undiscounted basis related to both principal as well as those associated with all future coupon payments.
Market risk Market risk is the risk associated with adverse changes in the fair value or accrual income and expense of assets and liabilities held by the Group as a result of movements in market factors such as interest rates foreign exchange rates volatility and credit spreads.
The Groups balance sheet is predominantly UK based and is denominated in GBP therefore foreign exchange risk is not a major part of the Groups risk profile.
Structural interest rate risk comprises the sensitivity of the Groups current and future net interest income and economic value to movements in market interest rates.
The major contributors to interest rate risk are the investment of noninterest bearing deposits and equity into interestbearing assets the mismatch between repricing dates of interestbearing assets and liabilities basis risk for example the inability of the pricing basis for customer asset and liability products to be replicated in the financial markets or the risk arising from changing relationships between different interest rate yield curves and customer optionality e. the right to repay borrowing in advance of contract maturity dates.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 168 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks
The focus of the Groups activity is to provide highquality banking services to its customers.
These services include the provision of foreign exchange products and derivative products to enable customers to manage risks within their businesses.
As a result of these activities the Group may be exposed to forms of market risk that would arise from movements in price on these products.
Controls include the hedging of these products as and when they arise.
Measurement
Interest rate risk in the banking book IRRBB is measured monitored and managed from both an internal management and regulatory perspective.
The RMF incorporates both market valuation and earningsbased approaches.
In accordance with the Group IRRBB Policy testing repricing analysis cash flow analysis and scenario analysis.
The key features of the internal interest rate risk management model are the use of basis point sensitivity analysis VaR and EaR are measured on a statistical basis 99% confidence level with appropriate holding periods depending on varying risk types historical simulation approach utilising instantaneous interest rate shocks including parallel rate movements and twists in the yield curve to explore risks around exposures to movements in short or longterm interest rates static balance sheet i. assumptions covering the behavioural life of products and customer behaviour for optionality are reviewed and approved by ALCO.
Foreign exchange risk is assessed based on the absolute exposure in each currency.
Mitigation measures Market risks are overseen by ALCO with delegation for daytoday management given to Treasury.
Treasury use a number of techniques and products to manage market risks including interest rate swaps cash flow netting and foreign exchange.
Basis risk is managed through a combination of wholesale market basis risk management products pricing strategies and product innovation.
As part of an objective to secure stable and optimal net interest income over both a 12month period and over the long term mismatch risk can be minimised with the investment of equity and noninterest bearing deposits targeting the stability of net interest income.
The use of derivatives gives rise to the need to apportion transactions into hedge relationships.
Fair value hedges The Group hedges part of its existing interest rate risk resulting from potential movements in the fair value of fixed rate assets and liabilities.
The fair value of these swaps is disclosed in note 3.18.
There were no transactions for which fair value hedge accounting had to be discontinued in the year.
Cash flow hedges The Group hedges a portion of the variability in future cash flows attributable to interest rate and foreign currency risk.
The interest and foreign currency risk arise from variable interest rate assets and liabilities which are hedged using cross currency and interest rate swaps and material nonGBP denominated assets which are hedged using foreign exchange forward contracts.
There were no transactions for which cash flow hedge accounting had to be discontinued in the period as a result of the highly probable cash flows no longer being expected to occur.
The fair value of derivatives is disclosed in note 3.18.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 169 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
Model parameters and assumptions are reviewed and updated on at least an annual basis.
Material changes require the approval of ALCO.
Oversight of market risk is conducted by the Groups balance sheet and liquidity risk oversight team that is independent of the Treasury function.
The Board and Executive Risk Committee through ALCOs oversight monitors risk to ensure it remains within approved policy limits and Board requirements.
Interest rate risk audited Value at risk Earnings at risk As at 30 September Average value during the year Minimum value during the year Maximum value during the year Principal financial assets and liabilities The following table shows the Groups principal financial assets and liabilities and the main nontraded market risk types they are exposed to
Interest
Foreign exchange risk
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 6937 Financial assets available for sale 2076 Loans and advances to customers 31293 Derivative financial instruments 282 Other financial assets at fair value 477
Due to customers 27718 Due to other banks 3817 Derivative financial instruments 376 Other financial liabilities at fair value 26 Debt securities in issue 4785
Interest
Foreign exchange risk
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 5955 Financial assets available for sale 1731 Loans and advances to customers 29202 Derivative financial instruments 585 Other financial assets at fair value 750
Due to customers 27090 Due to other banks 1309 Derivative financial instruments 598 Other financial liabilities at fair value 48 Debt securities in issue 4501 Foreign currency assets and liabilities split by type The Group does not incur material foreign currency exposure.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 170 Risk report Balance sheet and prudential regulation risks Repricing periods of assets and liabilities by assetliability category The following table shows the repricing periods of the Groups assets and liabilities as assessed by the Group.
This repricing takes account of behavioural assumptions where material and the Groups policy to hedge capital in accordance with a benchmark term agreed by ALCO in order to reduce variability in net interest income.
Items are allocated to time buckets in the table below by reference to the earlier of the next contractual interest rate repricing date and the residual maturity date.
2017 unaudited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 6  6937 Due from other banks 1125 49     1174 Financial assets available for sale 234 362 100 1020 360  2076 Other financial assets at fair value 477      477 Loans and advances to customers 8537 5356 5496 11811 247 154 31293 Other assets      1274 1274 Total assets 17129 5776 5620 12979 607 1120 43231
Due to other banks 3292 517 8    3817 Due to customers 10708 1107 3923 11965 15  27718 Other financial liabilities at fair value 26      26 Debt securities in issue 42 3968  475 300  4785 Other liabilities 1 1327 3483 Equity  165 441 2796   3402 Total liabilities and equity 15353 5801 4488 15947 315 1327 43231 Notional value of derivatives managing interest rate sensitivity 89 3044 478 2767 112 Total interest rate gap sensitivity 1687 3069 1610 201 180 207 Cumulative interest rate gap sensitivity 1687 1382 228 27 207 2016 unaudited
3 months or less 3 to 12 months 1 to 5 years
5 years
Total
Assets
Cash and balances with central banks 5  5955 Due from other banks 949 3     952 Financial assets available for sale 252 285  665 495 34 1731 Loans and advances to customers 10122 4443 4484 10958 165 216 29956 Other assets      1335 1335 Total assets 17121 4739 4505 11751 660 1153 39929
Due to other banks 67 929 313    1309 Due to customers 10738 1476 3703 11213 12  27142 Debt securities in issue 204 3822  475   4501 Other liabilities 1 1434 3766 Equity  173 460 2578   3211 Total liabilities and equity 12573 6438 4578 14894 12 1434 39929 Notional value of derivatives managing interest rate sensitivity 1298 1610 501 2869 462 Total interest rate gap sensitivity 3250 3309 428 274 186 281 Cumulative interest rate gap sensitivity 3250 59 369 95 281  CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 171 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Pension risk The Group operates a defined benefit DB pension scheme the Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Scheme the Scheme.
Clydesdale Bank PLC is the Schemes principal employer and there are no other participating employers.
Following a consultation process the Scheme was closed to future accrual on 1 August 2017 for the majority of members.
A small number of members elected to keep DB accruals subject to making an increased contribution to the Scheme and to also forego other remuneration benefits.
DB pension schemes provide a promise to pay members a predetermined level of income at retirement which is independent of the contributions and investment returns assets used to fund these benefit promises collectively the liabilities.
As such there are significant risks associated with managing a DB scheme.
These risks will continue until the Scheme is formally wound up either in the event that all the liabilities are transferred to a third party for example an insurer or once all individual member benefits are paid.
The Schemes assets are held under a separate trust and the Scheme is managed by a corporate Trustee Board independently of the Group per the Scheme Trust Deed and Rules.
Therefore the Groups ability to directly manage the Scheme is limited to certain powers within the governing documentation.
Aside from the Groups role to sponsor the Scheme to ensure there are sufficient assets to meet benefit payments as they fall due the Groups focus is directed on mitigating the impact on capital and earnings through working with the trustee to implement risk reduction initiatives.
Several activities have been implemented since 2003 with the specific aim of reducing risk in the Scheme including a derisking journey plan benefit reforms and the outcome of the 2017 consultation on future accruals.
The principal cause of risk within the Scheme is the difference between the assets and the liabilities.
The assets are exposed to market valuation movements within and between asset classes while the liabilities are more sensitive to interest rate and inflation rate changes and changes in other actuarial assumptions which may not be borne out in experience for example life expectancy.
There are various bases with differing assumptions for measuring the Scheme liabilities whereas Scheme assets are consistently valued at current market values.
The two key bases used to value DB scheme liabilities are IAS 19 a standardised accounting measure which is the basis for income statement balance sheet and capital reporting and the Trustees Technical Provisions basis which determines the cash funding contributions to the Scheme to repair any deficit agreed as part of a triennial valuation.
The IAS 19 valuation is disclosed in note 3.16.
The rate used to discount the liabilities on the IAS 19 basis is a key driver of volatility and as prescribed by IAS 19 is based on yields on highquality corporate bonds.
Therefore the IAS 19 valuation can move adversely because of low rates and narrowing credit spreads.
Inflation is another key source of volatility.
This is because member benefits have an element of index linking and therefore the liabilities increase with rises in longterm inflation assumptions although in practice over the long term the relationship between interest and inflation rates tends to be negatively correlated resulting in a degree of risk offset.
The triennial valuation the valuation uses the Trustees actuarial assumptions and a liability discount rate based on gilt yields.
The last formal valuation indicated a deficit of 290m as at 30 September 2016 after allowing for changes to future accrual from 1 August 2017 a reduction from the 30 September 2013 reported deficit of 450m.
There has been no change to the deficit reduction schedule agreed with the Trustees in June 2014 with a further payment of 50m in May 2017 to be followed by payments of 50m in each year ending 31 March 2019 31 March 2020 31 March 2021 and 31 March 2022.
A payment of 55m is due in the year ending 31 March 2023.
Details of retirement benefit obligations are included in section 3.16 of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 172 Risk report Regulatory compliance and conduct risk Effectively addressing legacy issues and building a platform for growth The Group continues to focus to address and eliminate legacy conduct issues while seeking to ensure that regulators expectations are met and our current and future proposition is compliant and fair to customers.
Regulatory and compliance risk Regulatory and compliance risk is the risk of failing to understand and comply with relevant laws regulations licence conditions supervisory requirements selfregulatory industry codes of conduct and voluntary initiatives failing to identify monitor and respond to changes in the regulatory environment damaging the Groups relationship with its regulators through noncompliance with requirements not keeping regulators informed of relevant issues that affect or which may affect the Group not responding effectively to the information requests and review findings of the regulators by providing incorrect or inadequate information not meeting regulatory deadlines or obstructing the regulator from fulfilling its role.
Risk appetite The Group has no appetite for actions resulting in breaches of regulation or for inaction to address systemic process and control failures leading to material noncompliance.
Mitigation measures The Group has a regulatory engagement policy designed to ensure an open and cooperative relationship is maintained with regulators at all times ensuring that all key interactions with regulators are managed recorded and escalated as appropriate.
All colleagues are required to achieve mandated standards to meet their compliance gateway obligations.
Material changes to regulatory policies and protocols are approved by either the Executive Leadership Team or the Board.
The Group CRO and Risk Leadership Team consider compliance risk topics when setting risk appetite and through ongoing risk assessment profiling and reporting.
Monitoring
A risk management oversight and compliance monitoring plan is approved by Boards Risk Committee on an annual basis which independently assesses the control framework underpinning compliance with laws and regulations.
Conduct risk Conduct risk is the risk of undertaking business in a way which is contrary to the interests of our customers resulting in the delivery of inappropriate customer outcomes customer detriment regulatory censure redress costs andor reputational damage.
Risk appetite The Group is committed to acting in the interests of its customers and has no appetite for conduct risk.
Mitigation measures The Group has a conduct framework which recognises the key conduct risks inherent in the Groups strategy through which it seeks to apply the highest standards in the design and sale of products and the treatment of its customers.
The framework ensures fair customer outcomes supported by a good customer experience.
This is achieved in a number of ways including continuous monitoring and responding to customer feedback and complaints.
In addition if things do go wrong action is taken to ensure we put things right for our customers.
Products are designed and sold to meet customer needs and expectations with governance processes embedded to ensure those objectives are met.
Consideration of customer outcomes is embedded within the Groups operating processes and metrics are regularly monitored to help ensure outcomes are appropriate.
Exposures
As part of the demerger from NAB in 2016 NAB and the Group have entered into a Conduct Indemnity Deed where NAB has agreed to provide the Group with an indemnity in respect of certain historic liabilities relating to conduct in the period prior to the demerger date.
Details of the Conduct Indemnity Deed are included in note 3.14  Provisions.
There continues to be a great deal of uncertainty and significant judgement is required in determining the quantum of conduct riskrelated liabilities with note 3.14 reflecting the Groups current position in relation to redress provisions for PPI interest rate hedging products IRHPs and other smaller historic conduct matters.
The final amount required to settle the Groups potential liabilities for these matters is materially uncertain.
The Group will continue to reassess the adequacy of provisions for these matters and the assumptions underlying the calculations at each reporting date based upon experience and other relevant factors at that time.
Monitoring
This is a principal focus of the Board senior management and regulators and the Group seeks to ensure customers are treated fairly and products are designed and sold to meet their needs.
The
Group also works to ensure that customer expectations are met and complaints are dealt with effectively and fairly.
All Three Lines of Defence consider conduct risk as part of their oversight and assurance activities.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 173 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Operational risk including people risks Proactive operational risk management with enhanced risk frameworks The Group continues to strengthen the controls that provide a continuity of service while identifying areas of operational efficiency and ensuring the level of operational risk capital reflects our risk profile.
Operational risk including people risks is the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes people strategies and systems or from external events including for example the prospect of a cyber attack.
It is a core component of the RMF and is embedded in daytoday business activities.
Responsibilities are set out in a structured operational risk framework that seeks to identify assess mitigate monitor and report the operational risks and events that could impact the achievement of business objectives or impact core business processes.
Business units are responsible for the daytoday management of operational risk with oversight from the risk management function and independent assurance activities undertaken by internal audit.
The requirements of the operational RMF are defined in an overarching operational risk policy and related minimum standards and reflect the Groups operational risk appetite.
Risk appetite The Group is prepared to tolerate a level of operational risk exposure within agreed thresholds and limits.
Operational risks arise from daytoday business activities which may result in direct or indirect losses and could adversely impact the Groups financial performance levels of customer care and reputation.
Approach to monitoring and mitigating exposures Losses may result from both internal and external events and are categorised using risk categories aligned to Basel II.
The Basel II categories are used to ensure that data can be reported externally and compared with other industry data.
The Group has identified assessed and is currently monitoring all key operational risks across the above noted categories including undertaking an assessment of control effectiveness monitoring trends in key risk indicators and escalating events in accordance with policy requirements.
Stress testing The Group undertakes scenario analysis to gain insights into the stresses the business could be subject to in the event of this type of operational risk materialising.
The Group maintains a suite of operational risk scenarios covering top operational risks relevant to its business.
As part of the scenario analysis approach the suite of operational risk scenarios are reviewed and updated on a regular basis for existing potential impacts and identification of potential new risk events.
Management then document a proposed response to identify how the scenarios would be managed and monitored if they occurred.
Risk category Operational resilience risk The risks associated with the ability of the Group to quickly adapt to disruptions while maintaining continuous business operations and safeguarding people assets and overall brand equity even in the face of adverse events shocks and chronic or incremental changes.
Information technology risk The risks associated with inadequate and failed information technology processes and components including hardware software and networking components.
Change risk The risks associated with a failure to execute and deliver change that could result in an inability to meet our strategic objectives including failing to meet our customer regulator colleague or shareholders expectations at a Group level and local management level.
Thirdparty risk The risks associated with ensuring the Groups outsourced and offshoring arrangements are controlled effectively including the risk of failure to service existing and new customers and the potential cessation of specific activities or the risk of personally identifiable information or Group sensitive data being exposed or exploited or the risk of financial reputational and regulatory censure if the third party enters into any illegal or unethical activities.
Data risk The risks associated with the accuracy management and use of data that underpins decision making at every level across the organisation.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 174 Risk report Financial crime risk A strengthened and robust financial crime framework The Group continues to invest in its systems and controls to prevent detect screen and report financial crime demonstrating a tangible uplift in effectiveness.
Financial crime risk is the risk that the Groups products and services will be used to facilitate financial crime against the Group its customers or third parties.
It encompasses the risk of failing to understand and comply with relevant laws regulations and supervisory requirements relating to money laundering terrorism financing bribery and corruption and sanctions and embargoes.
It also includes risks associated with external or internal acts intended to defraud misappropriate and circumvent policy funds information regulations and property.
The Group maintains an overarching financial crime policy and four policy standards aligned to each material financial crime risk.
These are Sanctions  The Group has no appetite for noncompliance with the legal and regulatory obligations relating to sanctions and embargoes.
To reflect the Groups risk appetite and to protect the Group from financial and reputational damage including regulatory censure fines and enforcement action the Sanctions and Embargoes Policy articulates a set of minimum standards and requirements which must be complied with.
Antimoney laundering  The Group applies a prescribed highrisk customer model which sets out the types of customer it has no risk appetite to onboard as well as customers with whom the Group is prohibited from entering into or maintaining a customer relationship.
All other customers who are not prescribed shall be subject to controls commensurate with their risk.
Antibribery and corruption  The Group does not tolerate the direct or indirect offer payment solicitation or acceptance of bribes in any form.
The Group has in place risk assessments policies and guidelines on interacting with customers suppliers and agents including specific policies for gifts and hospitality.
Senior managers across the business are required to complete an evaluation of risk areas as part of the risk assessment process.
Fraud  The Group accepts that in order to conduct business in a commercially viable manner it is willing to sustain fraud losses within an agreed set of parameters.
The application of fraud risk management considers customer impacts industry trends and financial impacts of fraud which on occasion provide conflicting priorities.
Emerging risks are identified and assessed with action taken to mitigate them.
An agreed loss plan is set and performance against this is overseen by the policy owner and reported through the appropriate governance committees.
With regard to internal fraud the Group recognises the risk of internal fraud but has no appetite for it.
Consequently there is a control framework in place to mitigate that risk.
Exposures
There are currently no significant exposures to report.
The Group continues to review the external environment for any change in regulatory or legislative direction taking action as appropriate.
Mitigation measures Risk assessments against the four financial crime policy standards take place on an annual basis.
Over and above these assessments regular oversight of higherrisk activities takes place as part of the formal oversight plan and embedded activity takes place throughout the year.
Key performance metrics relative to critical financial crime systems are kept under review to ensure ongoing effectiveness.
Third party tools are used to test system effectiveness where available and appropriate.
Training completion and compliance is subject to annual oversight.
All standards are reflected in the Group policy and standards and financial crime prevention manual the content of which is provided by financial crime risk and updated as appropriate.
Monitoring
The financial crime team is responsible for strategy governance standard setting oversight training and reporting to the competent authorities and governance committeesBoard.
The control framework is owned by financial crime risk but management and execution of customer identity and verification customer due diligence enhanced due diligence identifying highrisk customers including correspondent banking relationships and record keeping is the responsibility of first line business units.
Account opening pass rates are overseen as part of a regular process undertaken by financial crime risk and reported monthly.
Higherrisk customers are referred to financial crime risk and senior management within Customer Banking for agreement and sign off that business is within appetite and then continue to be monitored on an ongoing basis.
Screening customers for sanctions or politically exposed persons and transaction monitoring is carried out by financial crime risk.
Sanctions screening for payments is carried out by the Payments team in the first line.
Critical financial crime systems oversight is independently tested by Internal Audit.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 175 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Strategic business and financial performance risk Robust strategy development and monitoring Strategy is delivered within a welldefined risk appetite and RMF with continual monitoring in place.
Strategic business and financial performance risk is the risk of significant loss loss of earnings or damage arising from business decisions that impact the longterm interests of the Groups stakeholders or from an inability to adapt to external developments.
Risk appetite The Group intends to grow and increase share in target markets and has clear strategies for its business model and for target customers and products but it has no appetite to achieve its targets in an unsustainable fashion or one which may result in damaging outcomes for the Group its customers or other stakeholders.
Exposures
The Group operates amid intense increasing competition.
Peer and challenger banks some with innovative business models and low cost bases such as fastgrowing peertopeer lenders and crowd funders allied with rapid technological change notably in payments and mobile banking present a fastevolving challenging environment.
These trends and new regulations also necessitate a large change agenda which diverts management attention imposes costs and which may not deliver expected benefits.
At the same time the low interest rate environment constrains income reduces margins and by inhibiting capital generation reduces strategic room for manoeuvre.
As such income growth and margin expectations over the Groups planning horizon are balanced highlighting that this environment contributes to significant business risk the risk that Group net income fails to grow as targeted or falls.
Mitigation measures CYBG was divested from NAB and listed in February 2016 but strategic changes necessary for success when independent were assessed over a prolonged prior period.
Moreover CYBG has a long history as a full service UK bank and benefits from an experienced Board and Executive Leadership Team such that the overall strategy has evolved through a mature and robust process.
The Groups risk appetite represents a risk envelope against which chosen strategies and financial plans are assessed and within which chosen strategies must operate.
The RAS and associated risk appetite framework is therefore a key means of controlling strategic risk.
The risk appetite framework comprises an extensive system of measures thresholds and other controls which together ensure that the Group operates within the Boards approved appetite for strategic risk.
Monitoring
A range of financial and nonfinancial metrics including RoTE lending growth customer acquisition NIM and others are key performance indicators used to monitor performance relative to strategic objectives.
They are monitored against the Financial Plan by the Groups Board and Executive Leadership Team who react to deviations from targets and modify strategy accordingly.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 176 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC 178 Consolidated financial statements 186 Company financial statements 241 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 177 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 178 Our opinion on the financial statements In our opinion the CYBG PLC Group financial statements and Parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
What we have audited The CYBG PLC financial statements comprise Group Parent company Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 30 September 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 30 September 2017 Consolidated Balance Sheet as at 30 September 2017 Company Balance Sheet as at 30 September 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 September 2017 Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 September 2017 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Company Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Related notes 1.1 to 5.5 to the financial statements Related notes 6.1 to 6.6 to the financial statements Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Annual Report and Accounts rather than in the notes to the financial statements.
These have been crossreferenced from the financial statements and are identified as audited.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors Responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report below.
We are independent of the Group and Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 179 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Conclusions relating to principal risks going concern and viability statement We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the annual report in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the annual report set out on page 19 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors confirmation set out on page 71 in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the Directors statement set out on page 191 in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements whether the Directors statement in relation to going concern required under the Listing Rules in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the Directors explanation set out on page 125 in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Overview of our audit approach Key audit matters  Payment Protection Insurance PPI and other conduct related provisioning.
SME lending impairment provisions Revenue recognition  Effective interest method accounting.
Audit scope  We performed an audit of the complete financial information of the Group and Parent.
Our Group audit scope included all CYBG PLC subsidiaries.
Materiality  Overall Group materiality was 17m which represents 0.5% of shareholders equity.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 180 Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Key audit matters Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Boards Audit Committee Payment Protection Insurance PPI and other conduct related provisioning Please refer to pages 79 to 87 Audit Committee report pages 219 to 222 Provisions for liabilities and charges note pages 237 to 238 Contingent liabilities and commitments note.
The Group has material provisions relating to its conduct towards its past and present customers relating to past PPI sales and other conduct related matters.
The Group benefits from a conduct indemnity deed granted by its former parent under which 90.3% of remediation costs for past conduct issues can be reimbursed up to a capped total amount.
The Group contributes 9.7% of such costs.
While this limits the impact on the Groups results and equity unutilised amounts remaining under the indemnity are an important factor in the assessment of the Groups overall financial position.
In March 2017 the FCA published Policy Statement 173 containing its final rules and guidance on PPI complaints.
The
Policy Statement confirmed a new rule that sets a deadline of 29 August 2019 for consumers to complain about the way they were sold PPI.
During the year the Group has also made progress with its past business review for other conduct related matters.
Significant judgements and assumptions are required to be made by the Directors in relation to the timing volume and quantum of future redress payments and associated administration costs that will be required.
The most significant assumption is total anticipated future PPI complaint volumes.
The effects of these judgements are material so this was considered to be a significant audit risk.
We considered the results of the testing of key controls operating within the PPI and other conduct case handling and recording processes which supported the data used in the determination of key provision assumptions.
We found that we could place reliance on these controls.
We examined the models used by the Directors to determine a best estimate of the provisions for missold payment protection insurance PPI and other products.
We assessed the appropriateness of PPI provision model assumptions including case volumes redress per claim uphold rates and case processing costs which were informed by the Groups historic experience.
We tested the clerical accuracy of the Directors provision calculations and sensitivity analysis.
In evaluating the Directors provision assumptions we examined correspondence during the year between the Group and the FCA and regulatory pronouncements such as PS 173.
We compared the Directors assumptions to our own expectations based on the Groups historical experience current trends and our industry knowledge.
We communicated to the Audit Committee that provisions for PPI redress and other conduct related matters held by the Group were reasonably estimated.
We noted that the Banks disclosures describe the uncertainties and risks associated with determining the provisions and the sensitivity of the provisions to changes in key assumptions.
As disclosed on page 222 in Note 3.14 we also noted that 148m of the Capped Indemnity remains undrawn and that this provides a level of protection to the Group should future costs relating to PPI claims exceed the Directors estimate.
The estimations of provisions for PPI claims and other conduct related matters are inherently uncertain and required significant judgements to be made by the
The Directors best estimate for future PPI claims and associated costs involved probability weighting a number of possible outcomes.
The most significant assumption is the volume of future new PPI complaints details of which are reported on page 220 in Note 3.14.
We determined an independent range of reasonable future PPI cost outcomes using the Groups historical experience of PPI claims and we compared this range to the Directors estimate.
We found no material differences in this comparison.
We communicated to the Audit Committee that provisions for other conduct related matters had been determined based on appropriate evidence and were fairly stated at 30 September 2017.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 181 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Key audit matters Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Boards Audit Committee SME lending impairment provisions Please refer to pages 79 to 87 Audit Committee report and pages 210 to 212 Impairment provisions on credit exposures note.
The majority of the Groups nonretail lending portfolio relates to small and medium sized enterprises SMEs which can be vulnerable to both domestic and foreign market volatility.
Estimating the Groups collective and specific provisioning is subjective requires the Directors to exercise significant judgement and incorporates the use of various assumptions.
Due to the materiality of the provisions and level of judgment involved this was considered to be a significant audit risk.
We tested controls over impairment calculations and the generation of portfolio data for use in these calculations.
These controls included those covering the identification and assessment of potentially impaired loans the transfer of data from source systems to impairment models and the calculation of specific impairment provisions.
We determined that we could rely on these controls for the purposes of our audit.
We performed loan file testing on a sample of impaired loans to determine whether the specific provisions held by the Group were in our judgement sufficient and appropriate.
Our approach included the use of our own valuation specialists to independently test key assumptions underpinning a sample of collateral values used in provision calculations.
We evaluated the completeness of SME loans assessed for impairment by the Directors and examined key loans where no impairment provisions were held.
We tested the collective impairment provision model by examining the logic of the model calculations the accuracy of data inputs and the appropriateness of key assumptions and loan ratings used within the model.
We tested the Directors judgements in determining overlays to the collective impairment models for appropriateness of methodology and accuracy of calculation.
We communicated to the Audit Committee that the impairment models calculations and assumptions employed by the Group were reasonable as at 30 September 2017 and that these resulted in impairment provisions that were appropriately estimated.
We also concluded that the disclosures presented were in compliance with IFRSs.
We independently determined a range of appropriate outcomes for the level of incurred but not reported losses existing in the Groups loan portfolio.
The
Directors post model adjustments resided within our range of acceptable outcomes.
We assessed and challenged the calculations and related judgements for a sample of specific impairment provisions and did not identify any material differences to the provisions determined by the Directors.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 182 Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC Key audit matters Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Boards Audit Committee Revenue recognition Effective Interest method Please refer to page 198 net interest income accounting policy.
For certain product fees the Group operates a model to recognise fee income included within interest income under the effective interest method.
The effective interest method spreads the recognition of product fee income over the life of a financial instrument as these are in substance an integral part of the overall yield.
Effective interest models are sensitive to judgements about the expected lives of the product portfolios to which they relate.
Due to the complexity of calculations the degree of judgement exercised by the Directors in respect of the expected lives of the product portfolios and the different products for which fees are recognised this is considered a significant audit risk.
We gained an understanding of key controls and assessed the appropriateness of key assumptions used within the Groups effective interest model primarily the average loan life assumption which we corroborated against underlying loan data our knowledge of market conditions and observed practice in the UK mortgage sector.
We performed data integrity testing on the key sources of information feeding the effective interest calculation.
This involved sample testing data from business systems to the loan data used in the model and viceversa.
We examined the journals recording the deferral and amortisation of fee income to verify that the revenue deferred and amortised over the life of the underlying loans was appropriate and aligned with the effective interest model output.
As set out on page 209 in Note 3.5 the Group has recorded 32m of net deferred income in relation to fee income and expenses deferred under the Groups effective interest method of accounting.
We communicated to the Audit Committee that the effective interest adjustments recognised in interest income had been appropriately derived.
We also communicated that the assumptions made by the Directors were reasonable in the context of the Groups lending portfolios and current observable customer behaviours.
In the prior year our auditors report included a key audit matter in relation to recoverability of the deferred tax asset.
There was a significant reduction in the valuation of the Groups deferred tax asset in the prior financial year and consequently this was not considered a key audit matter in the current year.
Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
Audit materiality Audit materiality is the magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Audit materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined audit materiality for the Group to be 17m 2016 17m which approximates 0.5% of the total equity attributable to owners of the Parent company Group equity.
The reason for selecting this measure as the basis for our audit materiality consideration is that the Group was loss making in recent financial periods.
Given the importance of equity to the Groups solvency and regulatory capital resources we judged equity to be the most relevant basis for setting audit materiality.
Performance materiality Performance materiality is the application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement was that performance materiality should be set at 75% 2016 50% of our audit materiality namely 12.75m 2016 8.5m.
We have set performance materiality at this percentage due to our previous experience as auditors of the Group from which we concluded that there is a lower expectation of material financial statement inaccuracies due to the effective control environment and only minor audit differences resulting from our prior and current year work.
We set performance materiality at a more conservative percentage of 50% in the prior year as 2016 was CYBG PLCs first year reporting as a publicly listed company.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 183 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Reporting threshold This is the amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 0.85m 2016 0.85m which is set at 5% of our audit materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Other information The other information comprises the information included in the annual report set out on pages 1 to 175 including the Strategic Report set out on pages 1 to 37 the Financial Results set out on pages 38 to 48 Governance set out on pages 49 to 126 the Risk Report set out on pages 127 to 175 and Additional Information set out on pages 249 to 263 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 126  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit committee reporting set out on pages 79 to 87  the section describing the work of the audit committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code set out on page 62  the parts of the Directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 184 Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of CYBG PLC Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the Parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report or the Directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement set out on page 126 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements is the Directors are responsible for assessing the Group and Parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
Explanation as to what extent the audit was considered capable of detecting irregularities including fraud The objectives of our audit in respect of fraud are to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of material misstatement due to fraud through designing and implementing appropriate responses and to respond appropriately to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit.
However the primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud rests with both those charged with governance of the entity and management.
Our audit approach in respect of irregularities including fraud was as follows We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory frameworks that are applicable to the Group and determined that the most significant were the regulations licence conditions and supervisory requirements of the Prudential Regulation Authority PRA and the Financial Conduct Authority FCA.
We understood how the Group complies with these legal and regulatory frameworks by making enquiries of management internal audit and those responsible for legal and compliance matters.
We also reviewed correspondence between the Group and UK regulatory bodies reviewed minutes of the Board and Executive Risk Committee and gained an understanding of the Groups approach to governance demonstrated by the Boards approval of the Groups governance framework and the Boards review of the Groups risk management framework RMF and internal control processes.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 185 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information We assessed the susceptibility of the Groups financial statements to material misstatement including how fraud might occur by considering the controls that the Group has established to address risks identified by the entity or that otherwise seek to prevent deter or detect fraud.
We also considered performance and incentive plan targets and their potential to influence management to manage earnings or influence the perceptions of investors.
Based on this understanding we designed our audit procedures to identify noncompliance with such laws and regulations identified in the paragraphs above.
Our procedures involved inquiries of legal counsel executive management internal audit and focused testing as referred to in the Key Audit Matters section above.
The Group operates in the banking industry which is a highly regulated environment.
As such the Senior Statutory Auditor considered the experience and expertise of the engagement team to ensure that the team had the appropriate competence and capabilities which included the use of specialists where appropriate.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Other matters we are required to address We were appointed as CYBG PLCs External Auditor and signed an engagement letter on 14 January 2016 prior to CYBG PLC becoming the holding company of the Group on its demerger from NAB and IPO in February 2016.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Company and we remain independent of the Group and the Company in conducting the audit.
The audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee.
Steven Robb Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
20 November 2017
The maintenance and integrity of the CYBG PLC website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 186 Financial statements Consolidated income statement for the year ended 30 September Note Interest income and similar income 1075 1101 Interest expense and similar charges 231 295 Net interest income 2.2 844 806 Gains less losses on financial instruments at fair value 6 9 Other operating income 186 182 Noninterest income 2.3 192 191 Total operating income 1036 997 Personnel expenses 166 280 Restructuring expenses 67 45 Depreciation and amortisation expense 87 88 Other operating and administrative expenses 400 468 Total operating and administrative expenses before impairment losses 2.4 720 881 Operating profit before impairment losses 316 116 Impairment losses on credit exposures 3.6 48 39 Profit on ordinary activities before tax 268 77 Tax expense 2.5 86 241 Profitloss for the year 182 164 Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders 146 206 Profit attributable to other equity holders 36 42 Profitloss for the year attributable to equity holders 182 164 Basic earningsloss per share pence 2.6 17.3 22.5 Diluted earningsloss per share pence 2.6 17.2 22.5 All material items dealt with in arriving at the profit before tax for the above years relate to continuing activities.
The notes on pages 191 to 240 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 187 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Financial statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September Note Profitloss for the year 182 164 Items that may be reclassified to the income statement Change in cash flow hedge reserve Lossesgains during the year 84 105 Transfers to the income statement 4 1 Taxation thereon 21 25 Change in available for sale reserve Lossesgains during the year 7 29 Transfers to the income statement 20 8 Taxation thereon 7 6 Total items that may be reclassified to the income statement 87 94 Items that will not be reclassified to the income statement Remeasurement of defined benefit pension plans 3.16 154 179 Taxation thereon 35 43 Total items that will not be reclassified to the income statement 119 136 Other comprehensive incomelosses net of tax 32 42 Total comprehensive incomelosses for the year net of tax 214 206 Total comprehensive incomelosses attributable to ordinary shareholders 178 248 Total comprehensive income attributable to other equity holders 36 42 Total comprehensive incomelosses attributable to equity holders 214 206 The notes on pages 191 to 240 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 188 Financial statements Consolidated balance sheet as at 30 September Note
Cash and balances with central banks 3.1 6937 5955 Due from other banks 1174 952 Financial assets available for sale 3.2 2076 1731 Other financial assets at fair value 3.3 477 750 Derivative financial instruments 3.4 282 585 Loans and advances to customers 3.5 31293 29202 Due from customers on acceptances 4 4 Current tax assets  2 Property plant and equipment 3.8 86 99 Investment properties 3.9 14 22 Intangible assets 3.10 339 256 Deferred tax assets 3.11 154 183 Defined benefit pension assets 3.16 207 Other assets 188 188 Total assets 43231 39929
Due to other banks 3.12 3817 1309 Other financial liabilities at fair value 3.3 26 48 Derivative financial instruments 3.4 376 598 Due to customers 3.13 27718 27090 Liabilities on acceptances 4 4 Provisions for liabilities and charges 3.14 554 852 Debt securities in issue 3.15 4785 4501 Retirement benefit obligations 3.16 3 79 Deferred tax liabilities 3.11 75 27 Other liabilities 3.17 2471 2210 Total liabilities 39829 36718
Share capital 4.1 88 88 Other equity instruments 4.1 450 450 Capital reorganisation reserve 4.1 839 839 Merger reserve 4.1 633 633 Other reserves 4.1 15 100 Retained earnings 3055 2779 Total equity 3402 3211 Total liabilities and equity 43231 39929 The notes on pages 191 to 240 form an integral part of these financial statements.
These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 20 November 2017 and were signed on its behalf by David Duffy Ian Smith
Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer
CYBG PLC Registered number  CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 189 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Financial statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity
Share capital
Capital reorganisation reserve
Other
Other reserves
Total equity Equity based compensation reserve
Available for sale reserve Cash flow hedge reserve As at 1 October tel  13 2096 3443 Loss for the year          164 164 Other comprehensive incomelosses net Total comprehensive incomelosses for the year        15 79 300 206 AT1 distribution paid Insertion of new parent company 223 670 893 Share for share exchange 1099  1732 633 Share capital reduction 1011         1011 Capital note repurchase net of tax     450     5 455 Capital note issued     450      450 Transfer from equity based compensation Transfer from asset revaluation reserve Equity based compensation expensed      5     5 Equity based compensation settled      2     2 As at 30 September 2016 4.1 88  839 779 3211 Profit for the year          182 182 Other comprehensive lossesincome net Total comprehensive lossesincome for the year        20 67 301 214 AT1 distribution paid Transfer from equity based compensation Equity based compensation expensed      6     6 As at 30 September 2017 4.1 88  839  1 3055 3402 The notes on pages 191 to 240 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 190 for the year ended 30 September Note Operating activities Profit on ordinary activities before tax 268 77 Adjustments for Noncash or nonoperating items included in profit before tax 5.2 728 643 Changes in operating assets 5.2 1857 2285 Changes in operating liabilities 5.2 919 1587 Interest received 1123 1101 Interest paid 258 200 Tax receivedpaid  Group relief 1 4 Net cash used in operating activities 532 359 Cash flows from investing activities Interest received 11 11 Proceeds from sale or maturity of investments 20 101 Proceeds from sale of tangible fixed assets Purchase of tangible fixed assets Purchases of investments 492 357 Proceeds from sale of available for sale investments 60 56 Purchase and development of intangible assets 148 99 Net cash used in investing activities 551 293 Cash flows from financing activities Interest received 3 1 Interest paid 90 98 Proceeds from other equity instruments issued  450 Repurchase of other equity instruments  457 Repurchase of subordinated debt  474 Redemption and principal repayment on residential mortgage backed securities and covered bonds 3.7 740 1029 Issuance of residential mortgage backed securities and covered bonds 3.7 750 750 Issuance of mediumterm notessubordinated debt 3.15 298 475 Amounts drawn under the TFS 1900 Net decrease in amounts due from related entities  786 Net decrease in amounts due to related entities  106 Equity based compensation  2 AT1 distributions 36 35 Net cash provided by financing activities 2085 265 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 1002 387 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 5950 6337 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 5.2 6952 5950 1 Tangible fixed assets include property plant and equipment investment properties and property inventory.
2 Cash and cash equivalents is cash and balances with central banks less mandatory deposits plus cash equivalents within other assets less due to other banks due to related entities and other liabilities.
The notes on pages 191 to 240 form an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements Consolidated statement of cash flows CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 191 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Section 1 Basis of preparation
This section sets out the Groups accounting policies that relate to the consolidated financial statements as a whole.
Where an accounting policy is specific to one note the policy is described in the note to which it relates.
This section also shows new accounting standards amendments and interpretations relevant to the Group and whether they are effective in 2017 or later years.
We explain how these changes are expected to impact the financial position and performance of the Group.
1.1 General information The Company is a public company limited by shares incorporated in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act and registered in England and Wales.
The consolidated financial statements comprise those of the Company and its controlled entities together the Group.
1.2 Basis of accounting The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU and in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The financial information has been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of land and buildings investment properties financial assets available for sale and certain other financial assets and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
1.3 Presentation of risk offsetting and maturity disclosures Certain disclosures required under IFRS 7 Financial instruments disclosures and IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements have been included within the audited sections of the Risk report.
Where information is marked as audited it is incorporated into these financial statements by this cross reference and it is covered by the Independent auditors report.
1.4 Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic report.
In addition the Risk report includes the Groups risk management objectives and the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its capital.
In assessing the Groups going concern position as at 30 September 2017 the Directors have considered a number of factors including the current balance sheet position the principal and emerging risks which could impact the performance of the Group and the Groups strategic and financial plan which includes future projections of profitability capital adequacy liquidity and funding.
The assessment concluded that for the foreseeable future the Group has sufficient capital to support its operations has a funding and liquidity base which is strong robust and well managed with future capacity and has expectations that performance will continue to improve as the Groups strategy is executed.
As a result of the assessment the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future and therefore believe that the Group is well placed to manage its risks successfully in line with its business model and strategic aims.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
1.5 Basis of consolidation Controlled entities are all entities including structured entities to which the Company is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
An assessment of control is performed on an ongoing basis.
Controlled entities are consolidated from the date on which control is established by the Group until the date that control ceases.
The acquisition method of accounting is used to account for business combinations other than those under common control.
A non controlling interest is recognised by the Group in respect of any portion of the total assets less total liabilities of an acquired entity or entities that is not owned by the Group.
Postacquisition income received and expenses incurred by the entity or entities acquired are included in the consolidated income statement on a line by line basis in accordance with the accounting policies set out herein.
Balances and transactions between entities within the Group and any unrealised gains and losses arising from those transactions are eliminated in full upon consolidation.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared using uniform accounting policies.
Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 192 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 1 Basis of preparation continued 1.6 Foreign currency Functional and presentation currency Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in pounds sterling GBP which is also the Groups presentation currency rounded to the nearest million pounds sterling m unless otherwise stated.
Transactions and balances The Group records an asset liability expense or revenue arising from a transaction using the closing exchange rate between the functional and foreign currency on the transaction date.
At each subsequent reporting date the Group translates foreign currency monetary items at the closing rate.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation or settlement of monetary items are recognised in the income statement during the year in which the gains or losses arise.
Foreign currency nonmonetary items measured at historical cost are translated at the date of the transaction with those measured at fair value translated at the date when the fair value is determined.
Foreign exchange differences are recognised directly in equity for nonmonetary items where any component of associated gains or losses is recognised directly in equity.
Foreign exchange differences arising from nonmonetary items whereby the associated gains or losses are recognised in the income statement are also recognised in the income statement.
1.7 Financial assets and liabilities Recognition and derecognition A financial asset or a financial liability is recognised on the balance sheet when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Purchases and sales of financial assets classified within fair value through profit or loss are recognised on trade date.
The Group derecognises a financial asset when the contractual cash flows from the asset expire or it transfers the right to receive contractual cash flows on the financial asset in a transaction in which substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred.
Financial liabilities are derecognised when the Group has discharged its obligation to the contract or the contract is cancelled or expires.
Offsetting
This can only occur and the net amount be presented on the balance sheet when the Group currently has a legally enforceable right to set off the recognised amounts and intends either to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
1.8 Critical accounting estimates and judgements The preparation of financial statements requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of assets liabilities revenues and expenses and the disclosed amount of contingent liabilities.
Assumptions made at each balance sheet date are based on best estimates at that date.
Although the Group has internal control systems in place to ensure that estimates can be reliably measured actual amounts may differ from those estimates.
The Group considers the most significant use of accounting estimates and judgements relate to the following areas financial assets and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss note 3.3 impairment provisions on credit exposures note 3.6 deferred tax note 3.11 PPI redress provision and other conduct related matters note 3.14 and retirement benefit obligations note 3.16.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 193 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 1.9 New accounting standards and interpretations The Group has adopted the following International Accounting Standards Board IASB pronouncements in the current financial year.
Except where otherwise stated these did not have a material impact on the Groups consolidated financial statements amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation issued May 2014 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2016.
IAS 16 and IAS 38 both establish the principle for the basis of depreciation and amortisation being the expected pattern of consumption of the future economic benefits of an asset.
This amendment provides clarification that the use of certain revenue based methods to calculate depreciation is not appropriate.
Annual Improvements to IFRS Standards 20122014 Cycle issued September 2014 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2016.
The IASB has made amendments to the following standards that are relevant to the Group IFRS 5 Non current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures IAS 19 Employee Benefits and IAS 34 Interim Financial Reporting.
1 January 2016.
This includes a narrow scope amendment providing clarification to existing IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements requirements.
New accounting standards and interpretations not yet adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments issued July 2014 and IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers issued September 2015 are both effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and have been endorsed by the EU.
IFRS 16 Leases was issued in January 2016 and is effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and has been endorsed by the EU.
Separate updates on the Groups implementation of these new standards can be found at the end of this section.
There are a number of other standards and amendments that are either not available for adoption in the EU or are otherwise not mandatory at 30 September 2017 and have not been applied by the Group in preparing these financial statements.
The pronouncements while relevant to the Group are not anticipated to have a material impact and include amendments to IAS 12 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses issued in January 2016 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
The amendments clarify the requirements on the recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses amendments to IAS 7 Disclosure initiative issued in January 2016 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
The amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows require disclosures that enable users of the financial statements to evaluate changes in liabilities arising from an entitys financing activities amendments to IFRS 2 Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions issued in June 2016 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
The amendments provide guidance on the effects of vesting and nonvesting conditions on the measurement of cashsettled sharebased payments classification of sharebased payments with a net settlement feature for withholding tax obligations and accounting for modifications to a sharebased payment that change the classification from cashsettled to equitysettled amendments to IFRS 9 Prepayment Features with Negative Compensation issued in October 2017 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The amendments allow companies to measure particular prepayable financial assets with socalled negative compensation at amortised cost or at fair value through other comprehensive income if a specified condition is met instead of at fair value through profit or loss Annual Improvements to IFRS Standards 20142016 Cycle issued December 2016 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2017 or 1 January 2018.
The IASB has made amendments to the following standards IFRS 12 Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities clarification of the scope of the standard  effective 1 January 2017 and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures measuring an associate or joint venture at fair value  effective 1 January 2018 IFRIC interpretation 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration issued December 2016 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The new interpretation provides requirements on which exchange rate to use in reporting foreign currency transactions such as revenue transactions when payment is made or received in advance and IFRIC interpretation 23 Uncertainty over Income Tax Treatments issued June 2017 and effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
The new interpretation applies to any situation in which there is uncertainty as to whether an income tax treatment is acceptable under tax law and is not limited to actual ongoing disputes.
1 Endorsed by the EU.
2 Not yet endorsed by the EU.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 194 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 1 Basis of preparation continued 1.9 New accounting standards and interpretations continued Updates on the implementation of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers and IFRS 16 Leases The Group continues to assess the requirements of these Standards as it seeks to ensure that the methodology and approach to the key impacts and challenges of the Standards result in a high quality implementation while continuing to recognise emerging and evolving industry practice.
IFRS 9 CYBG implementation strategy and approach IFRS 9 was endorsed for adoption in the EU in November 2016 and will be adopted by the Group with effect from 1 October 2018.
Classification and measurement IFRS 9 changes the classification of financial assets by reducing the number of categories to just three amortised cost fair value through other comprehensive income FVOCI and fair value through profit or loss FVTPL.
The final classification is based on a combination of the Groups business model and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the instruments.
The option to designate a financial asset at FVTPL in IAS 39 is largely retained in IFRS 9 with IFRS 9 also affording a further option to designate certain equity instruments at FVOCI instead of accounting for these as FVTPL.
The Group has undertaken an assessment to determine the potential impact of these changes.
These are unlikely to result in significant changes to existing measurement bases however the final impact will be dependent on the circumstances prevailing on 1 October 2018.
Impairment overview The Groups IFRS 9 implementation programme is progressing as planned with models built and an endtoend parallel run exercise to commence during the year beginning 1 October 2017.
As expected there will be a period of refinement required where the series of complex decisions judgements and assumptions made particularly in relation to the Groups model methodology that will be reviewed sufficiently tested and benchmarked.
It is only after a period where the testing environment has stabilised that the results of the parallel run will provide an indication of the likely impact.
The Groups approach to the new expected credit loss ECL methodology in IFRS 9 will leverage as far as possible off the model development work that has been undertaken to support the Groups IRB accreditation application.
A lifetime ECL calculation will be required for scenarios where the credit quality of a financial asset has been identified through the Groups staging criteria as having significantly deteriorated since original recognition.
The Groups 12 month and lifetime ECL calculation will be based around a PD x EAD x LGD formula Term Defined as To be IFRS 9 compliant PD Probability of default PD is an estimate of the probability that a customer will default Forwardlooking 12 month and lifetime PD which needs to be capable of reflecting changes in the economic environment EAD Exposure at default EAD is an estimate of the amount the customer will owe at the time of default Forwardlooking and based on contractual limits with certain exceptions for revolving products such as credit cards that may contain both a drawn and undrawn element LGD Loss given default LGD is an estimate of the loss that the Group will suffer if the customer defaults incorporating any collateral held Forward looking with no prescribed floors CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 195 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information There are a number of specific key elements to the IFRS 9 ECL calculation which require the Group to define and articulate the direction it will take in meeting these  that is ensuring that the ECL calculation is forwardlooking and encompasses a probability weighted multiple scenario approach.
The Group currently adopts economic scenario methodology for capital planning and credit stress testing purposes and views the introduction of the IFRS 9 requirements as an extension to these established processes.
The Group will align the specific requirements of IFRS 9 to these to ensure a consistent approach is adopted.
The exact nature and number of the economic scenarios including the necessary economic inputs required for the scenarios along with their relevant probability weightings were finalised following experienced credit judgement discussion and agreement with stakeholders.
This will be subject to refinement as the parallel run period progresses.
The adoption of IFRS 9 may result in an increase in the Groups balance sheet provisions for credit losses and may therefore have a negative impact on the Groups regulatory capital position.
Hedge accounting Macro hedge accounting is being considered in a separate IASB project.
There is an option available to retain the existing IAS 39 hedge accounting requirements until the completion of the macro hedge accounting project.
The Group proposes to continue applying the hedge accounting requirements of IAS 39 in accordance with this option.
Regulatory capital The Group notes the pronouncements regarding transitional relief for the likely regulatory capital impact of adopting IFRS 9 from the Basel Committee and also the European Parliament and Commission and will continue to monitor the regulatory landscape over the year ahead in the lead up to the Groups adoption of IFRS 9 for final details on the regulatory capital treatment of the change to an ECL methodology.
The Group will consider the option of spreading the effect of the change to an ECL methodology for regulatory capital purposes should this feature in the finalised version of the rules.
IFRS 15 IFRS 15 was issued in May 2014 and endorsed for use in the EU in September 2016.
It is effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and it will be adopted by the Group with effect from 1 October 2018.
The Standard is unlikely to have a significant impact as the majority of the Groups income is generated from financial instruments and is therefore not in scope of the Standard.
For those revenues that are in scope typically fees and other commissions the Group continues to assess the related performance obligations to identify any fees or other commissions that may require a change in recognition.
The
Group continues to assess the new disclosure requirements of the Standard.
IFRS 16 IFRS 16 was issued in January 2016 and endorsed for use in the EU.
It is effective for financial years beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and will be adopted by the Group with effect from 1 October 2019.
The Group continues to work on and assess the new estimates and judgements required by the Standard and their implications.
Operating leases will be brought onto the Group balance sheet with an asset recognised for the contractual right of use and a liability recognised for the contractual payments.
The Group expects this work to progress throughout the 2018 reporting period.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 196 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 2 Results for the year 2.1 Segment information The Groups operating segments are operating units engaged in providing different products or services and whose operating results and overall performance are regularly reviewed by the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker the Executive Leadership Team.
The Groups business is organised into two principal operating segments SME banking and Retail banking.
In addition Central Functions consist of the Groups back office support functions.
SME banking The Groups established regional SME franchise offers a full range of banking products and services to meet business customers banking needs across its small business commercial corporate and specialist and acquisition finance segments.
The Groups SME franchise comprises small businesses which the Group defines as businesses with lending of up to 0.5m but less than 2.0m in turnover and commercial businesses which the Group defines as businesses with lending of more than 0.5m and greater than 2.0m in turnover.
Through its SME franchise the Group offers a full range of lending products and services across a portfolio consisting of term lending overdrafts and working capital solutions term lending the Group offers a wide variety of term loans both secured and unsecured and offers customers a range of repayment and interest rate options.
The majority of the Groups business term lending is LIBOR based overdrafts business overdrafts are the primary type of revolving variable rate credit facility offered by the Group to business customers invoice finance the Group advances funds against the customers trade receivables asset finance these products provide a method of financing capital equipment purchases international trade services these products facilitate transactions between a buyer and seller located in different countries.
The
Group offers import loans export loans documentary collections and currency guarantees together with letters of credit for securing trade and business current accounts the Group provides business customers day to day banking current account facilities including debit cards cheque books regular statements direct debits and standing orders and online banking.
Retail banking The Group has a comprehensive regional and national retail banking product proposition with a personal deposit portfolio comprising personal current accounts PCA savings accounts and term deposits.
The Groups Retail lending portfolio comprises mortgages personal loans credit cards overdrafts and introductions to insurance and investment products through its branch network PCA the Group offers a full range of PCAs including for example B a newly launched digital proposition together with a packaged bank account and a basic bank account savings accounts the Group offers a variety of savings accounts that pay a variable rate of interest.
It also offers cash ISAs that provide depositors tax free returns term deposits offer a fixed interest rate for a fixed term mortgages the Group provides mortgage loans on a capital repayment basis where the loan is required to be repaid during its life and on an interestonly basis where the customer pays interest during the term of the mortgage loan with the principal balance required to be repaid in full at maturity.
The Group offers both owner occupied mortgage loans and BTL loans personal loans the Group provides unsecured personal loans through its branch network and through its digital and telephone distribution channels credit cards the Group currently offers four credit card products Private MasterCard Business MasterCard Gold MasterCard and B MasterCard and overdrafts the Group provides overdraft lending across a variety of PCA products subject to the account holders status.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 197 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Geographical areas The Group has no operations outside the UK and therefore no secondary geographical area information is presented.
Operating segments
Retail banking
Other
Total
Net interest income 251 644 51  844 Noninterest income 83 100 11 20 192 Operating income 334 744 62 20 1036 Operating and administrative expenses 61 97 517 45 720 Impairment losses on credit exposures Segment operating profitloss before tax 240 632 579 25 268 Average interest earning assets 10154 20577 6966  37697 Operating segments
Retail banking
Other
Total
Net interest income 242 627 63  806 Noninterest income 87 100 4 8 191 Operating income 329 727 67 8 997 Operating and administrative expenses 70 119 540 152 881 Impairment losses on credit exposures Segment operating profitloss before tax 229 599 607 144 77 Average interest earning assets 10404 19063 6790  36257 1 Other reflects underlying adjustments to the statutory view of performance and is therefore not recharged to the Groups two principal operating segments such as conduct related provisions and restructuring costs.
For a breakdown of the items included in this category refer to Measuring financial performance  glossary.
2 The impairment losses on credit exposures of 15m 2016 9m for Retail banking includes losses on certain retail products attributable to SME private banking customers.
3 Average interest earning assets for SME banking include 2.9bn 2016 3.3bn of mortgages originated by private banking.
4 Comparative disclosures have been amended to conform with the current periods presentation.
Liabilities are managed on a centralised basis and therefore are not disclosed by segment.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 198 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 2 Results for the year continued 2.2 Net interest income Accounting policy Interest income is reflected in the income statement using the effective interest method which discounts the estimated future cash payments or receipts over the expected life of the financial instrument to the net carrying amount of the financial asset or liability.
When calculating the effective interest rate cash flows are estimated considering all contractual terms of the financial instrument e. prepayment call and similar options excluding future credit losses.
The calculation includes all fees and points paid or received that are an integral part of the effective interest rate such as transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts.
Where it is not possible to reliably estimate the cash flows or the expected life of a financial instrument or group of financial instruments the contractual cash flows over the full contractual term of the financial instrument or group of financial instruments are used.
Loan origination and commitment fees are recognised within the effective interest rate calculation.
Nonutilisation of a commitment fee is recognised as revenue upon expiry of the agreed commitment period.
Loan related administration and service fees are recognised as revenue over the period of service.
Interest income and interest expense on hedged assets and liabilities and financial assets and liabilities designated as fair value through profit or loss are also recognised as part of net interest income.
Where a trading derivative is economically hedging an interestbearing financial asset or liability designated at fair value through profit or loss the interest income and expense attributable to the derivative is recognised within net interest income and not as part of the fair value movement of the trading derivative.
Interest income and similar income Loans and advances to other banks 11 22 Financial assets available for sale 11 11 Loans and advances to customers 1030 1037 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 18 27 Due from related entities  1 Other interest income 5 3 Total interest income and similar income 1075 1101 Less interest expense and similar charges Due to other banks 15 8 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss  1 Due to customers 126 188 Debt securities in issue 90 87 Due to related entities  11 Total interest expense and similar charges 231 Net interest income 844 806 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 199 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 2.3 Noninterest income Accounting policy Gains less losses on financial instruments at fair value This includes fair value gains and losses from three distinct activities derivatives classified as held for trading  the full change in fair value of trading derivatives is recognised inclusive of interest income and expense arising on those derivatives except when economically hedging other assets and liabilities at fair value outlined in note 2.2 other financial assets and liabilities designated at fair value through profit or loss  these relate to the Groups fixed interest rate loan portfolio and related term deposits note 3.3 which were designated at inception as fair value through profit or loss.
The fair value of these loans is derived from the future loan cash flows using appropriate discount rates and includes adjustments for credit risk and credit losses.
The valuation technique used is reflective of current market practice and hedged assets liabilities and derivatives designated in hedge relationships  fair value movements are recognised on both the hedged item and hedging derivative in a fair value hedge relationship the net of which represents hedge ineffectiveness and hedge ineffectiveness on cash flow hedge relationships note 3.4.
Fees and commissions Where not integral to the effective interest rate these are recognised on an accruals basis as the services are provided or on completion of the underlying transaction.
Gains less losses on financial instruments at fair value Interest rate derivatives 45 3 Other assets and liabilities at fair value Ineffectiveness arising from fair value hedges note 3.4 4 Ineffectiveness arising from cash flow hedges note 3.4  1 Other operating income Fees and commissions 146 151 Margin on foreign exchange derivative brokerage 18 19 Gains on disposal of available for sale financial assets 20 8 Net fair value movement on investment properties 1 1 Other income Total noninterest income 192 1 A credit risk gain on other assets and liabilities at fair value of 6m offset by a fair value loss of 41m has been recognised in the current year 2016 11m gain and 4m loss respectively.
On 28 April 2017 MasterCard completed its acquisition of 94.2% of VocaLink.
By virtue of its 3.24% shareholding in VocaLink the Group received cash consideration of 25m.
The resulting gain of 20m which was recognised in the available for sale reserve following the acquisition announcement in 2016 was recycled to the income statement and is included within Gains on disposal of available for sale financial assets in the current year.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 200 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 2 Results for the year continued 2.4 Operating and administrative expenses Accounting policy Personnel expenses primarily consist of wages and salaries accrued bonus and social security costs arising from services rendered by employees during the financial year.
The Group recognises bonus costs where it has a present obligation that can be reliably measured.
Bonus costs are recognised over the relevant service period required to entitle the employee to the reward.
The Groups accounting policies on pension expenses and equity based compensation are included in notes 3.16 and 4.2 respectively.
Personnel expenses 166 280 Restructuring expenses note 3.14 67 45 Depreciation and amortisation expense notes 3.8 3.10 87 88 Other operating and administrative expenses 400 468 Total operating and administrative expenses 720 Personnel expenses comprise the following items Salaries wages and noncash benefits and social security costs 171 211 Defined contribution pension expense 19 20 Defined benefit pension incomeexpense note 3.16 54 28 Equity based compensation note 4.2 6 5 Other personnel expenses 24 16 Personnel expenses 166 280 The Group recognised gains in relation to its defined benefit pension scheme in the year.
A past service credit of 88m is included in personnel expenses as a result of the closure of the Scheme to future accrual for the majority of members.
In addition a curtailment gain of 13m was recognised in respect of redundancies which did not attract an enhancement entitlement and offsets against the related restructuring costs.
The average number of FTE employees of the Group during the year was made up as follows
Number
Managers 2234 2460 Clerical staff 3806 4258 The average monthly number of employees was 6818 2016 7567.
All staff are contracted employees of the Group and its subsidiary undertakings.
The average figures above do not include contractors.
Other items of significance to the Group which are included within other operating and administrative expenses are Operating lease charges 29 30 Impairment losses on software note 3.10  45 PPI redress expense note 3.14 48 44 Other conduct expenses note 3.14 10 7 Separation costs 8 11 Auditors remuneration 2 2 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 201 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Auditors remuneration included within other operating and administrative expenses Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys financial statements 20 20 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the Companys subsidiaries 1251 1387 Total audit fees 1271 1407 Audit related assurance services 124 180 Other assurance services 308 35 Total nonaudit fees 432 215 Fees payable to the Companys auditor in respect of associated pension schemes 63 75 Total fees payable to the Companys auditor 1766 1697 Nonaudit services performed by the auditor during the year included agreed upon procedures under the Conduct Indemnity arrangement with NAB regular profit attestations preparation of a comfort letter for the global medium term note programme issuance and a client asset regulatory review.
In addition to the above out of pocket expenses of 48k 2016 58k were borne by the Group principally related to reimbursement of travel expenses incurred by staff when performing the above services.
2.5 Taxation Accounting policy Income tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it is related to items recognised directly in equity in which case the tax is also recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable profit or loss for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements.
Deferred tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Current tax UK corporation tax Current year 17 12 Adjustment in respect of prior years  3 Deferred tax note 3.11 Current year 64 236 Adjustment in respect of prior years 5 4 Tax expense for the year 86 The tax assessed for the year differs from that arising from applying the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK.
A reconciliation from the expense implied by the standard rate to the actual tax expense is as follows Profit on ordinary activities before tax 268 77 Tax expense based on the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.5% 2016 20% 52 15 Effects of Disallowable expenses 9 8 Conduct indemnity adjustment 7 1 Deferred tax assets recognisedwritten off 21 237 Impact of rate changes 34 11 Adjustments in respect of prior years 5 7 Tax expense for the year 86 241 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 202 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 2 Results for the year continued 2.5 Taxation continued The total amount of tax current and deferred recognised directly in equity during the year was a credit of 1m 2016 21m.
Disallowable expenses represent in the main the Groups share of incremental conduct charges that are not deductible in computing taxable profits.
The Conduct indemnity adjustment represents the receipt frompayment to the Groups former parent less refunds attributable in accordance with the indemnity agreement note 3.14.
The rate at which deferred tax is recognised in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme has changed due to the closure of the
The surplus is accounted for as a potential refund to the employer not a reduction in future contributions.
In accordance with tax legislation this authorised surplus payment is recognised as a deferred tax liability at 35%.
There is an overall rate change in respect of the pension of 37m with 30m taken to the income statement and 7m to the statement of other comprehensive income.
2.6 Earnings per share EPS Accounting policy Basic earnings per share Basic earnings per share is calculated by taking the profit attributable to ordinary shareholders of the parent company and dividing this by the weightedaverage number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period.
Diluted earnings per share This requires the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue to be adjusted to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
These arise from awards made under equity based compensation schemes.
Share awards with performance conditions attaching to them are not considered to be dilutive unless these conditions have been met at the reporting date.
The Group presents basic and diluted earningsloss per share data in relation to the ordinary shares of CYBG PLC.
Profitloss attributable to ordinary shareholders 146 206 Tax relief on AT1 distribution attributable to ordinary equity holders 7 7 Tax relief on loss on repurchase of CYB Investments Limited CYBI AT1 issued to NAB  1 Profitloss attributable to ordinary equity holders for the purposes of basic and diluted EPS 153 198 Number of shares million Number of shares million Weightedaverage number of ordinary shares in issue Basic 883 880 Diluted 884 880 Basic earningsloss per share pence 17.3 22.5 Diluted earningsloss per share pence 1 The comparative has been restated so that the dilutive effect of the potentially dilutive share based payment awards has been excluded from the calculation on the basis that it would have reduced the loss per share.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 203 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Section 3 Assets and liabilities 3.1 Cash and balances with central banks Cash assets 1507 1313 Balances with central banks including EU payment systems 5430 4642 6937 5955 Less mandatory deposits with central banks Included in cash and cash equivalents note 5.2 6893 5912 1 Mandatory deposits are not available for use in the Groups day to day business and are noninterest bearing.
3.2 Financial assets available for sale Accounting policy Available for sale financial assets are recognised on trade date and comprise listed and unlisted nonderivative financial assets not classified into any other financial asset category.
They are initially recognised at fair value including direct and incremental transaction costs and subsequently measured at fair value.
Gains and losses arising from changes in fair value are included as a separate component of equity until sale or impairment at which point the cumulative gain or loss is transferred to the income statement.
All available for sale financial assets are continually monitored for evidence of any impairment which would typically be deemed to have arisen where there is evidence of a significant or prolonged reduction in the fair value of the security below its cost.
Where such evidence of impairment exists the cumulative net loss previously recognised directly in equity is transferred to the income statement.
In situations where evidence suggests a subsequent increase in value reversals of impairment of previously impaired equity instruments are recognised directly in equity reversals of impairment of debt instruments are recognised in the income statement.
Interest income determined using the effective interest method is recognised in the income statement.
Impairment losses and translation differences on monetary items are recognised in the income statement within the year in which they arise.
Listed securities 2066 1695 Unlisted securities 4 29 Other financial assets 6 7 Refer to note 3.18 for further information on the valuation methodology applied to available for sale assets and their classification within the fair value hierarchy.
Credit quality of investments Available for sale Senior investment grade 2066 1695 Other 10 36 Senior investment grade securities These include 1221m 2016 1286m of UK Government Gilts.
The remainder relates to highly liquid AAArated corporate bonds.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 204 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.3 Financial assets and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Accounting policy Financial assets and liabilities are designated at fair value through profit or loss with gains and losses recognised in the income statement as they arise note 2.3 when this reduces an accounting mismatch or where the performance is evaluated on a fair value basis.
In such cases transaction costs are recognised immediately in the income statement upon initial recognition of the financial asset and liability.
The derivatives related to the assets and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss do not meet the requirements for hedge accounting and are accounted for as held for trading derivative financial instruments note 3.4.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements Where the fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded on the balance sheet cannot be derived from active markets they are determined using a variety of valuation techniques that include the use of mathematical models.
The inputs to these models are derived from observable market data where possible but where such data is not available judgement is required to establish fair values.
The judgements include considerations of liquidity and model inputs.
The most significant judgement is in relation to the Groups fair value loan portfolio.
The most significant input impacting the carrying value of the loans other than interest rates is the future expectation of credit losses.
Sensitivity analysis indicating the impact of reasonably possible changes in this input on the fair value is provided in note 3.18.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Loans and advances 477 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss Due to customers  term deposits 26 Loans and advances Included in financial assets at fair value through profit or loss is a historical portfolio of loans sales ceased in 2012.
Interest rate risk associated with these loans is managed using interest rate derivative contracts and the loans are recorded at fair value to avoid an accounting mismatch.
The maximum credit exposure of the loans is 477m 2016 750m including accrued interest receivable of 2m 2016 4m.
The cumulative loss in the fair value of the loans attributable to changes in credit risk amounts to 11m 2016 24m and the change for the current year is a decrease of 13m 2016 decrease of 14m of which 6m 2016 11m has been recognised in the income statement.
The loans are classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy note 3.18.
Due to customers  term deposits Included in other financial liabilities at fair value are fixed rate deposits the interest rate risk on which is hedged using interest rate derivative contracts.
The deposits are recorded at fair value to avoid an accounting mismatch.
The change in fair value attributable to changes in the Groups credit risk is Nil 2016 Nil.
The Group is contractually obligated to pay 1m 2016 3m less than the carrying amount at maturity to the deposit holder.
The term deposits are classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy note 3.18.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 205 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3.4 Derivative financial instruments Accounting policy All derivative instruments manage exposures to interest rates and foreign currency and are recognised on the balance sheet at fair value on trade date.
The carrying value of a derivative is measured at fair value throughout the life of the contract.
Derivatives are carried as assets when the fair value is positive and as liabilities when the fair value is negative.
The notional amount of a derivative contract is not recorded on the balance sheet but disclosed as part of this note.
The method of recognising the resulting fair value gain or loss on a derivative depends on whether it is designated as a hedging instrument and if so the nature of the item being hedged.
Certain derivatives are designated as either hedges of highly probable future cash flows attributable to a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction a cash flow hedge or hedges of the fair value of recognised assets or liabilities or firm commitments a fair value hedge.
Cash flow hedge The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges is recognised in equity.
Specifically the separate component of equity note 4.1 is adjusted to the lesser of the cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument and the cumulative change in fair value of the expected future cash flows on the hedged item from the inception of the hedge.
Any remaining gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognised in the income statement.
The carrying value of the hedged item is not adjusted.
Amounts accumulated in equity are transferred to the income statement in the period in which the hedged item affects profit or loss.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss existing in equity at that time remains in equity and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the income statement.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in equity is immediately transferred to the income statement.
Fair value hedge The carrying value of the hedged item on initial designation is adjusted for the fair value attributable to the hedged risk.
Subsequently changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as fair value hedges are recorded in the income statement together with any changes in the fair value of the hedged asset or liability that are attributable to the hedged risk.
The movement in the fair value of the hedged item attributable to the hedged risk is made as an adjustment to the carrying value of the hedged asset or liability.
Where the hedged item is derecognised from the balance sheet the adjustment to the carrying amount of the asset or liability is immediately transferred to the income statement.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting the adjustment to the carrying amount of a hedged item is amortised to the income statement on an effective interest basis over the remaining life of the asset or liability.
Hedge effectiveness The Group documents at the inception of a transaction the relationship between hedging instruments and the hedged items and the Groups risk management objective and strategy for undertaking these hedge transactions.
The documentation covers how effectiveness will be measured throughout the life of the hedge relationship and its assessment both at hedge inception and on an ongoing basis of whether the derivatives that are used in hedging transactions are highly effective in offsetting changes in fair values or cash flows of hedged items.
A hedge is expected to be highly effective if the changes in fair value or cash flows attributable to the hedged risk during the period for which the hedge is designated are expected to offset in a range of 80% to 125%.
Derivatives held for trading The Group uses derivatives for risk management purposes and does not have a trading book.
However derivatives that do not meet the hedging criteria within IAS 39 or for which hedge accounting is not applied are classified as held for trading.
Changes in value of held for trading derivatives are immediately recognised in the income statement note 2.3.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 206 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.4 Derivative financial instruments continued The tables below analyse derivatives between those designated as hedging instruments and those classified as held for trading.
Fair value of derivative financial assets Designated as hedging instruments 202 351 Designated as held for trading 8telFair value of derivative financial liabilities Designated as hedging instruments 229 257 Designated as held for trading 14telCash collateral on derivatives placed with banks totalled 338m 2016 337m.
Cash collateral received on derivatives totalled 31m 2016 57m.
These amounts are included within due from other banks and due to other banks respectively.
The derivative financial instruments held by the Group are further analysed below.
The notional contract amount is the amount from which the cash flows are derived and is not an indication of the amounts at risk relating to these contracts.
Total derivative contracts as at 30 September 2017
Fair value of assets Fair value of liabilities Derivatives designated as hedging instruments Cash flow hedges Interest rate swaps 17952 56 104 Cross currency swaps 527 89 Forward foreign exchange 6 Fair value hedges Interest rate swaps 1452 57 125 Derivatives designated as held for trading Foreign exchange rate related contracts Spot and forward foreign exchange 2689 45 47 Cross currency swaps 150 9 9 Options 103 2 2 2942 56 58 Interest rate related contracts Swaps 983 18 82 Swaptions 33 Options 477 2 3 1493 20 85 Commodity related contracts 93 4 4 Total derivative contracts 24465 282 376 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 207 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Total derivative contracts as at 30 September 2016
Fair value of assets Fair value of liabilities Derivatives designated as hedging instruments Cash flow hedges Interest rate swaps 15526 154 79 Cross currency swaps 760 88 Forward foreign exchange 5 16291 242 79 Fair value hedges Interest rate swaps 1452 109 178 Derivatives designated as held for trading Foreign exchange rate related contracts Spot and forward foreign exchange 2202 84 78 Cross currency swaps 150 11 11 Options 216 5 5 2568 100 94 Interest rate related contracts Swaps 1512 123 233 Swaptions 47  1 Options 569 2 4 2128 125 238 Commodity related contracts 127 9 9 Total derivative contracts 22566 585 598 Derivatives traded to manage the Groups interest rate exposure on a net portfolio basis are accounted for as cash flow hedges.
Derivatives traded to manage interest rate risk on certain fixed rate assets such as UK Government Gilts are accounted for as fair value hedges.
The Group also cash flow hedges its foreign currency exposure on material highly probable nonGBP denominated transactions.
The Group hedging positions also include those designated as foreign currency and interest rate hedges of debt issued from the Groups securitisation and covered bond programmes respectively.
As such certain derivative financial assets and liabilities have been booked in structured entities and consolidated within these financial statements.
Cash flow hedged derivatives include vanilla interest rate swaps within macro hedges and cross currency swaps within a structured entity.
The Group has notional commitments in the following periods Nominal values per time period Within 0 to 3 months 92 1452 Between 3 and 12 months 2986 6710 1 to 5 years 14817 8063 Greater than 5 years 590 66 18485 16291 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 208 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.4 Derivative financial instruments continued The Group has hedged forecast future cash flows which vary primarily with interest or foreign exchange rates.
These cash flows are expected to impact the income statement in the following periods
Forecast payable cash flows
Forecast payable cash flows Within 1 year Between 1 and 2 years Between 2 and 3 years Between 3 and 4 years Between 4 and 5 years Greater than 5 years 26 18  6 Gainloss arising from fair value hedges note 2.3 Hedging instrument 1 15 Hedged item attributable to the hedged risk 5 15 Loss from cash flow hedges due to hedge ineffectiveness note 2.3 1 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 209 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3.5 Loans and advances to customers Accounting policy Loans and advances to customers arise when the Group provides money directly to a customer and include overdrafts credit card lending lease finance mortgages invoice financing and term lending.
Loans and advances to customers are initially recognised at fair value including direct and incremental transaction costs.
They are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method adjusted for impairment losses.
They are derecognised when the rights to receive cash flows have expired or the Group has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership.
Leases entered into by the Group as lessor where the Group transfers substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee are classified as finance leases.
The leased asset is not held on the Group balance sheet instead a finance lease is recognised representing the minimum lease payments receivable under the terms of the lease discounted at the rate of interest implicit in the lease.
Interest income is recognised in interest receivable allocated to accounting periods to reflect a constant periodic rate of return.
Overdrafts 1524 1536 Credit cards 396 400 Lease finance 594 515 Mortgages 23480 21836 Other term lending  SME 4762 4393 Other term lending  Retail 709 690 Trade finance 23 26 Gross loans and advances to customers 31488 29396 Accrued interest receivable 75 76 Unearned income 28 26 Deferred and unamortised fee income 32 29 Impairment provisions on credit exposures note 3.6 210 215 The Group has transferred a proportion of mortgages to the securitisation and covered bond programmes note 3.7.
The Group also has a portfolio of fair valued business loans of 477m 2016 750m which are held separately as Other financial assets at fair value on the balance sheet note 3.3.
Combined with the above this is equivalent to total loans and advances of 31770m 2016 29952m.
Lease finance The Group leases a variety of assets to third parties under finance lease arrangements including vehicles and general plant and machinery.
The cost of assets acquired by the Group during the year for the purpose of letting under finance leases and hire purchase contracts amounted to 13m 2016 5m and 408m 2016 381m respectively.
The total receivables from finance leases and hire purchase contracts were 17m 2016 8m and 550m 2016 482m respectively.
Finance lease and hire purchase receivables Gross investment in finance lease and hire purchase receivables Due within 1 year 241 224 Due within 1 to 5 years 346 288 Due after more than 5 years Unearned income 27 25 Net investment in finance lease and hire purchase receivables 567 490 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 210 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.6 Impairment provisions on credit exposures Accounting policy Assets carried at amortised cost At each reporting date the Group assesses if there is objective evidence of impairment on a financial asset or group of financial assets due to one or more loss events that occurred after initial recognition but prior to the balance sheet date.
Examples of loss events are i where there has been an actual breach of contract by the borrower such as a default or delinquency in payment of interest or principal or ii the granting of a concession to the borrower that the Group would not otherwise consider.
The Group first assesses whether objective evidence of impairment exists either individually for assets that are separately significant or collectively for assets that are not separately significant.
If it is determined that no objective evidence of impairment exists for an individually assessed financial asset whether significant or not the asset is included in a group of financial assets with similar credit risk characteristics and collectively assessed for impairment collective provisions.
Collective provisions Collective provisions are generally established for homogenous portfolios such as the Retail portfolios and the small business portfolio within the SME franchise.
Within the Groups Retail environment past loss experience is a key factor in determining an appropriate collective provision level and takes into account a number of different elements including the number of days past due the realisable value of any security held and the timing of any such security sale.
These and other factors will influence the probability that the customer defaults on the loan the PD.
In the event of a default occurrence the Retail collective provision calculator provides the amount the Group expects to be irrecoverable from that customer the LGD.
The level and impact of LGD varies significantly between the Groups secured and unsecured lending portfolios.
Collective provisioning for the Groups SME portfolio is also based on the use of PD and LGD.
The assets are included in a group of financial assets with similar risk characteristics and collectively assessed for impairment.
The modelled collective assessment considers factors such as credit quality levels of arrears credit utilisation loan to collateral ratios and other factors including the Groups internal customer rating system eCRS.
These characteristics are relevant to the estimation of future cash flows for groups of such assets as they are indicative of the borrowers ability to pay all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the assets being evaluated.
Reliance is placed on the eCRS rating when assessing PD as these are directly mapped within the model.
Manual interventions to the eCRS rating such as the placement on a watch list will directly lead to an increase in PD and consequently the level of collective provision required.
LGD assumptions are driven by the level of security assigned to the customer within the collective provisioning model.
These are regularly monitored to ensure comparability with recent actual loss experience.
In addition for both the Groups Retail and SME portfolios experienced judgement is used to estimate the amount of an impairment loss.
This reflects a limited number of refinements that have been assessed as necessary to reflect specific and evolving circumstances that by their nature cannot be adequately captured in the models.
The use of judgements and supportable estimates is considered by management to be an essential part of the credit impairment process.
The methodology and assumptions used for estimating future cash flows are reviewed regularly to identify and reduce any significant differences between loss estimates and actual loss experience.
Specific provision If there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has been incurred on a loan the amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of the estimated future cash flows including the estimated realisable value of any security discounted at the assets original effective interest rate a specific provision.
Specific provision allowances are primarily established against the Groups commercial business within the SME franchise.
Assets are reviewed on a regular basis and those showing potential or actual vulnerability are placed onto a watch list where enhanced monitoring is undertaken.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 211 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
When first recognised the impairment allowance which is a combination of both the collective and specific provision is recognised in the income statement.
Following impairment interest income is recognised using the original effective rate of interest which was used to discount the future cash flows for the purpose of measuring the impairment loss.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed.
The amount of the reversal is recognised in the income statement.
When a loan is uncollectible and all necessary internal procedures have been completed it is written off against the related impairment loss.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off reduce the expense in the income statement.
The Groups impairment policy for available for sale financial assets is included in note 3.2 Critical accounting estimates and judgements In determining the required level of collective impairment provisions the Group uses the output from various statistical models with management judgement required to assess the modelled outputs and where necessary make appropriate adjustments.
The key assumptions within the Groups collective provisioning models which give rise to significant estimation uncertainty are the PD and the LGD.
Both measures are predicated on expectations of customer behaviour and performance which requires management to form a judgement based on a wide range of historic and current evidence.
The actual amount of the future cash flows and their timing may differ significantly from the assumptions made for the purposes of determining the impairment allowances and consequently these allowances can be subject to variation as time progresses and the circumstances of the customer become clearer.
From an SME perspective changes made to eCRS will have a direct impact as these are mapped to PDs.
Assumption changes on retail customer behaviour will also have an impact on the PDs used.
Within the Retail portfolio the Groups collective provision is reflective of the fact that the majority of lending is concentrated on customer mortgages where the available security is generally sufficient to cover the exposure.
This differs from the SME portfolio where the availability and strength of the security will have less of an impact on overall recoveries leading to a potentially higher collective provision charge relative to the overall exposure.
Sensitivities within the collective provision There are interactions between the various assumptions within the provisioning models which mean that no single factor is likely to move independent of others however the sensitivities disclosed below assume all other assumptions remain unchanged.
If the PDs were to move by  5% from those presently used within the Groups provisioning models the impairment provision would increasedecrease accordingly by 5m.
An important element to the PD is the loss emergence period LEP which represents the Groups assessment of the period from when a loss event occurs to eventual default.
The impact of the LEP differs between the Groups Retail and SME portfolios.
A twomonth increase in the LEP would result in a further 2m impairment provision within the SME portfolio and a further 1m being added to the Retail impairment provision.
To the extent that recovery rates improve from those presently used within each of the Groups provisioning models by 5% the impairment provision on loans and advances would decrease by 14m.
Alternatively if recovery rates deteriorate by 5% the impairment provision on loans and advances would increase by 24m.
Provision in the SME portfolio is sensitive not only to default rates and severity of losses but also to the assessment of risk and security.
If 10% of the SME portfolio were to fall by one notch the impairment provision would increase by 2m.
In addition to modelled outputs the impairment provision is further impacted by management judgements.
These include judgements that reflect elements which are not sufficiently sensitive to the current economic conditions model risk reserves that are held to cover against a range of potential model limitations and judgements made in respect of potential recoveries for specific provisions which also involve customer and economic specific conditions.
These management judgements do not allow for any meaningful sensitivity comparison.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 212 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.6 Impairment provisions on credit exposures continued Opening balance 215 230 Charge for the year 48 39 Amounts written off 75 68 Recoveries of amounts written off in previous years 18 18
Closing balance 210 215 Specific 56 64 Collective 15tel1 Other includes the unwind of net present value elements of specific provisions and other minor movements.
3.7 Securitisation and covered bond programmes Accounting policy The Group sponsors the formation of structured entities primarily for the purpose of facilitation of asset securitisation and covered bond transactions to accomplish certain narrow and welldefined objectives.
Although the Group has no shareholding in these entities where it is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entities and it has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity they are regarded as controlled entities as described in note 1.5 and are consolidated in the Groups financial statements.
Securitisation
The Group has securitised a proportion of its retail mortgage loan portfolio under the Groups master trust securitisation programmes.
The securitised mortgage loans have been assigned at principal value to bankruptcy remote structured entities.
These structured entities have been funded through the issue of residential mortgage backed debt to thirdparty institutional debt investors.
The Group is entitled to any residual income from the vehicles after the debt obligations and senior expenses of the programmes have been met.
The securitised debt holders have no recourse to the Group other than the principal and interest including fees generated from the securitised mortgage loan portfolio.
The Group continues servicing these mortgage loans in return for an administration fee.
The mortgage loans do not qualify for derecognition because the Group remains exposed to the majority of the risks and rewards of the mortgage loan portfolio principally the associated credit risk.
The securitisation structured entities are consolidated and the securitised mortgage loans retained on the Groups balance sheet.
A liability is recognised for the proceeds of the funding transaction.
The externally held securitised notes in issue are included within debt securities in issue note 3.15.
There are a number of notes held internally by the Group not recognised on the balance sheet which are used as collateral for repurchases and similar transactions or for credit enhancement purposes.
Covered bond A subset of the Groups retail mortgage loan portfolio has been ring fenced and assigned to a bankruptcy remote limited liability partnership Clydesdale Covered Bond 2 LLP associated with the covered bond programme to provide a guarantee for the obligations payable on the covered bonds issued by the Group.
Similar to the securitisation programmes the Group is entitled to any residual income after all payment obligations due under the terms of the covered bonds and senior programme expenses have been met.
The Group continues servicing these mortgage loans in return for an administration fee.
The mortgage loans do not qualify for derecognition because the Group retains all of the risks and rewards of the mortgage loan portfolio.
The covered bond partnership is consolidated with the mortgage loans retained on the consolidated balance sheet and the covered bonds issued included within debt securities in issue.
The covered bond holders have dual recourse firstly to Clydesdale Bank PLC on an unsecured basis and secondly to the LLP under the Covered Bond Guarantee secured against the mortgage loans.
Significant restrictions Where the Group uses its financial assets to raise finance through securitisations and the sale of securities subject to repurchase agreements this leads to the assets becoming encumbered.
Once encumbered the assets are not available for transfer around the Group.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 213 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The assets and liabilities in relation to securitisation and covered bonds in issue at 30 September are as follows
Securitisation
Covered bonds
At 1 October 2016 3208 797 4005 Issuance of debt 750  750 Repayments 740  740 Other movements 24 49 25 At 30 September 2017 3242 748 3990
Securitised mortgage loans 6182 1344 7526
Securitisation
Covered bonds
At 1 October 2015 3031 721 3752 Issuance of debt 750  750 Reclassification of notes previously held internally 380  380 Repayments 1029  1029 Other movements 76 76 152 At 30 September 2016 3208 797 4005
Securitised mortgage loans 5435 1149 6584 Other movements consist of exchange rate movements on currency denominated bonds and fair value hedge accounting adjustments.
The following table sets out the net position of the fair value of financial assets relating to the securitisation programmes where the counterparty to the associated liabilities has recourse only to the financial assets Fair value of transferred assets 6074 5417 Fair value of associated liabilities 3262 3233 2812 2184 There were no events during the year that resulted in any Group transferred financial assets being derecognised.
The Group has contractual and noncontractual arrangements which may require it to provide financial support as follows Securitisation programmes The Group provides credit support to the structured entities via reserve funds which are partly funded through subordinated debt arrangements and by holding junior notes.
Exposures totalled 47m in subordinated debt 2016 20m and 856m in junior notes held 2016 610m.
The Group has a beneficial interest in the securitised mortgage portfolio held by the structured entities of 711m 2016 977m.
Furthermore the Group has an obligation to repurchase mortgage exposures if certain mortgage loans no longer meet the programme criteria.
Looking forward through future reporting periods there are a number of date based options on the notes issued by the structured entities which could be actioned by them as issuer.
These could require the Group as sponsor to provide additional liquidity support.
Covered bond programme The nominal level of overcollateralisation was 681m 2016 599m of the outstanding covered bonds.
From time to time the obligations of the Group to provide overcollateralisation may increase due to the formal requirements of the programme.
Furthermore the Group has an obligation to repurchase mortgage exposures if certain mortgage loans no longer meet the programme criteria.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 214 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.8 Property plant and equipment Accounting policy The Groups freehold and longterm leasehold land and buildings are carried at their fair value as determined by the Directors taking account of advice received from independent valuers.
Fair values are determined in accordance with guidance published by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors including adjustments to observable market inputs reflecting any specific characteristics of the land and buildings.
Directors valuations are performed annually in July with the independent valuations carried out on a threeyear cycle on an open market basis.
The valuations are classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in note 3.18.
All other items of property plant and equipment are carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to acquisition of the asset.
Impairment is assessed whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
With the exception of freehold land all items of property plant and equipment are depreciated or amortised using the straight line method at rates appropriate to their estimated useful life to the Group.
The annual rates of depreciation or amortisation are
50 years Leases leasehold improvements the lower of the expected lease term or the assets remaining useful life Fixtures and equipment 310 years Residual values and useful lives of assets are reviewed at each reporting date.
Depreciation is recognised within depreciation expense in the income statement.
Freehold land and buildings
Building improvements
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 October 2015 10 telAdditions   15 7 22 Disposals 4  32 12 48 At 30 September 2016 6 telAdditions   14 7 21 Disposals 1  25 5 31 At 30 September 2017 5 telAccumulated depreciation At 1 October 2015 1  105 74 180 Charge for the year   15 10 25 Disposals   30 11 41 At 30 September 2016 1  90 73 164 Charge for the year note 2.4   14 8 22 Disposals   16 3 19 At 30 September 2017 1  88 78 167 Net book value At 30 September At 30 September CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 215 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
A comparison of the carrying value between the revaluation basis and the historical cost basis for freehold and longterm leasehold land and buildings is shown below Carrying value as included under the revaluation basis 7 8 Carrying value if the historical cost basis had been used 6 7 3.9 Investment properties Accounting policy Investment properties are measured at fair value and are revalued annually by the Directors.
The valuations are based upon advice received from independent valuers and performed on an open market basis.
Adjustments are made to observable market data for comparable properties for specific characteristics such as the nature location or condition of the asset.
Fair value movements are recognised in the income statement in the period in which they arise.
Investment properties are classified in Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy as defined in note 3.18.
At 1 October 22 32 Disposals 7 10 Revaluation 1 At 30 September 14 During the year 86% 2016 97% of the investment properties generated total rental income of 1m 2016 1m and incurred operating and administrative expenses of 1m 2016 1m.
The operating and administrative expenses of the investment properties that did not generate rental income were Nil 2016 Nil.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 216 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.10 Intangible assets Accounting policy Capitalised software costs are stated at cost less amortisation and any provision for impairment.
Identifiable and directly associated external and internal costs of acquiring and developing software are capitalised where the software is controlled by the Group and where it is probable that future economic benefits that exceed its cost will flow from its use over more than one year.
Costs associated with maintaining software are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Capitalised computer software costs are amortised on a straight line basis over their expected useful lives usually between three and 10 years.
Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement as incurred.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable which typically arises when the benefits associated with the software were substantially reduced from what had originally been anticipated or the asset has been superseded by a subsequent investment.
In such situations an impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount of an asset is the higher of its fair value less costs of disposal or its value in use.
Intangible assets which are fully amortised are reviewed annually to consider whether the assets remain in use.
Capitalised software costs
At 1 October 463 427 Additions 148 99 Writeoff 22 63 At 30 September 589 Accumulated amortisation At 1 October 207 162 Charge for the year note 2.4 65 63 Writeoff 22 63 Impairment note 2.4  45 At 30 September 250 207 Net book value at 30 September 339 3m 2016 13m of the 148m 2016 99m software additions do not form part of internally generated software projects.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 217 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3.11 Deferred tax Accounting policy Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
A deferred tax asset is recognised for unused tax losses and unused tax credits only if it is probable that future taxable amounts will arise against which those temporary differences and losses may be utilised.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements The Group has deferred tax assets of 154m 2016 183m the reduction from the previous balance sheet date is due to the movement in the defined benefit pension scheme to a surplus and the utilisation of the capital allowance deferred tax asset.
The
Group has assessed the recoverability of these deferred tax assets at 30 September 2017 and considers it probable that sufficient future taxable profits will be available against which the underlying deductible temporary differences can be utilised over the corporate planning horizon.
At 30 September 2017 the Group had an unrecognised deferred tax asset of 180m 2016 202m representing trading losses with a gross value of 1058m 2016 1186m.
Although there is no prescribed period after which losses expire a deferred tax asset has not been recognised in respect of these losses as the Directors have insufficient certainty over their recoverability in the foreseeable future.
Movement in net deferred tax asset At 1 October 156 379 Recognised in the income statement note 2.5 69 232 Recognised directly in equity 8 9 At 30 September 79 156 The Group has recognised deferred tax in relation to the following items Deferred tax assets Tax losses carried forward 28 35 Capital allowances 120 127 Cash flow hedge reserve 1 1 Transitional adjustment  available for sale reserve 3 Employee equity based compensation 2 2 Defined benefit pension scheme deficit  18 Deferred tax liabilities Defined benefit pension scheme surplus 72 Cash flow hedge reserve  21 Gains on unlisted available for sale investments 3 6 Net deferred tax asset 79 156 The statutory rate of UK corporation tax is 19% from 1 April 2017 and as enacted in Finance Act 2016 will fall to 17% from 1 April 2020.
In accordance with IAS 12 these rates are taken into account in assessing the value at which assets are expected to be realised and liabilities settled.
Finance Bill No.
2 2017 contains draft legislation in respect of the Corporate Tax Loss Restriction and the Corporate Interest Restriction which was due to apply from 1 April 2017.
As the legislation was not substantively enacted at the balance sheet date it has not been applied in the calculation of the tax position at 30 September 2017.
Management expects that given the Groups particular asset profile in respect of losses application of the new rules would have resulted in an immaterial increase in the deferred tax asset recognised on the balance sheet.
This is expected given that the new rules are designed to accelerate the payment of corporation tax.
The rate at which deferred tax is recognised in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme has changed due to the closure of the Scheme to the majority of members note 3.16.
The surplus is accounted for as a potential refund to the employer rather than a reduction in future contributions.
In accordance with tax legislation this authorised surplus payment is recognised as a deferred tax liability at 35%.
There is an overall rate change in respect of the pension of 37m with 30m charged in the income statement and 7m charged directly to equity.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 218 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.12 Due to other banks Accounting policy Repurchase agreements Securities sold subject to repurchase agreements repos are retained in their respective balance sheet categories.
The associated liabilities are included in amounts due to other banks based upon the counterparties to the transactions.
The difference between the sale and repurchase price of repos is treated as interest and accrued over the life of the agreements using the effective interest method.
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase 1864 1226 Transaction balances with other banks 21 23 Deposits from other banks 31 60 Secured loans 1901 The underlying securities sold under agreements to repurchase have a carrying value of 2660m 2016 1657m.
Secured loans comprise amounts drawn under the TFS.
3.13 Due to customers Noninterest bearing demand deposits 2548 2160 Interest bearing demand deposits 19130 19328 Term deposits 5957 5454 Other wholesale deposits 18 12 27653 26954 Accrued interest payable 65 136 27090 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 219 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3.14 Provision for liabilities and charges Accounting policy Provisions for liabilities and charges are recognised when a legal or constructive obligation exists as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be necessary to settle the obligation and the obligation can be reliably estimated.
Provisions for liabilities and charges are not discounted to the present value of their expected net future cash flows except where the time value of money is considered material.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements PPI redress provision and other conduct related matters Management has exercised significant judgement around the key assumptions that underpin the estimates and used estimation techniques to quantify them.
Ongoing regulatory review and input as well as rulings from the Financial Ombudsman Service over time and the Groups internal reviews and assessments of customer complaints will continue to impact upon the nature and extent of conduct related customer redress and associated costs for which the Group may ultimately become liable in future periods.
Significant judgement is required in determining the key assumptions used to estimate the quantum of the provision including the level of future complaint volumes uphold rates how many claims are or may be upheld in the customers favour and redress costs the average payment made to customers.
Also factored into the estimate is the effect of the judgements required around the outcome of the remediation activity.
The provision is therefore subject to inherent uncertainties as a result of the subjective nature of the assumptions used in quantifying the overall estimated position at 30 September 2017 consequently the provision calculated may be subject to change in future years if outcomes differ to those currently assumed.
Sensitivity analysis indicating the impact of reasonably possible changes in key assumptions on the PPI provision is presented within this note.
There are similar uncertainties and judgements for other conduct risk related matters however the level of liability is materially lower.
PPI redress provision Opening balance 725 774 Charge to the income statement note 2.4 48 44 Charge reimbursedreimbursable under Conduct Indemnity 446 406 Utilised 797 499 Closing balance 422 Customer redress and other provisions Opening balance 101 214 Charge to the income statement note 2.4 10 8 Charge reimbursedreimbursable under Conduct Indemnity 88 27 Utilised 90 148 Closing balance 109 Restructuring provision Opening balance 26 18 Charge to the income statement 58 39 Utilised 61 31 Closing balance 23 Total provisions for liabilities and charges 554 1 Restructuring provision includes surplus lease space provision.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 220 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.14 Provision for liabilities and charges continued PPI redress In common with the wider UK retail banking sector the Group continues to deal with complaints and redress issues arising out of historic sales of PPI.
During the year the Group reassessed the level of provision that was considered appropriate to meet current and future expectations in relation to the misselling of PPI policies and concluded that a further charge of 494m was required incorporating the Groups estimate of the impact of PS173 issued on 2 March 2017 relating to a proposed time bar for complaints in August 2019.
It also incorporated a reassessment of the costs of processing cases and the impact of experience adjustments.
Only 9.7% of the charge impacts the Groups income statement 48m as a result of the Capped Indemnity.
The total provision raised to date in respect of PPI is 2140m 2016 1646m with 422m of this remaining 2016 725m comprising 201m for customer initiated complaints and proactive customer contact 2016 299m 80m for the remediation of complaints closed prior to August 2014 2016 257m and 142m for costs of administering the redress programme 2016 169m.
To 30 September 2017 the Group has received 361000 complaints 2016 282000 and has allowed for 73000 further walk in complaints.
This reflects an expectation that the volume of walk in complaints will reduce compared to most recent experience as the time bar approaches.
Future complaint volumes could differ from the Groups assumption which could result in a further provision being required.
The Group implemented a comprehensive new PPI complaint handling process from August 2014 which involved making a number of significant changes to the PPI operations which resulted in an increase in operational and administrative costs.
As reported previously the Group is in the process of reopening approximately 180000 complaints and reviewing the original decision reached in light of the new PPI complaint handling processes.
As at 30 September 2017 this exercise is approximately 83% complete.
In addition to the remediation activity described above the Group has completed a past business review PBR of certain PPI sales to determine if there was actual or potential customer detriment in the sales process leading to a risk of missale and the potential for proactive redress.
The review indicated a more favourable outcome than allowed for in the assumptions underpinning the provision as at 30 September 2016.
The increase in provision has taken into account all of the above factors as well as a revision in the Groups expectation of new customer initiated complaints in light of current experience with the overall provision based on a number of assumptions derived from a combination of past experience estimated future experience industry comparison and the exercise of judgement in the key areas identified.
There remain risks and uncertainties in relation to these assumptions and consequently in relation to the ultimate costs of redress and related costs including i the number of PPI claims and the extent to which this is influenced by the activity of claims management companies the application of a time bar Plevin and FCA advertising ii the number of those claims that ultimately will be upheld iii the amount that will be paid in respect of those claims iv any additional amounts that may need to be paid in respect to previously handled claims v the response rates to the proactive customer contact and vi the costs of administering the remediation programme.
As such the factors discussed above mean there is a risk that existing provisions for PPI customer redress may not cover all potential costs.
In light of this the eventual costs of PPI redress and complaint handling may therefore differ materially from that estimated and further provision could be required.
The table below sets out the key assumptions and the effect on the provision at 30 September 2017 of future potential changes in key assumptions
Change in assumption Sensitivity Number of expected future customer initiated complaints 73000 cases 10% 22m Uphold rates Future complaints 1% 3m Pre August 2014 complaints review 1% 1m Average redress costs 1% 2m 1 There are interdependencies between several of the key assumptions which add to the complexity of the judgements the Group has to make.
This means that no single factor is likely to move independently of others however the sensitivities disclosed above assume all other assumptions remain unchanged.
The sensitivities disclosed do not incorporate the impact if any on the administrative cost element of the provision.
2 Sensitivity to a change in average redress across customer initiated complaints pre August 2014 complaints review and PBR customer populations.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 221 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The number of complaints received is monitored against past experience and future expectations and the Group will continue to reassess the adequacy of the provision for this matter and the assumptions underlying the provision calculation based upon experience and other relevant factors as matters develop.
Customer redress and other provisions In addition to PPI redress set out above provision for customer redress is held in those instances where the Group expects to make payments to customers whether on an exgratia or compensatory basis.
Provisions can arise as a result of legal or regulatory action and can incorporate the costs of skilled persons independent reviewers and where appropriate other elements of administration.
The Group has reassessed the level of provision considered necessary in light of the current and future expected claims for all of these matters and concluded that no additional provisions are required to cover the expected tail of new complaints received at this stage.
Other provisions also include amounts in respect of a number of other nonPPI conduct related matters legal proceedings and claims arising in the ordinary course of the Groups business.
Over the course of the year the Group has raised further provisions of 98m for these matters but only 9.7% of the charge impacts the Groups income statement 10m as a result of the Capped Indemnity.
The ultimate cost to the Group of other customer redress matters is driven by a number of factors relating to offers of redress compensation offers of alternative products consequential loss claims and administrative costs.
The matters are at varying stages of their life cycle and in certain circumstances usually early in the life of a potential issue elements of the potential exposure are contingent.
These factors could result in the total cost of review and redress varying materially from the Groups estimate.
The final amount required to settle the Groups potential liabilities in these matters is therefore uncertain and further provision could be required.
During the year Nil 30 September 2016 1m was also recognised for provisions not related to customer redressconduct risk.
Conduct Indemnity Deed The Groups economic exposure to the impact of historic conduct related liabilities is mitigated by a Capped Indemnity from NAB.
The
Company and NAB have an agreement under which NAB has provided the Company with a Capped Indemnity to meet the costs of dealing with conduct matters related to products sold in the period prior to the date of the Groups demerger from NAB the Conduct Indemnity Deed.
The legacy conduct matters covered by the Capped Indemnity are referred to as Relevant Conduct Matters.
The
Capped Indemnity provides the Group with economic protection against certain costs and liabilities including financial penalties imposed by a regulator resulting from conduct issues relating to a PPI standalone interest rate hedging products voluntary scope tailored business loans and fixed rate tailored business loans and other conduct matters subject to certain limitations and minimum financial thresholds.
Amounts payable under the Capped Indemnity include subject to certain limitations payments to customers to satisfy settle or discharge a Relevant Conduct Matter and the direct costs and expenses of satisfying settling discharging or administering such Relevant Conduct Matter.
It has been agreed that NAB will meet 90.3% of Qualifying Conduct Costs claimed by the Company up to the amount of the Capped
Claims under the Capped Indemnity are recognised in the consolidated income statement simultaneously with the charge for Relevant Conduct Matters.
The conduct expense and associated reimbursement income are presented net within Other operating and administrative expenses.
A reimbursement receivable is recognised on the consolidated balance sheet within Due from other banks this receivable is periodically settled by NAB.
The reimbursement receivable is not offset against the provision amount on the Groups consolidated balance sheet.
The provision expense and reimbursement income are disclosed above.
No reimbursement income or receivable is recognised on the consolidated balance sheet in relation to contingent liabilities for Relevant Conduct Matters.
Any possible future reimbursement income linked to contingent liabilities in respect of Relevant Conduct Matters is not disclosed as a contingent asset as the amounts cannot be reliably estimated and are not virtually certain to be received.
To the extent that it is no longer probable that provisions for a Relevant Conduct Matter previously raised will be required to settle conduct obligations and a provision for a Relevant Conduct Matter is released as unutilised the related Capped Indemnity amounts received will become repayable to NAB.
Should the Qualifying Conduct costs exceed the Capped Indemnity any excess cost will be borne by the Group.
To the extent that tax relief is expected in relation to provisions for which reimbursement income is applicable amounts may become repayable to NAB.
In the consolidated financial statements deferred tax assets are only recognised in respect of the loss share proportion 9.7% of unused tax losses on Relevant Conduct Matters on the basis that the Group does not obtain the economic benefit of the future tax relief which is repayable to NAB.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 222 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.14 Provision for liabilities and charges continued The utilisation and undrawn balance of the Capped Indemnity is set out below
Conduct protection provided by NAB 1700 Capital injected into CYBI prior to demerger Drawn in the period to 30 September 2016 Undrawn Conduct Indemnity as at 30 September 2016 682 Drawn in the year to 30 September 2017 171 Amount to be drawn relating to the year to 30 September 2017 363 Undrawn balance as at 30 September 2017 148 1 120m of the 670m of capital injected in CYBI on 24 September 2015 related to the Conduct Indemnity Deed.
2 465m of the 898m represents the precovered provision amount.
Duration and termination The indemnity protection provided by NAB to the Company in respect of Relevant Conduct Matters under the Capped Indemnity is perpetual in nature except in the following circumstances it is fully utilised by the Group or in the event that at any time i the PRA determines that NABs remaining exposure under the Capped Indemnity or ii the Unutilised Indemnity Amount is 100m or less NAB will have the right with the approval of the PRA at its sole discretion to terminate the Capped Indemnity by subscribing for shares at a price equivalent to the prevailing fiveday average market price for the shares in an amount equal to the Unutilised Indemnity Amount provided that the maximum value of the shares to be subscribed for does not exceed a value equal to 9.9% of the issued share capital of the Group on an undiluted basis at such time a 100m Termination.
NAB and the Group may also agree arrangements to terminate or replace the Capped Indemnity with the consent of the PRA.
In particular NAB and the Group have agreed that they will on the fifth anniversary of the demerger and if relevant each subsequent anniversary of the demerger seek to agree arrangements to terminate the Capped Indemnity.
If any such arrangements are agreed between NAB and the Group they will be required to obtain the approval of the PRA at its sole discretion before commencing the implementation of such arrangements.
In relation to proposals made by NAB to the Group in connection with such termination of the Capped Indemnity the Group cannot unreasonably withhold its agreement to the Capped Indemnity being replaced by a payment equal to the Unutilised Indemnity Amount to be applied in whole or in part in subscribing for shares at a price equivalent to the prevailing fiveday average market price for the shares provided that the maximum value of the shares to be subscribed for pursuant to such proposal would not exceed 200m or if lower a value equal to 9.9% of the issued share capital of the Group on an undiluted basis at such time a Post5 Year Equity Subscription Termination.
If 100m Termination or Post5 Year Equity Subscription Termination occurs the Group will not be entitled to make any further claims under the Capped Indemnity but will be entitled to retain in a designated account for a period of three years following such termination any Unutilised Covered Amount and any amount to be withdrawn from a designated account in respect of conduct costs that fall within the scope of the Capped Indemnity which have been incurred and paid by the Group prior to such termination.
The Company will be required to return to NAB any other amounts in a designated account and to release to NAB all amounts remaining in the collateral account.
Following the expiry of such threeyear period the Group will be required to repay all remaining amounts in a designated account net of any amount to be withdrawn from a designated account in respect of conduct costs that fall within the scope of the Capped Indemnity which have been incurred and paid by Group prior to such anniversary.
Restructuring provision Restructuring of the business is currently ongoing and a provision is held to cover redundancy payments property vacation costs and associated enablement costs.
During the year 67m 2016 45m was charged to the income statement of which 9m 2016 6m was charged directly to the income statement and 58m 2016 39m was provided for in accordance with the requirements of IAS 37.
61m 2016 31m of the total provision was utilised in the year.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 223 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Included within the restructuring provision is an amount for committed rental expense on surplus lease space consistent with the expected exposure on individual leases where the property is unoccupied.
This element of the provision will be utilised over the remaining life of the leases or until the leases are assigned and is measured at present values by discounting anticipated future cash flows.
3.15 Debt securities in issue Accounting policy Debt securities comprise short and longterm debt issued by the Group including commercial paper mediumterm notes term loans covered bonds and residential mortgage backed securities RMBS.
Debt securities are initially recognised at fair value being the issue proceeds net of transaction costs incurred.
These instruments are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method resulting in premiums discounts and associated issue costs being recognised in the income statement over the life of the instrument.
The breakdown of debt securities in issue is shown below
Subordinated debt Securitisation Covered bonds
Total
Amortised cost 297 476 3242 698 4713 4383 Fair value hedge adjustments    50 50 99 Total debt securities 297 476 3242 748 4763 4482 Accrued interest payable 248 758 4785 4501 There were no new issuances of covered bonds during the year.
The following new issuances of securitised debt occurred 5 July 2017  GBP 350m Lanark 20171 1A.
5 July 2017  GBP 400m Lanark 20171 2A.
The following securitised debt redemptions occurred during the year in line with the scheduled programme terms 22 August 2017  EUR 300m Lanark 20141 1A.
On 22 June 2017 the Group issued a 300m 8year callable 3.125% fixed to floating medium term note with a final maturity of 22 June 2025.
Mediumterm notes 8year 3.125% fixed to floating rate callable senior notes due 2025 297 Accrued interest payable 3 Total mediumterm notes 300 Subordinated debt 10year noncall five years with a final maturity of 9 February 2026  fixed 5% 476 477 Accrued interest payable 3 3 Total subordinated debt 479 480 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 224 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.15 Debt securities in issue continued Details of the terms and conditions of the notes issued under the securitisation and covered bond programmes as at 30 September 2017 were as follows Issue date Currency
Class A Lanark RMBS 27 July 2012 GBP 288 3M GBP LIBOR  1.63% 22 November 2017 20 March 2014 GBP 265 3M GBP LIBOR  0.50% 22 November 2018 11 December 2014 EUR 368 3M EURIBOR  0.40% 22 August 2018 11 December 2014 GBP 274 3M GBP LIBOR  0.60% 22 February 2020 6 August 2015 GBP 120 3M GBP LIBOR  0.50% 22 August 2018 6 August 2015 EUR 247 3M EURIBOR  0.45% 22 May 2021 4 August 2016 GBP 606 3M GBP LIBOR  1.00% 22 February 2019 5 July 2017 GBP 349 3M GBP LIBOR  0.42% 22 November 2020 5 July 2017 GBP 399 3M GBP LIBOR  0.55% 22 August 2022 Class A Lannraig RMBS 30 September 2011 GBP 326 3M GBP LIBOR  2.20% 19 November 2017 Covered bonds 31 May 2012 GBP 748 4.63% 8 June 2026 Total securitised notes and covered bonds note 3.7 3990 3.16 Retirement benefit obligations Accounting policy The Group makes contributions to both defined benefit and defined contribution pension schemes which entitle employees to benefits on retirement or disability.
Defined contribution pension scheme The Group recognises the obligation for contributions to the scheme as an expense in the income statement as incurred.
Prepaid contributions are recognised as an asset to the extent that a cash refund or a reduction in the future payment is available.
Defined benefit pension scheme A liability or asset in respect of the defined benefit scheme is recognised on the balance sheet and is measured as the present value of the defined benefit obligation less the fair value of the defined benefit scheme assets at the reporting date.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation for the scheme is discounted by high quality corporate bond rates that have maturity dates approximating to the terms of the Groups defined benefit obligation.
Surpluses are only recognised to the extent that they are recoverable through reduced contributions in the future or through refunds from the scheme.
In assessing whether a surplus is recoverable the Group considers its current right to obtain a refund or a reduction in future contributions and does not anticipate any future acts by other parties that could change the amount of the surplus that may be ultimately recovered.
Pension expense attributable to the Groups defined benefit scheme comprises current service cost net interest on the net defined benefit obligationasset past service cost resulting from a scheme amendment or curtailment gains or losses on settlement and administrative costs incurred.
Where actuarial remeasurements arise the Group recognises such amounts directly in equity through the statement of comprehensive income in the period in which they occur.
Actuarial remeasurements arise from experience adjustments the effects of differences between previous actuarial assumptions and what has actually occurred and changes in actuarial assumptions.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 225 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Group operates both defined benefit and defined contribution arrangements.
The Groups principal trading subsidiary Clydesdale Bank PLC is the sponsoring employer in one funded defined benefit pension scheme the Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Scheme the Scheme.
The Scheme was established under trust on 30 September 2009 as a result of the merger of the Clydesdale Bank Pension Scheme and the Yorkshire Bank Pension Fund.
The assets of the Scheme are held in a trustee administered fund with the Trustee responsible for the operation and governance of the Scheme including making decisions regarding the Schemes funding and investment strategy.
The Scheme is subject to the funding legislation outlined in the Pensions Act 2004 which came into force on 30 December 2005.
This together with documents issued by the Pensions Regulator sets out the framework for funding defined benefit occupational pension plans in the UK.
The Group also provides postretirement health care under a defined benefit scheme for pensioners and their dependant relatives for which provision has been made on a basis consistent with the methodology applied to the defined benefit pension scheme.
This is a closed scheme and the provision will be utilised over the life of the remaining scheme members.
The following table provides a summary of the present value of the defined benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets for the Scheme Active members defined benefit obligation 807 1264 Deferred members defined benefit obligation 1549 1776 Pensioner and dependant members defined benefit obligation 1618 1497 Total defined benefit obligation 3974 4537 Fair value of Scheme assets 4181 4462 Net defined benefit pension assetliability 207 75 Postretirement medical benefits obligations 3 1 Active members include current employees who became deferred members on 1 August 2017 as part of the Scheme closure exercise.
The Group has implemented a number of reforms to the Scheme to manage the liability.
It closed the Scheme to new members in 2004 and since April 2006 has determined benefits accruing on a career average revalued earnings basis.
On 1 August 2017 the Scheme was closed to future benefit accrual for the majority of current employees with affected employees future pension benefits being provided through the existing defined contribution scheme Total Pension.
The Total Pension income statement charge for the year is shown in note 2.4.
The closure of the Scheme for the majority of current employees has resulted in a reduction in the defined benefit obligation recognised as a past service credit in the year.
During the year Clydesdale Bank PLC reached agreement with the Trustee on the Scheme funding valuation at 30 September 2016 with a calculated deficit of 290m.
In the recovery plan dated 31 July 2017 the Group agreed to contribute 50m per annum until 31 March 2022 and 55m in the year to 31 March 2023 to eliminate this deficit.
Reconciliation of the net defined benefit pension assetliability Opening net defined benefit pension scheme liabilityasset 75 52 Service creditcost 54 31 Interest on net defined benefit liabilityasset 1 3 Remeasurement effects recognised in SOCI 154 179 Employer contributions 69 84 Administrative expenses 7 4 Curtailments and settlements 13 Closing fair value of net defined benefit pension scheme assetliability 207 75 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 226 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.16 Retirement benefit obligations continued Reconciliation of the defined benefit pension scheme assets Opening fair value of defined benefit pension scheme assets 4462 3565 Interest income on Scheme assets at discount rate 104 135 Return on Scheme assets lessgreater than discount rate 195 791 Employer contributions note 5.3 69 84 Benefits paid 102 90 Transfer payments 150 19 Administrative costs paid 7 4 Closing fair value of defined benefit pension scheme assets 4181 Reconciliation of the defined benefit pension scheme obligations Opening defined benefit pension scheme obligations 4537 3513 Current service cost 26 27 Past service creditcost 80 4 Interest expense on the defined benefit obligation 105 132 Actuarial gain  experience adjustments 76 51 Actuarial gain  demographic assumptions 88 Actuarial gainloss  financial assumptions 185 1021 Benefits paid from Scheme assets 102 90 Transfer payments 150 19 Curtailments and settlements 13 Closing defined benefit pension scheme obligations 3974 The major categories of plan assets for the Scheme stated at fair value are as follows
Equities 804 784 Government bonds 1495 1640 Global sovereign bonds 33 38 Corporate bonds 829 968 Alternative credit 97 Infrastructure 272 254 Secure income alternatives 209 124
Other 4 6 Cash 124 93
Property 145 115 Fair value of defined benefit pension scheme assets 4181 1 Derivative financial instruments are used to modify the profile of the assets of the Scheme to better match the Schemes liabilities.
Derivative holdings may lead to increased or decreased exposures to the physical asset categories disclosed above.
The Scheme is not invested in any of the Groups own financial instruments.
Through its defined benefit pension plan and postemployment medical plan the Group is exposed to a number of risks.
The main risk to the Group is that additional contributions are required if the Schemes assets are not sufficient to pay for the benefits which will be influenced mainly by inflation and the longevity of members.
The level of asset returns will be a key factor in the overall investment return.
The investment portfolio is subject also to a range of risks typical of the assets held in particular equity risk credit risk on bonds and exposure to the property market.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 227 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The Trustee has implemented an investment structure including physical assets and derivatives that seeks to reduce the Schemes exposure to inflation and interest rate risks.
The current hedge ratio is around 60% of liabilities when measured on a selfsufficiency basis.
This strategy reflects the Schemes liability profile and the Trustees and the Groups attitude to risk.
The Trustee monitors the investment objectives and asset allocation policy on a regular basis.
Amounts recognised in the income statement Current service cost 26 27 Past service cost 8 4 Past service credit on closure of Scheme 88 Curtailment and settlement gains 13 Net interest on net defined benefit liabilityasset 1 3 Defined benefit incomeexpense for the year 66 28 Administration costs incurred 7 4 Creditcost recognised in the income statement note 2.4 59 32 The Group incurred a past service cost of 8m 2016 4m in relation to enhanced early retirement entitlements on redundancy in both years these were fully offset in the income statement by a corresponding release from the restructuring provision.
In contrast the income statement benefited from a curtailment gain of 13m 2016 Nil due to a higher than normal level of redundancies in the current year with no enhancement entitlement this gain has been offset against the related restructuring costs.
Amounts recognised in the statement of comprehensive income Opening cumulative actuarial losses 849 670 Actuarial gain due to liability experience adjustments 76 51 Actuarial gainloss due to liability assumption changes 185 1021 Actuarial gain due to demographic assumption changes 88 Return on Scheme assets lessgreater than discount rate 195 791 Cumulative actuarial losses recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 695 Actuarial assumptions % p. % p.
Financial assumptions Discount rate 2.74 2.38 Inflation RPI 3.24 3.02 Inflation CPI 2.24 2.02 Career average revalued earnings CARE revaluations Pre 31 March 2012 benefits RPI 3.24 3.02 Post 31 March 2012 benefits CPI capped at 5% per annum 2.24 2.02 Pension increases capped at 2.5% per annum 2.12 2.05 Pension increases capped at 5% per annum 3.10 2.94 Rate of increase for pensions in deferment 2.24 2.02 Demographic assumptions Postretirement mortality years years Current pensioners at 60  male 28.2 27.7 Current pensioners at 60  female 29.7 29.6 Future pensioners at 60  male 29.3 29.2 Future pensioners at 60  female 30.9 31.1 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 228 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.16 Retirement benefit obligations continued Critical accounting estimates and judgements The value of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme requires management to make several assumptions.
The key areas of estimation uncertainty are The discount rate applied.
The discount rate is required to be set with reference to market yields at the end of the reporting period on high quality corporate bonds in the currency and with a term consistent with the Schemes obligations.
The average duration of the Schemes obligations is approximately 20 years.
The market for bonds with a similar duration is illiquid and as a result significant management judgement is required to determine an appropriate yield curve on which to base the discount rate.
Inflation assumptions.
Inflation is set with reference to market expectations of the RPI measure of inflation for a term consistent with the Schemes obligations based on data published by the BoE.
Other measures of inflation such as CPI or inflation measures subject to an annual cap are derived from this assumption.
Mortality assumptions.
The cost of the benefits payable by the Scheme will also depend upon the life expectancy of the members.
The assumptions for mortality rates are based on standard mortality tables which allow for future improvements in life expectancies.
The table below sets out the sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation and pension cost to realistic changes in the key actuarial assumptions Assumption change Impact on defined benefit obligation Impact on pension cost Discount rate 0.25% 186 6 0.25% 199 6
0.25% 140 4 0.25% 135 4 Life expectancy 1 year 136 4 1 year 139 4 The above sensitivity analyses are based on a change in an assumption while holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
The discounted mean term of the defined benefit obligation at 30 September 2017 is 20 years 2016 22 years.
The expected contributions for the year ending 30 September 2018 are 33m 2017 Nil and expected benefit payments for the year ending 30 September 2018 are 100m 2017 85m.
During the current year the Group and Trustee entered into a contingent security arrangement the Security Arrangement note 5.3.
3.17 Other liabilities Notes in circulation 2197 1912 Accruals and deferred income 163 152 Other 111 146 2210 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 229 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 3.18 Fair value of financial instruments Accounting policy Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the valuation date.
When available the Group measures the fair value of an instrument using quoted prices in an active market for that instrument.
Where no such active market exists for the particular asset or liability the Group uses a valuation technique to arrive at the fair value including the use of transaction prices obtained in recent arms length transactions where possible discounted cash flow analysis option pricing models and other valuation techniques commonly used by market participants.
In doing so fair value is estimated using a valuation technique that makes maximum possible use of market inputs and that places minimal possible reliance upon entityspecific inputs.
The best evidence of the fair value of a financial instrument at initial recognition is the transaction price which represents the fair value of the consideration given or received unless the fair value of that instrument is evidenced by comparison with other observable current market transactions in the same instrument i. variables include only data from observable markets.
When such evidence exists the Group recognises profits or losses on the transaction date.
In certain limited circumstances the Group applies the fair value measurement option to financial assets including loans and advances where the inherent market risks principally interest rate and option risk are individually hedged using appropriate interest rate derivatives.
The loan is designated as being carried at fair value through profit or loss to offset the movements in the fair value of the derivative within the income statement and therefore avoid accounting mismatch.
When a loan is held at fair value a statistical based calculation is used to estimate expected losses attributable to adverse movements in credit risk on the assets held.
This adjustment to the credit quality of the asset is then applied to the carrying amount of the loan to arrive at fair value and recognised in the income statement.
Analysis of the fair value disclosures uses a hierarchy that reflects the significance of inputs used in measuring fair value.
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a fair value measurement is categorised is determined on the basis of the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety.
The fair value hierarchy is as follows Level 1 fair value measurements  quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for an identical financial asset or liability Level 2 fair value measurements  inputs other than quoted prices within Level 1 that are observable for the financial asset or liability either directly as prices or indirectly derived from prices and Level 3 fair value measurements  inputs for the financial asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
For the purpose of reporting movements between levels of the fair value hierarchy transfers are recognised at the beginning of the reporting period in which they occur.
The tables overleaf show a comparison of the carrying amounts of financial assets and liabilities measured at amortised cost as reported on the balance sheet and their fair values where these are not approximately equal.
There are various limitations inherent in this fair value disclosure particularly where prices are derived from unobservable inputs due to some financial instruments not being traded in an active market.
The methodologies and assumptions used in the fair value estimates are therefore described in the notes to the tables.
The difference between carrying value and fair value is relevant in a trading environment but is not relevant to assets such as loans and advances.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 230 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.18 Fair value of financial instruments continued 30 September 2017 30 September 2016
Fair value Fair value measurement using
Fair value Fair value measurement using Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Financial assets Loans and advances to customers 31293 31088  1009 30079 29202 29298  1076 28222 Financial liabilities Due to customers 27718 27833  27833  27090 27114  27114 Debt securities in issue 4785 4910 795 4115  4501 4592 459 4133 The Groups fair values disclosed for financial instruments at amortised cost are based on the following methodologies and assumptions Loans and advances to customers  The fair values of loans and advances are determined by firstly segregating them into portfolios of similar characteristics.
Contractual cash flows are then adjusted for expected credit losses and expectations of customer behaviour based on observed historic data.
The cash flows are then discounted using current market rates for instruments of similar terms and maturity to arrive at an estimate of their fair value.
Certain variable rate loan portfolios are discounted using market rates on similar loans offered by the Group at the valuation date.
Due to customers  The fair value of deposits is determined from a discounted cash flow model using current market rates for instruments of similar terms and maturity.
Debt securities in issue  The fair value is taken directly from quoted market prices where available or determined from a discounted cash flow model using current market rates for instruments of similar terms and maturity.
The following tables provide an analysis of financial instruments that are measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value using the fair value hierarchy described above.
Fair value measurement as at 30 September 2017 Fair value measurement as at 30 September 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Financial assets Derivative financial assets  282  282  585  585 AFS investments  listed 2066   2066 1695   1695 AFS investments  unlisted   4 4   29 29 AFS  other   6 6   7 7 Other financial assets at fair value   477 477   750 750 Total financial assets at fair value 2066 282 487 2835 1695 585 786 3066 Financial liabilities Derivative financial liabilities  376  376  598  598 Other financial liabilities at fair value   26 26   48 48 Total financial liabilities at fair value  376 26 402  598 48 646 There were no transfers between Level 1 and 2 in the year.
The Groups fair values for financial instruments that are measured subsequent to initial recognition at fair value are based on the following methodologies and assumptions Derivative financial assets and liabilities  The fair values of derivatives including foreign exchange contracts interest rate swaps interest rate and currency option contracts and currency swaps are obtained from discounted cash flow models or option pricing models as appropriate.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 231 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Available for sale investments Listed Level 1  The fair values of listed investments are based on quoted closing market prices.
Unlisted Level 3  Includes 2m of Visa Inc.
Visa Europe note 2.3.
The preferred stock is convertible into Visa Inc. potential reduction for certain litigation losses that may be incurred by Visa Europe.
The fair value of the preference shares has been calculated by taking the period end New York Stock Exchange share price for Visa Inc. clawback related to contingent litigation.
For other unlisted equity and debt investments the Groups share of the net asset value or the transaction price respectively are considered the best representation of the exit price and are the Groups best estimates of fair value.
Available for sale  other Level 3  The other available for sale financial asset represents deferred consideration receivable and consists of the rights to future commission.
The valuation is determined from a discounted cash flow model incorporating estimated attrition rates and investment growth rates appropriate to the underlying funds under management.
Financial assets and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss  fair values are derived from data or valuation techniques based upon observable market data and nonobservable inputs as appropriate to the nature and type of the underlying instrument.
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value based on valuation techniques for which any significant input is not based on observable market data Level 3 Level 3 movement analysis Financial assets available for sale Other financial assets at fair value Other financial liabilities at fair value Balance at the beginning of the year 36 750 48 Fair value gainslosses recognised In profit or loss unrealised  39 2 In profit or loss realised 1 2 In available for sale reserve unrealised 1
Sales
Settlements 2 236 20 Balance at the end of the year 10 477 26 Level 3 movement analysis Financial assets available for sale Other financial assets at fair value Other financial liabilities at fair value Balance at the beginning of the year 15 1097 67 Fair value gainslosses recognised In profit or loss unrealised  10 2 In profit or loss realised 8 In available for sale reserve unrealised 21 Purchases 2 Sales 8
Balance at the end of the year 36 750 48 1 Net gains or losses were recorded in noninterest income interest income or expense and impairment losses or within the available for sale reserve as appropriate.
2 The sale principally relates to the disposal of the VocaLink investment during the year note 2.3.
3 Settlements for the year ended 30 September 2016 include a realised loss of 5m relating to financial assets that are measured at fair value at the end of each reporting period.
Such fair value gains or losses are included in noninterest income note 2.3.
There were no transfers into or out of Level 3 in the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 Nil.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 232 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 3 Assets and liabilities continued 3.18 Fair value of financial instruments continued Quantitative information about significant unobservable inputs in Level 3 valuations The table below lists key unobservable inputs to Level 3 financial instruments and provides the range of those inputs as at 30 September 2017.
Fair value
Unobservable inputs
High range Financial assets Other financial assets at fair value 477 Discounted cash flow Portfolio lifetime probability of default 2.2% 11.3% Available for sale  other 6 Discounted cash flow Funds under management attrition rate 10% 20% Available for sale  investments  unlisted 4 Discounted cash flow Contingent litigation risk 0% 100% The Group has 26m 2016 48m of financial liabilities at fair value classed as Level 3 which represent a portfolio of term deposits that are directly linked to the customer loans which are also held at fair value and classed as Level 3.
Their relationship to the fair value assets is such that should the liability be settled the amount payable would be net of the fair value asset.
Sensitivity of Level 3 fair value measurements to reasonably possible alternative assumptions Where valuation techniques use nonobservable inputs that are significant to a fair value measurement in its entirety changing these inputs will change the resultant fair value measurement.
The most significant exposure to Level 3 fair value measurements is in respect of the Groups fair value loan portfolio with the most significant input other than interest rates being the future expectations of credit losses.
If lifetime expected losses were 20% greater than predicted the carrying value of the loans would decrease by 2m and vice versa.
The most significant input impacting the fair value of the available for sale  other asset is the funds under management attrition rate.
The Group currently assumes a 15% attrition rate.
If this rate was 20% the fair value would reduce by 1m if it was 10% the fair value would increase by 2m.
The most significant input impacting the fair value of the available for sale  investments is contingent litigation risk.
If this risk crystallised the fair value would reduce by 2m.
In the event the litigation risk did not transpire the fair value would increase by 3m.
Other than these significant Level 3 measurements the Group has a limited remaining exposure to Level 3 fair value measurements and changing one or more of the inputs for fair value measurements in Level 3 to reasonable alternative assumptions would not change the fair value significantly with respect to profit or loss total assets total liabilities or equity on these remaining Level 3 measurements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 233 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Section 4 Capital 4.1 Equity Accounting policy
The financial instruments issued by the Company are treated as equity i. exchanging a fixed amount of cash or other financial assets for a fixed number of its own equity instruments.
To the extent that this definition is not met the proceeds of issue are classified as a financial liability.
Dividends
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options or to the acquisition of a business are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Final dividends on ordinary shares are recognised as a liability and deducted from equity when they are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are deducted from equity when they are no longer at the discretion of the Company.
Proposed final dividends for the year are disclosed as an event after the balance sheet date.
4.1.1 Share capital Number of shares Number of shares Ordinary shares  allotted called up and fully paid Opening ordinary share capital 881531852 2232012512 88 223 Share for share exchange  1352697256  876 Share capital reduction    1011 Issued under employee share schemes 2074214 2216596 Closing ordinary share capital 883606066 881531852 88 During the year 2074214 2016 2216596 ordinary shares were issued under employee share schemes with a nominal value of 0.2m 2016 0.2m.
The share for share exchange in the year to 30 September 2016 arose on the Groups demerger from NAB and listing on the London Stock Exchange.
The holders of ordinary shares are entitled to dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the shareholders of the Company.
All shares in issue at 30 September 2017 rank equally with regard to the Companys residual assets.
The Directors have recommended a final dividend in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017 of 1p per ordinary share in the Company 2016 Nil to be paid on 16 February 2018.
The payment of the final dividend is subject to approval of the shareholders at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
These financial statements do not reflect the recommended dividend.
With regards to utilisation of the Conduct Indemnity note 3.14 sets out a number of circumstances where share capital in the Company could be subscribed for by NAB.
A description of the other equity categories included within the Consolidated statement of changes in equity and significant movements during the year is provided below.
4.1.2 Other equity instruments Other equity instruments consists of Perpetual Contingent Convertible Notes fixed 8% which were issued on 8 February 2016 with a principal amount of 450m and an optional redemption on 8 December 2022.
AT1 distributions of 36m were paid in the year 29m net of tax 2016 35m paid 28m net of tax.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 234 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 4 Capital continued 4.1.3 Capital reorganisation reserve The capital reorganisation reserve of 839m was recognised on the issuance of CYBG PLC ordinary shares in February 2016 in exchange for the acquisition of the entire share capital of the Groups previous parent company CYBI Limited.
The reserve reflects the difference between the consideration for the issuance of CYBG PLC shares and CYBI Limiteds share capital and share premium.
4.1.4 Merger reserve A merger reserve of 633m was recognised on the issuance of CYBG PLC ordinary shares in February 2016 in exchange for the acquisition of the entire share capital of CYBI Limited.
The merger reserve reflects the difference between the consideration for the issuance of CYBG PLC shares and the nominal value of the shares issued.
4.1.5 Other reserves 4.1.5.1 Asset revaluation reserve The asset revaluation reserve includes the gross revaluation increments and decrements arising from the revaluation of land and buildings.
4.1.5.2 Available for sale reserve The available for sale reserve records the gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of available for sale financial assets.
The principal movement in the reserve reflects the sale of VocaLink during the year as detailed in note 2.3.
4.1.5.3 Cash flow hedge reserve The cash flow hedge reserve represents the cumulative posttax gains and losses on derivatives designated as cash flow hedging instruments that will be recycled to the income statement when the hedged items affect profit or loss.
As at 30 September 2017 the cash flow hedge reserve reflected a cumulative loss of 1m 2016 66m cumulative gain.
The fair value of derivatives in cash flow hedges decreased by 84m in the year 2016 105m increase and a 4m gain 2016 2m gain was recycled to interest income in line with hedged items affecting profit or loss.
A 0.3m loss 2016 1m loss was transferred to noninterest income due to ineffectiveness arising from cash flow hedges.
These movements were offset by a deferred tax credit of 21m 2016 charge of 25m.
4.1.5.4 Equitybased compensation reserve The Groups equity based compensation reserve records the value of equity settled share based payment benefits provided to the Groups employees as part of their remuneration that has been charged through the income statement and adjusted for deferred tax.
4.2 Equity based compensation Accounting policy The Group operates a number of equity settled share based compensation plans in respect of services received from certain of its employees.
The fair value of the services received is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is measured by reference to the fair value of the Companys shares performance options or performance rights granted including where relevant any market performance conditions and any nonvesting conditions.
The impacts of any service and nonmarket performance vesting conditions are not included in the fair value and instead are included in estimating the number of awards or options that are expected to vest.
The total expense is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified vesting conditions are to be satisfied.
A corresponding credit is recognised in the equity based compensation reserve adjusted for deferred tax.
In some circumstances employees may provide services in advance of the grant date and therefore the grant date fair value is estimated for the purposes of recognising the expense during the period between the start of the service period and the grant date.
At the end of each reporting period the Group revises its estimates of the number of shares performance options and performance rights that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket and service vesting conditions.
The impact of the revision to original estimates if any is recognised in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to the equity based compensation reserve.
The equity settled share based payment charge for the year is 6m 2016 5m.
In the prior year the figures include awards under the Groups and NAB share plans.
The charges under the NAB share plans were classified as equity settled share based payments up to the demerger date of 8 February 2016 and are included in the total above.
Following the demerger these plans no longer meet the definition of share based payments under IFRS 2 Share based payments accordingly the total above excludes NAB share plan costs after 8 February 2016.
Details of these plans are included within the Directors remuneration report.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 235 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG awards The Group made a number of awards under its share plans Plan Eligible employees Nature of award Vesting conditions Grant dates Deferred Equity Plan Selected employees Conditional rights to shares Continuing employment or leaving in certain limited circumstances 2016 and Long Term Incentive Plan Selected senior employees Conditional rights to shares Continuing employment or leaving in certain limited circumstances and achievement of delivery of the Groups strategic goals and growth in shareholder value.
Share Incentive Plan All employees Nonconditional share award Continuing employment 2016 1 All awards are subject to vesting conditions and therefore may or may not vest.
2 The year in which grants have been made under the relevant plan.
3 Grants made under the Deferred Equity Plan are made the year following the financial year to which they relate.
Further detail on each plan is provided below Deferred Equity Plan DEP Under the plan employees were awarded conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares.
The shares are subject to forfeiture conditions including forfeiture as a result of resignation termination by the Group or failure to meet compliance requirements.
Awards include The upfront and deferred elements of bonus awards where required to comply with the PRA Remuneration Code or the Groups deferral policy.
Buyout of equity from previous employment for senior new hires.
Demerger awards which are also subject to the achievement of performance conditions over a threeyear period.
Details of the performance conditions are set out in the Directors remuneration report.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Under the plan employees were awarded conditional rights to CYBG PLC shares.
The shares are subject to forfeiture conditions including forfeiture as a result of resignation termination by the Group or failure to meet compliance requirements.
The performance conditions of the plan must be met over a threeyear period.
The measures reflect a balanced approach between financial and nonfinancial performance and are aligned to the organisations strategic goals.
Measures relative weightings and the quantum for assessing performance are outlined in the Directors remuneration report section.
Share Incentive Plan SIP Eligible employees at the date of the award were awarded Group shares which are held in the Share Incentive Plan Trust SIP Trust.
Awards are not subject to performance conditions and participants are the beneficial owners of the shares granted to them but not the registered owners.
Voting rights over the shares are normally exercised by the registered owner at the direction of the participants.
For the 2015 Demerger award leavers with the exception of gross misconduct retain their awards but they must withdraw their shares from the SIP Trust.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 236 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 4 Capital continued 4.2 Equity based compensation continued Awardsrights made during the year
Number outstanding at 1 October 2016
Number forfeited
Number outstanding as 30 September Average fair value of awards at grant pence Deferred Equity Plan 2015 Demerger 2235204  197152  2038052 196.96 2015 Bonus 1489390  7370 1346425 135595 195.17 2015 Commencement 111127   46059 65068 194.67 2016 Bonus  1193700 6776 643729 543195 266.03 2016 Commencement  169997  38001 131996 266.03 Long Term Incentive Plan 2016 LTIP  2261948 18561  2243387 266.03 Share Incentive Plan 2015 Demerger 1822976  2560 1 Forfeited shares remain in the SIP Trust.
2 Shares withdrawn from SIP Trust on leaving the Group.
Determination of grant date fair values Participants of the DEP and LTIP plans are not entitled to dividends until the awards vest but the number of shares which vest may be increased to reflect the value of dividends that would have been paid up to the end of the holding period for the awards subject to the extent permitted under the relevant remuneration regulation.
Accordingly the grant date fair value of the awards with only service conditions andor nonmarket performance conditions has been taken as the market value of the Companys ordinary shares at the grant date.
Where awards are subject to nonmarket performance conditions an estimate is made of the number of awards expected to vest in order to determine the overall sharebased payment charge to be recognised over the vesting period.
The Group has not issued awards under any CYBG plan with market performance conditions.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 237 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Section 5 Other notes 5.1 Contingent liabilities and commitments Accounting policy Financial guarantees The Group provides guarantees in the normal course of business on behalf of its customers.
Guarantees written are conditional commitments issued by the Group to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party and are primarily issued to support direct financial obligations such as commercial bills or other debt instruments issued by a counterparty.
The rating of the Group as a guarantee provider enhances the marketability of the paper issued by the counterparty in these circumstances.
Financial guarantee contracts are initially recorded at fair value which is equal to the premium received unless there is evidence to the contrary.
Operating lease commitments The leases entered into by the Group are primarily operating leases with operating lease rentals charged to the income statement on a straight line basis over the period of the lease.
The Group discloses its obligations for future minimum payments under noncancellable leases.
Contingent liabilities Contingent liabilities are possible obligations whose existence will be confirmed only by uncertain future events or present obligations where the transfer of economic benefit is uncertain or cannot be reliably measured.
Contingent liabilities are not recognised on the balance sheet but are disclosed unless they are remote.
The table below sets out the amounts of financial guarantees and commitments which are not recorded on the balance sheet.
Financial guarantees and commitments are creditrelated instruments which include acceptances letters of credit guarantees and commitments to extend credit.
The amounts do not represent the amounts at risk at the balance sheet date but the amounts that would be at risk should the contracts be fully drawn upon and the customer default.
Since a significant portion of guarantees and commitments is expected to expire without being drawn upon the total of the contract amounts is not representative of future liquidity requirements.
Financial guarantees Guarantees and assets pledged as collateral security Due in less than 3 months 19 19 Due between 3 months and 1 year 40 44 Due between 1 year and 3 years 7 9 Due between 3 years and 5 years 3 3 Due after 5 years 42 48 No specified maturity Other credit commitments Undrawn formal standby facilities credit lines and other commitments to lend at call 8408 Capital commitments The Group had future capital expenditure which had been contracted for but not provided for at 30 September 2017 of 1m 2016 2m.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 238 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 5 Other notes continued 5.1 Contingent liabilities and commitments continued Operating lease commitments Leases as lessor Future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are Within 1 year 1 2 Between 1 year and 5 years 4 4 Over 5 years  1 Leases as lessee Future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are Within 1 year 30 29 Between 1 year and 5 years 100 94 Over 5 years 13telOther contingent liabilities Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS The FSCS provides compensation to depositors in the event that a financial institution is unable to repay amounts due.
Following the failure of a number of financial institutions claims were triggered against the FSCS initially to pay interest on borrowings which the FSCS has raised from the UK Government to support the protected deposits.
During 2015 the FSCS levy was also invoiced to institutions for the third of three annual levies to cover capital repayments to the UK Government.
The principal of these borrowings which remains after the three annual levies have been paid is anticipated to be repaid from the realisation of the assets of the defaulted institutions.
The FSCS has however confirmed that the size of the future levies will be kept under review in light of developments from the insolvent estates.
The FSCS has estimated levies due to 31 March 2018 for the interest on borrowings and an accrual of 2m 30 September 2016 8m is held for the Groups calculated liability to that date.
The ultimate FSCS levy as a result of the failures is uncertain.
Conduct risk related matters There continues to be significant uncertainty and thus judgement is required in determining the quantum of conduct risk related liabilities with note 3.14 reflecting the Groups current position in relation to redress provisions including those for PPI.
The final amount required to settle the Groups potential liabilities for these and other conduct related matters is materially uncertain.
Contingent liabilities include those matters where redress is likely to be paid and costs incurred but the amounts cannot currently be estimated.
The financial exposure to the Group related to legacy conduct risks is mitigated by the Capped Indemnity provided by NAB note 3.14.
The Group will continue to reassess the adequacy of provisions for these matters and the assumptions underlying the calculations at each reporting date based upon experience and other relevant factors at that time.
Legal claims The Group is named in and is defending a number of legal claims arising in the ordinary course of business.
No material adverse impact on the financial position of the Group is expected to arise from the ultimate resolution of these legal actions.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 239 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 5.2 Notes to the statement of cash flows Adjustments included in profit before tax Interest receivable 1075 1101 Interest payable 231 295 Depreciation and amortisation note 2.4 87 88 Net gain on capital and debt restructure  1 Transfer from cash flow hedge reserve  1 Derivative financial instruments fair value movements 6 10 Impairment losses on credit exposures note 3.6 48 39 Impairment losses on software note 2.4  45 Fair value movement on investment properties 1 1 Equity based compensation 6 Gain on disposal of VocaLink 20 Changes in operating assets Net increasedecrease in Balances with supervisory central banks 1 1 Due from other banks 221 826 Derivative financial instruments 280 63 Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss 237 346 Loans and advances to customers 2140 1758 Other assets 12 15 1857 2285 Changes in operating liabilities Net increasedecrease in Due to other banks 608 960 Derivative financial instruments 221 60 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 21 19 Due to customers 699 672 Provisions for liabilities and charges 298 154 Defined benefit pension obligations 128 52 Other liabilities 280 120 919 1587 For the purposes of the statement of cash flows cash and cash equivalents comprise the following balances with less than three months maturity from the date of acquisition.
This includes cash and liquid assets and amounts due to other banks to the extent less than 90 days.
Cash and balances with central banks note 3.1 6893 5912 Other assets 99 111 Due to other banks 12 25 Other liabilities 28 48 5950 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 240 Financial statements Notes to the consolidated financial statements Section 5 Other notes continued 5.3 Related party transactions Compensation of key management personnel KMP KMP comprises Directors of the Company and members of the Executive Leadership Team.
Salaries and shortterm benefits 8 8 Other longterm employee benefits  1 Termination benefits  2 Equity based compensation 1 Basis of the expense recognised in the year in accordance with IFRS 2 Equity based compensations including associated employers NIC.
The following information regarding Directors remuneration is presented in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
Aggregate remuneration 5 6 In addition to the above 0.2m 2016 Nil was expensed relating to longterm incentive plans.
None of the Directors were members of the Groups defined contribution pension scheme during 2017 2016 none.
One of the Directors was a member of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme during 2017 2016 one.
None of the Directors hold share options and none were exercised during the year 2016 none.
Transactions with KMP KMP their close family members and any entities controlled or significantly influenced by the KMP have undertaken the following transactions with the Group in the normal course of business.
The transactions were made on the same terms and conditions as applicable to other Group employees or on normal commercial terms.
Loans and advances 2 Deposits 4 No provisions have been recognised in respect of loans provided to the KMP 2016 Nil.
There were no debts written off or forgiven during the year to 30 September 2017 2016 Nil.
Included in the above are three 2016 six loans totalling 1m 2016 7.4m made to Directors.
In addition to the above there are guarantees of Nil 2016 0.4m made to Directors and their related parties.
Other related party transactions During the current year the Group and Trustee entered into a contingent Security Arrangement.
The Security Arrangement provides additional support to the Scheme by underpinning recovery plan contributions and some additional investment risk.
The security is in the form of a preagreed maximum level of assets that are set aside for the benefit of the Pension Scheme in certain trigger events.
These assets are held by Red Grey Square Funding LLP an insolvency remote consolidated structured entity.
The Group incurred costs in relation to pension scheme administration.
These costs which amounted to 0.3m in the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 0.5m were charged to the Group sponsored scheme.
The Group has deposits of 20.3m 2016 31.7m at the year end placed by the Scheme at market rates.
Pension contributions of 69m 2016 84m were made during the year to the Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Scheme sponsored by the Group note 3.16.
5.4 Pillar 3 disclosures Basel III Capital Requirements Directive IV Pillar 3 disclosure requirements are set out in Part Eight of the CRR.
The consolidated disclosures of the Group for the 2017 financial year will be issued concurrently with the Annual Report and Accounts and will be found at siteinvestorcentrefinancialresults.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 241 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Financial statements Company balance sheet as at 30 September Note
Due from related entities 6.6 803 498 Due from other banks 364 7 Current tax assets 1 3 Investments in controlled entities 6.2 2249 2193 Deferred tax assets  1 Total assets 3417
Due to other banks 91 36 Due to related entities 6.6 366 7 Debt securities in issue 6.3 779 480 Other liabilities 2 2 Total liabilities 1238 525
Share capital 88 88 Other equity instruments 6.5 450 450 Merger reserve 6.5 633 633 Other reserves 6.5 6 3 Retained earnings 6.5 1002 1003 Total equity 2179 2177 Total liabilities and equity 3417 The Company made a profit of 24m 2016 loss of 3m during the year.
The notes on pages 244 to 248 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 242 for the year ended 30 September Note Other reserves
Merger reserve
Equity based compen sation reserve Cash flow hedge reserve
Total equity At 1 October 2015 6.5 Loss for the year      3 3 Other comprehensive losses net of tax     3  3 Total comprehensive losses for the year     3 3 6 AT1 distributions paid net of tax      9 9 Insertion of new parent company 1099 633     1732 Share capital reduction 1011     1011 Capital note issued   450    450 Transfer from equity based compensation reserve    4  4 Equity based compensation As at 30 September 2016 6.
3 1003 2177 Profit for the year      24 24 Other comprehensive income net of tax     1  1 Total comprehensive income for the year     1 24 25 AT1 distributions paid net of tax      29 29 Transfer from equity based compensation reserve    4  4 Equity based compensation    6   6 As at 30 September 2017 6.
2 1002 2179 The notes on pages 244 to 248 form an integral part of these financial statements.
Financial statements Company statement of changes in equity CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 243 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Financial statements Company statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 September Operating activities Profitloss on ordinary activities before tax 29 3 Adjustments for Changes in operating assets Due from other banks 357 7 Changes in operating liabilities Due to other banks 55 36 Other liabilities  2 Interest receivable 25 15 Interest payable 27 16 Net increase in amounts due to related entities 359 7 Tax received  Group relief 3 Net cash provided by operating activities 91 Cash flows from investing activities Investment in controlled entities 49 Net cash used in investing activities 49 2184 Cash flows used infrom financing activities Interest received 22 11 Interest paid 24 12 Insertion of a new parent company  1732 Issuance of mediumterm notessubordinated debt 298 474 Proceeds for issue of other equity instruments  450 Net decrease in amounts due from related entities 296 480 AT1 distributions 36 12 Net cash used inprovided by financing activities 36 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 6 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 15 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 21 Cash and cash equivalents comprise the following balances with less than three months maturity from the date of acquisition.
Due from related parties note 6.6 21 The notes on pages 244 to 248 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 244 Section 6 Notes to the Company financial statements 6.1 Company basis of preparation The Company is incorporated in the UK and registered in England and Wales.
The Company financial statements of CYBG PLC the Parent Company the Company which should be read in conjunction with the Group Directors Report have been prepared on a going concern basis in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
No individual income statement or statement of comprehensive income is presented for the Company as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis of measurement The financial information has been prepared under the historical cost convention.
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimates are revised and in any future periods affected.
The accounting policies of the Company are the same as those of the Group which are set out in the notes to the consolidated financial statements except that the Company has no policy in respect of consolidation.
These accounting policies have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these financial statements.
6.2 Company investments in controlled entities Accounting policy The Companys investments in controlled entities are valued at cost or valuation less any provision for impairment.
Such investments are reviewed annually for potential evidence of impairment or more frequently when there are indications that impairment may have occurred.
Losses relating to impairment in the value of shares in controlled entities are recognised in the income statement.
At 30 September 2249 As disclosed in note 3.14 to the consolidated financial statements the Company has entered into a Conduct Indemnity Deed with NAB.
Claims under the Conduct Indemnity Deed are made by the Company while the provisions in respect of the qualifying conduct costs are raised and incurred by its principal trading subsidiary Clydesdale Bank PLC.
As a consequence the recognition and measurement basis of the Capped Indemnity in the Company differs from that of the Group.
For the Company the substance of the indemnity agreement is that of variable consideration in relation to its investment in controlled entities.
When a claim is raised under the Capped Indemnity the Company recognises a receivable from NAB presented within amounts due from other banks with a corresponding decrease in the cost of the Companys investments in controlled entities.
The Company does not recognise any income or expense in relation to claims under the Capped Indemnity.
It is intended that upon collection of the claim proceeds from NAB the capital impact of providing for Relevant Conduct Matters in Clydesdale Bank PLC is mitigated by the Company using the proceeds to subscribe for share capital.
During the year ended 30 September 2017 the Companys investments in controlled entities was reduced by 536m 2016 433m in relation to Conduct Indemnity adjustments and the Company subscribed for 179m 2016 426m of additional share capital in its controlled entities.
Where provisions for Relevant Conduct Matters are increased in respect of a reporting period but proceeds from that claim are not received from NAB prior to the reporting date the Company has put in place an agreement with Clydesdale Bank PLC in order to mitigate the effect of capital losses at the end of the reporting period.
Upon raising a provision for a Relevant Conduct Matter the Company indemnifies Clydesdale Bank PLC for the Qualifying Conduct Costs excluding the Groups loss share until it subscribes for an equivalent amount of capital in Clydesdale Bank PLC.
The Company recognises a capital contribution within investments in controlled entities and a liability in amounts due to other entities in respect of these amounts.
This totalled 364m at 30 September 2017 2016 7m.
Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 245 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information The table below represents the wholly owned subsidiary undertakings of the Group and Company as at 30 September 2017 Wholly owned subsidiary undertakings Nature of business Class of share held
Country of incorporation Registered office Direct holdings Clydesdale Bank PLC Banking Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL CYB Investments Limited Holding company Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ Indirect holdings CGF No 9 Limited Leasing Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL Clydesdale Bank Asset Finance
Leasing Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL Clydesdale Bank Head Office Nominees Limited In liquidation Limited by guarantee 100% Scotland Saltire Court 20 Castle Terrace Edinburgh EH1 2DB Craig Yr Haul Management Company Limited
Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ CYB Intermediaries Holdings
In liquidation Ordinary 100% England 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL CYB Intermediaries Limited Insurance intermediary Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ CYB Services Limited In liquidation Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL St Vincent Equities Limited Investment company Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL Yorkshire Bank Home Loans
Mortgage finance Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ 11 Tudor Hill Residential Management Company Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ CB Nominees Limited Dormant Limited by guarantee 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL CYB SSP Trustee Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ Linton Springs Residential Management Company Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ St Johns Place Residential Management Company Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ YCB DC Trustee Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL YCBPS Property Nominee Company Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Trustee Limited Dormant Ordinary 100% Scotland 30 St Vincent Place Glasgow G1 2HL Yorkshire Bank PLC Dormant Ordinary 100% England 20 Merrion Way Leeds Yorkshire LS2 8NZ The Company also has an interest in the Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Foundation a charitable foundation registered in Scotland as a company limited by guarantee.
Clydesdale Bank PLC acts as a guarantor for 10 and is the main donor.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 246 Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements Section 6 Notes to the Company financial statements continued 6.2 Company investments in controlled entities continued All subsidiaries have a 30 September year end with the exception of the following entities Wholly owned subsidiary undertakings Accounting reference date Craig Yr Haul Management Company Limited 31 January 11 Tudor Hill Residential Management Company Limited 31 December Linton Springs Residential Management Company Limited 31 December St Johns Place Residential Management Company Limited 31 December In addition to the above the Company also has an interest in a number of structured entities Other controlled entities as at 30 September 2017 Nature of business Country of incorporation Registered office Clydesdale Covered Bonds No.
2 LLP Acquisition of mortgage loans England 20 Merrion Way Leeds LS2 8NZ Lanark Holdings Limited Holding company England Winchester House Mail Stop 429 1 Great Winchester Street London EC2N 2DB Lanark Trustees Limited Mortgages trustee England Winchester House Mail Stop 429 1 Great Winchester Street London EC2N 2DB Lanark Funding Limited Funding company England Winchester House Mail Stop 429 1 Great Winchester Street London EC2N 2DB Lanark Master Issuer PLC Issuer of securitised notes England Winchester House Mail Stop 429 1 Great Winchester Street London EC2N 2DB Lannraig Holdings Limited Holding company England 35 Great St.
Helens London EC3A 6AP United Kingdom Lannraig Trustees Limited Mortgages trustee Jersey 44 Esplanade St Helier Jersey JE4 9WG Channel Islands Lannraig Funding Limited Funding company England 35 Great St.
Helens London EC3A 6AP United Kingdom Lannraig Master Issuer PLC Issuer of securitised notes England 35 Great St.
Helens London EC3A 6AP United Kingdom Red Grey Square Funding LLP Security provider England 35 Great St.
Helens London EC3A 6AP United Kingdom 1 During the year the Bank sponsored the formation of Red Grey Square Funding LLP for the purpose of entering into the Security Arrangement with the Clydesdale and Yorkshire Bank Pension Scheme note 5.3.
All of the above structured entities have a financial year end of 30 September.
Details of the Groups interests in consolidated structured entities associated with securitisation and covered bond arrangements are set out in note 3.7.
6.3 Company debt securities in issue Subordinated debt 479 Medium term notes 300 Information on subordinated debt and medium term notes is provided in note 3.15 to the consolidated financial statements.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 247 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information 6.4 Company fair value of financial instruments Analysis of the fair value disclosures uses a hierarchy that reflects the significance of inputs used in measuring the fair value.
The level in the fair value hierarchy within which a fair value measurement is categorised is determined on the basis of the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety.
The fair value hierarchy is as follows Level 1 fair value measurements  quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical financial assets or liabilities.
Level 2 fair value measurements  inputs other than quoted prices within Level 1 that are observable for the financial asset or liability either directly as prices or indirectly derived from prices.
Level 3 fair value measurements  inputs for the financial asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
Fair value of financial instruments carried at amortised cost The tables below show a comparison of the carrying amounts of financial assets and liabilities measured at amortised cost as reported on the balance sheet and their fair values where these are not approximately equal.
There are various limitations inherent in this fair value disclosure particularly where prices may not represent the underlying value due to dislocation in the market.
Not all of the Companys financial instruments can be exchanged in an active trading market.
Company
30 September 2017 30 September 2016
Fair value Fair value measurement using
Fair value Fair value measurement using Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Financial assets Due from related entities 803 819  819  498 480  480 Financial liabilities Debt securities in issue 779 795 795   480 459 459
The Companys fair values disclosed for financial instruments at amortised cost are based on the following methodologies and assumptions Amounts due from related entities  The fair value of subordinated debt due from related entities is derived from quoted market prices of the debt security in issue after accounting for differences in credit spread.
All other amounts due from related entities are redeemable at call and therefore carrying value approximates fair value.
Debt securities in issue  The fair value of subordinated debt is taken directly from quoted market prices.
6.5 Company reserves 6.5.1 Cash flow hedge reserve As at 30 September 2017 the cash flow hedge reserve comprised crystallised fair value losses arising from a matured cash flow hedge of 2.5m 2016 3.3m.
This hedge relationship was entered into to mitigate the interest rate risk exposure prior to the issuance of the subordinated debt.
The hedge matured at the date of issue.
The balance on the cash flow hedge reserve within the statement of changes in equity is net of tax.
The crystallised fair value losses will be amortised from the cash flow hedge reserve to the income statement over the life of the subordinated debt.
In respect of this a 0.8m loss 2016 0.5m loss was recycled into the income statement during the year.
6.5.2 Other equity instruments and reserves Information on other equity instruments and other reserves is provided in note 4.1 to the Groups consolidated financial statements.
Included within retained earnings is the profit for the year ended 30 September 2017 of 24m 2016 loss of 3m.
6.5.3 Available distributable items Distributable reserves are determined as required by the Companies Act 2006 by reference to a companys individual financial statements.
At 30 September 2017 the Company had accumulated distributable reserves of 1002m 2016 1003m.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 248 Section 6 Notes to the Company financial statements continued 6.6 Company related party transactions During the year there have been transactions between the Company controlled entities of the Company and other related parties.
The Company receives and provides a range of services fromto its principal subsidiary undertaking including loans and deposits.
Amounts due from controlled entities of the Company Cash and cash equivalents 21 15 Subordinated debt 482 483 Medium term notes 300 Total amounts due from related entities 803 On 22 June 2017 the Company purchased 300m of 8year callable fixed 3.125% medium term notes with a final maturity date of 22 June 2025 from Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Medium term notes comprise dated unsecured loans and are issued by Clydesdale Bank PLC.
These securities will in the event of the windingup of the issuer be subordinated to the claims of depositors and all other creditors of the issuer other than creditors whose claims rank junior to the claims of the holders of the medium term loan liabilities including those of subordinated debt holders.
On 8 February 2016 the Company purchased 475m of 10year callable fixed 5% subordinated debt with a final maturity date of 9 February 2026 from Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Subordinated debt comprises dated unsecured loan capital and is issued by Clydesdale Bank
These securities will in the event of the windingup of the issuer be subordinated to the claims of depositors and all other creditors of the issuer other than creditors whose claims rank junior to the claims of the holders of subordinated liabilities.
Amounts due to controlled entities of the Company Amounts due in relation to conduct indemnity 364 7 Other payables 2 Total amounts due to related entities 366 Other related party transactions As discussed in note 4.2 to the consolidated financial statements the Group provides share based compensation to employees through a number of schemes all in relation to shares in the Company.
The cost of providing these benefits is recharged to the employing company Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Recharges are calculated based on the fair value of awards expensed in the period in accordance with IFRS 2 Share based payments.
The key management personnel of the Company are the key management personnel of the Group with relevant disclosures given in note 5.3 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company has no employees 2016 Nil.
Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information ADDITIONAL INFORMATION Measuring financial performance  glossary 250 Glossary 253 Abbreviations 259 Country by country reporting 260 Shareholder information 261 Forwardlooking statements 263 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 249 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 250 Additional information Measuring financial performance  glossary Financial performance measures As highlighted in the Strategic report the Financial results section and the Risk report the Group utilises a range of performance measures to assess the Groups performance.
These can be grouped under the following headings
Asset quality and Capital optimisation.
The performance measures used are a combination of statutory regulatory and alternative performance measures with the type of performance measure used dependent on the component elements and source of what is being measured.
Statutory performance measures S These are used when the basis of the calculation is derived from a measure that is required under generally accepted accounting principles GAAP.
An example of this would be references to earnings per share.
Regulatory performance measures R These are used when the basis of the calculation is required and specified by the Groups regulators.
Examples of this would be the leverage ratio and the Tier 1 ratio.
Alternative performance measures A These are used when the basis of the calculation is derived from a nonGAAP measure  also referred to as APMs.
Examples of this would be the cost to income ratio and the return on tangible equity.
Where a performance measure refers to an underlying metric the detail on how this measure is arrived at along with managements reasoning for excluding the item from the Groups current underlying performance rationale can be found on page 252 directly following this section.
These adjustments to the Groups statutory results made by management are necessary to provide a more meaningful underlying basis.
Descriptions of the performance measures used including the basis of calculation where appropriate are set out below
Term Type Definition Net interest margin NIM A Net interest income as a percentage of average interest earning assets for a given period.
Net interest income of 844m 2016 806m is divided by average interest earning assets for a given period of 37697m 2016 36257m which is then adjusted to exclude shortterm repos used for liquidity management purposes amounts received under the Conduct Indemnity and not yet utilised and any associated income.
As a result of the exclusions noted above average interest earning assets used as the denominator have reduced by 491m 2016 698m and the net interest income numerator has reduced by 1.1m 2016 2.6m.
Underlying return on tangible equity RoTE A Underlying profit after tax less preference share and other distributions as a percentage of average tangible equity total equity less intangible assets and AT1 for a given period.
Underlying cost to income ratio CIR A Underlying total operating expenses as a percentage of underlying total operating income for a given period.
Underlying basic earnings per share EPS A Underlying profitloss attributable to ordinary equity shareholders including tax relief on any distributions made to other equity holders divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue for a given period.
Statutory RoTE A Statutory profitloss after tax less preference share and noncontrolling interest distributions as a percentage of average tangible equity total equity less intangible assets and AT1 for a given period.
Statutory CIR A Statutory total operating expenses as a percentage of total operating income for a given period.
Statutory basic EPS S Statutory profitloss attributable to ordinary equity shareholders including tax relief on any distributions made to other equity holders divided by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue for a given period.
The term financial performance measure covers all metrics ratios and percentage calculations used to assess the Groups performance and is interchangeable with similar terminology used in the Annual Report and Accounts such as highlights key metrics key performance indicators KPIs and key credit metrics.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 251 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Asset quality Term Type Definition Impairment charge to average customer loans cost of risk A Impairment losses on credit exposures plus credit risk adjustment on fair value loans to average customer loans defined as loans and advances to customers other financial assets at fair value and due from customers on acceptances.
90 days past due DPD plus impaired assets to customer loans A Customer loans that are either impaired or where the repayment is more than 90 days overdue as a percentage of total customer loans at a given date.
Specific provision to gross impaired assets A The specific impairment provision on credit exposures as a percentage of gross impaired assets at a given date.
Total provision to customer loans A Total impairment provision on credit exposures as a percentage of total customer loans at a given date.
Indexed loan to value LTV of the mortgage portfolio A The mortgage portfolio weighted by balance and indexed using the MIAC Acadametrics indices at a given date.
Net write offs to customer loans A Net write offs including loans at fair value as a percentage of total customer loans at a given date.
Capital optimisation Term Type Definition Common Equity Tier 1 CET1 ratio R CET1 capital divided by RWAs at a given date.
Tier 1 ratio R Tier 1 capital as a percentage of riskweighted assets.
Total capital ratio R Total capital resources divided by riskweighted assets at a given date.
Leverage ratio R This is a regulatory standard ratio proposed by the Basel III as a supplementary measure to the risk based capital requirements.
It is intended to constrain the buildup of excess leverage in the banking sector and is calculated by dividing Tier 1 capital resources by a defined measure of on and offbalance sheet items plus derivatives.
Modified leverage ratio R The Groups leverage ratio on a modified basis excluding qualifying central bank claims from the exposure measure in accordance with the policy statement issued by the PRA in October 2017.
Tangible net asset value TNAV per share A Tangible equity as at the period end divided by the closing number of ordinary shares.
Loan to deposit ratio LDR R Customer loans as a percentage of customer deposits at a given date.
Liquidity coverage ratio
R Measures the surplus or deficit of the banks high quality liquid assets relative to weighted net stressed cash outflows over a 30 day period.
It assesses whether the bank has sufficient liquid assets to withstand a shortterm liquidity stress based on cash outflow assumptions provided by regulators.
Net stable funding ratio
R The total amount of available stable funding divided by the total amount of required stable funding expressed as a percentage.
The Group monitors the NSFR based on its own interpretations of current guidance available for CRD IV NSFR reporting.
Therefore the reported NSFR may change over time with regulatory developments.
Due to possible differences in interpretation of the rules the Groups ratio may not be directly comparable with those of other financial institutions.
The Group no longer reports Return on Assets statutory and underlying basis as a financial performance measure.
Other measures presented such as RoTE are considered more relevant and useful for assessing profitability.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 252 Additional information Measuring financial performance  glossary Underlying adjustments to the statutory view of performance In arriving at an underlying basis the effects of certain items that do not promote an understanding of historical or future trends of earnings or cash flows are removed with management believing this presents a set of results that provide a more reflective yearonyear comparison.
These items are
FY2017
FY2016 m Description Reason for exclusion from the Groups current underlying performance
58 51 These are customer redress and associated costs arising from legacy products and past sales practices.
These costs are historical in nature and are not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
Restructure expense 67 45 Restructuring of the business is currently ongoing with costs including redundancy payments property vacation costs and associated enablement costs.
These costs are significant and are part of the Groups strategic objective in simplifying and streamlining operations and processes to enhance productivity.
Consequently this expense is not viewed as a normal ongoing operating cost to the
Separation costs 8 11 Costs incurred directly relating to the demerger from NAB.
Specific costs relating to the demerger from NAB are historic and not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
Net gains on debt restructuring 1 These are the net gains arising on the repurchase of subordinated debt from NAB at the time of the demerger.
Losses or gains from oneoff or infrequent transactions such as those rising from debt restructures are not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
Impairment
45 This relates to the impairment of historic development costs and legacy software developed pre demerger.
Specific costs or gains relating to the demerger from NAB are historic and not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
This includes the impact on the impairment of legacy intangible assets where post demerger the Group had greater flexibility in its digital direction.
Gain on disposal of
Visa share 20 7 A oneoff gain recognised on the disposal of the Groups VocaLink and Visa Europe Limited share.
Losses or gains from oneoff or infrequent transactions are not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
Gain on DB pension scheme reforms 88  A oneoff gain on the closure of the defined benefit pension scheme to future accrual for the majority of members Losses or gains from oneoff or infrequent transactions are not indicative of the Groups current underlying performance.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 253 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Term Definition Additional Tier 1 securities AT1 Securities that are considered additional Tier 1 capital in the context of CRD IV.
Arrears A customer is in arrears when they fail to adhere to their contractual payment obligations resulting in an outstanding loan that is unpaid or overdue.
Average assets Represents the average of assets over the year adjusted for any disposed operations.
B The Groups digital application suite offering Retail customers money management capabilities across Web Android and Apple platforms.
Bank Clydesdale Bank PLC.
Bank levy Applicable to certain UK financial institutions and UK operations of foreign banks from 1 January 2011.
The amount due is based on a percentage of the chargeable equity and liabilities for each applicable entity as at the balance sheet date.
Bank surcharge Introduced by the Finance Act No2 2015 for the Groups banking entity from 1 January 2016 and is an 8% charge on taxable profits over 25m before the offset of brought forward losses or Group relief.
Basel II The capital adequacy framework issued by the BCBS in June 2006 defining how firms should calculate their regulatory capital requirements.
Basel III Reforms issued by the BCBS in December 2010 to strengthen global capital and liquidity rules with the goal of promoting a more resilient banking sector.
In Europe the new requirements were implemented by CRD IV on a phased basis from 1 January 2014 with full implementation by 1 January 2019.
Basis points bps One hundredth of a percent 0.01% meaning that 100 basis points is equal to 1%.
This term is commonly used in describing interest rate movements.
Board Refers to the CYBG PLC Board or the Clydesdale Bank PLC Board as appropriate.
Capped Indemnity The indemnity from NAB in favour of CYBG PLC in respect of certain qualifying conduct costs incurred by CYBG Group which is capped at the Capped Indemnity Amount subject to the Loss Sharing Arrangement under the terms of the Conduct Indemnity Deed.
Capped Indemnity Amount An amount equal to 1.58bn less any Pre Covered provision amount.
Carrying value also referred to as carrying amount The value of an asset or a liability in the balance sheet based on either amortised cost or fair value principles.
Collateral The assets of a borrower that are used as security against a loan facility.
Collateral Account A cash deposit with the BoE in an amount equal to the Unutilised Indemnity Amount from time to time used to collateralise certain obligations of NAB under the Capped Indemnity.
Collective impairment provision Impairment assessment on a collective basis for homogeneous groups of loans that are not considered individually significant and to cover losses which have been incurred but have not yet been identified on loans subject to individual assessment.
Commercial paper An unsecured promissory note issued to finance shortterm credit requirements.
These instruments have a specified maturity date and stipulate the face amount to be paid to the investor on that date.
Common Equity Tier 1 capital
The highest quality form of regulatory capital that comprises total shareholders equity and related noncontrolling interests less goodwill and intangible assets and certain other regulatory adjustments.
Company CYBG PLC.
Conduct Indemnity Deed The deed between NAB and CYBG PLC setting out the terms of The Capped Indemnity and Certain arrangements for the treatment and management of certain Conduct Matters.
Conduct Matters In the context of the Conduct Indemnity Deed conduct issues relating to PPI standalone IRHP voluntary scope TBLs and FRTBLs and other conduct matters in the period prior to the demerger date whether or not known at the demerger date.
Conduct risk The risk of treating customers unfairly andor delivering inappropriate outcomes resulting in customer detriment regulatory fines compensation redress costs and reputational damage.
Contractual maturities The date on which the final payment of any financial instrument is due to be paid or received at which point all the remaining outstanding principal and interest have been repaid in full.
Glossary
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 254 Term Definition Counterparty The other party that participates in a financial transaction with every transaction requiring a counterparty in order for the transaction to complete.
Covered bonds A corporate bond with primary recourse to the institution and secondary recourse to a pool of assets that act as security for the bonds on issuer default.
Covered bonds remain on the issuers balance sheet and are a source of term funding for the Group.
CRD IV European legislation to implement Basel III.
It replaces earlier European capital requirements directives with a revised package consisting of a new Capital Requirements Directive and a new Capital Requirements Regulation.
CRD IV sets out capital and liquidity requirements for European banks and harmonises the European framework for bank supervision.
See also Basel III.
CRD V A set of proposals issued by the European Commission including amendments of among other things the existing Capital Requirements Directive and Capital Requirements
See also CRD IV.
Credit risk adjustmentcredit valuation adjustment An adjustment to the valuation of financial instruments held at fair value to reflect the creditworthiness of the counterparty.
Customer deposits Money deposited by individuals and corporate entities that are not credit institutions and can be either interest bearing noninterest bearing or term deposits.
Default A customer is in default when either they are more than 90 days past due on a credit obligation to the Group or are considered unlikely to pay their credit obligations in full without recourse to actions such as realisation of security if held.
Delinquency See Arrears.
Demerger The demerger of CYBG Group from NAB pursuant to which all of the issued share capital of CYBI Limited was transferred to CYBG PLC by NAB in consideration for the issue and transfer of CYBG shares to NAB in part for the benefit of NAB which NAB subsequently sold pursuant to the IPO and in part for the benefit of NAB shareholders under a scheme of arrangement.
Demerger date 8 February 2016 Derivative A financial instrument that is a contract or agreement whose value is related to the value of an underlying instrument reference rate or index.
Earnings at risk EaR A measure of the quantity by which net interest income might change in the event of an adverse change in interest rates.
Effective interest rate method The method used to measure the carrying value of certain financial instruments which amortises the relevant fees over the expected life of the instrument.
Effective tax rate The tax charge in the statutory income statement as a percentage of the statutory profit before tax.
Encumbered assets Assets that have been pledged as security collateral or legally ring fenced in some other way which prevents those assets being transferred pledged sold or otherwise disposed.
Exposure A claim contingent claim or position which carries a risk of financial loss.
Fair value The price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction in the principal or most advantageous market at the measurement date under current market conditions.
Fair value adjustment An adjustment to the fair value of a financial instrument which is determined using a valuation technique Level 2 and Level 3 to include additional factors that would be considered by a market participant that are not incorporated within the valuation model.
Financial Ombudsman Service FOS An independent body set up by the UK Parliament to resolve individual complaints between financial businesses and their customers.
Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS The UKs compensation fund of last resort for customers of authorised financial services firms and is funded by the financial services industry.
The FSCS may pay compensation if a firm is unable or likely to be unable to pay claims against it.
This is usually because it has stopped trading or has been declared in default.
FINREP A standardised Financial Reporting framework mandated by the EBA.
Its aim is to establish a single rule book to ensure a robust and uniform regulatory framework.
Additional information
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 255 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Term Definition Forbearance The term generally applied to the facilities provided or changes to facilities provided to assist borrowers both retail and SME who are experiencing or are about to experience a period of financial stress.
Forborne nonperforming loans Loans to which forbearance measures have been granted and which are more than 90 DPD or where the debtor is assessed as unlikely to pay its credit obligations in full without realisation of collateral regardless of the existence of any pastdue amount or of the number of DPD.
Forborne performing loans Loans to which forbearance measures have been granted and which are up to 90 DPD and do not otherwise meet the criteria of forborne nonperforming loans.
Funding risk A form of liquidity risk arising when the liquidity needed to fund illiquid asset positions cannot be obtained at the expected terms and when required.
Group CYBG and its controlled entities.
Hedge ineffectiveness Represents the extent to which the income statement is impacted by changes in fair value or cash flows of hedging instruments not being fully offset by changes in fair value or cash flows of hedged items.
Housing lending Mortgages secured by residential properties as collateral. integration and connectivity for our customer systems applications and technology partners.
IFRS 9 The new financial instrument accounting standard which is applicable for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 which the Group will adopt from 1 October 2018.
Impaired loans Loans in arrears with insufficient security to cover principal and arrears of interest revenue or where there is sufficient doubt about the ultimate collectability of principal and interest.
Impairment allowances A provision held on the balance sheet to recognise that a loan is impaired.
This can be calculated at either the individual or collective level.
Impairment losses Where an assets recoverable amount is less than its carrying value and the difference is recognised in the income statement with the carrying value of the asset reduced by creating an impairment allowance.
This can be assessed at either the individual or collective level.
Interest rate hedging products
This incorporates i standalone hedging products identified in the Financial Services Authority FSA 2012 notice ii the voluntary inclusion of certain of the Groups more complex tailored business loan TBL products and iii the Groups secondary review of all fixedrate tailored business loans FRTBLs complaints which were not in scope for the FSA notice.
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process ICAAP The Groups assessment of the levels of capital that it needs to hold through an examination of its risk profile from regulatory and economic capital viewpoints.
Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process ILAAP The Groups assessment and management of balance sheet risks relating to funding and liquidity.
Internal ratingsbased approach
A method of calculating credit risk capital requirements using internal rather than supervisory estimates of risk parameters.
Investment grade The highest possible range of credit ratings from AAA to BBB as measured by external credit rating agencies.
Jaws The net difference between movements in total income and underlying costs for the period expressed as a percentage.
Level 1 fair value measurements Financial instruments whose fair value is derived from unadjusted quoted prices for identical instruments in active markets.
Level 2 fair value measurements Financial instruments whose fair value is derived from quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets and financial instruments valued using models where all significant inputs are observable.
Level 3 fair value measurements Financial instruments whose fair value is derived from valuation techniques where one or more significant inputs are unobservable.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 256 Term Definition Listing Rules Regulations applicable to any company listed on a United Kingdom stock exchange subject to the oversight of the UK Listing Authority UKLA.
The Listing Rules set out mandatory standards for any company wishing to list its shares or securities for sale to the public.
Loan to value ratio LTV A ratio that expresses the amount of a loan as a percentage of the value of the property on which it is secured.
Loss Share The percentage of a provision raised or an increase in a provision which CYBG PLC will be responsible for under the Conduct Indemnity Deed.
Fixed at 9.7% at the demerger date.
Loss Sharing Arrangement The arrangement relating to the Capped Indemnity pursuant to which CYBG PLC will be responsible for the Loss Share.
Medium Term Notes Debt instruments issued by corporates including financial institutions across a range of maturities.
Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities MREL MREL is a minimum requirement for institutions to maintain equity and eligible debt liabilities to help ensure that when an institution fails the resolution authority can use these financial resources to absorb losses and recapitalise the continuing business.
The
BoE set out its approach to setting banks MREL in November 2016.
Net interest income The amount of interest received or receivable on assets net of interest paid or payable on liabilities.
Net promoter score NPS This is an externally collated customer loyalty metric that measures loyalty between a Provider who in this context is the Group and a consumer.
Nonimpaired assets 90 DPD Consist of wellsecured assets that are more than 90 DPD and portfoliomanaged facilities that are not well secured and are between 90 and 180 DPD.
Operational risk The risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes people strategies and systems or from external events.
Overall Liquidity Adequacy Rule OLAR An FCA and PRA rule that firms must at all times maintain liquidity resources which are adequate both as to amount and quality to ensure that there is no significant risk that its liabilities cannot be met as they fall due.
This is included in the Groups Risk Appetite and subject to approval by the Board as part of the ILAAP.
Past due loans and advances Loans and advances on which repayments are overdue.
Pension risk The risk that at any point in time the available assets to meet pension liabilities are at a value below current and future scheme obligations.
PPI redress Includes PPI customer redress and all associated costs excluding fines.
Pre Covered provision amount The amount of any provisions relating to Conduct Matters raised or increased by CYBG Group between 31 March 2015 and the demerger date in respect of which NAB has provided specific support at any time after 31 March 2015 but before the demerger date.
This was 465m at the demerger date.
Probability of default PD The probability that a customer will default usually within a oneyear time horizon although the time horizon will change on 1 October 2018 in line with IFRS 9 requirements.
Property revaluation Represents revaluation increments and decrements of land and buildings based on Directors valuations to reflect fair value.
Regulatory capital The capital which the Group holds determined in accordance with rules established by the PRA.
Residential mortgagebacked securities RMBS Securities that represent interests in groups or pools of underlying mortgages.
Investors in these securities have the right to cash received from future mortgage payments interest and principal.
Additional information
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 257 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Term Definition Restructured loans A restructured loan is where the terms and conditions of a loan contract have been varied that may involve one or both of the following the original scheduled repayment contract has been rewritten by changing the frequency and pattern of repayments with a lengthening of the final repayment maturity profile on a noncommercial basis e. assets not previously held or a debt for equity swap.
See also forbearance.
Retail lending Lending to individuals rather than institutions.
This includes both secured and unsecured lending such as personal loans residential and BTL mortgages overdrafts and credit card balances.
Ring fencing A new regime of rules which require banks to change the way that they are structured by separating retail banking services from investment and international banking.
This is to ensure the economy and taxpayers are protected in the event of any future financial crises.
Risk appetite The level and types of risk the Group is willing to assume within the boundaries of its risk capacity to achieve its strategic objectives.
Riskweighted assets RWA On and off balance sheet assets of the Group are allocated a risk weighting based on the amount of capital required to support the asset.
Sale and repurchase agreement repo A shortterm funding agreement that allows a borrower to create a collateralised loan by selling a financial asset to a lender.
As part of the agreement the borrower commits to repurchase the security at a date in the future repaying the proceeds of the loan.
For the counterparty buying the security and agreeing to sell in the future it is a reverse repurchase agreement or a reverse repo.
Scheme of arrangement A scheme of arrangement under Part 5.1 of the Australian Corporations Act between NAB and NAB shareholders to effect the demerger.
Scheme The Groups defined benefit pension scheme the Yorkshire and Clydesdale Bank Pension Scheme.
Secured lending Lending in which the borrower pledges some asset e. for the lending.
Securitisation The practice of pooling similar types of contractual debt and packaging the cash flows from the financial asset into securities that can be sold to institutional investors in debt capital markets.
It provides the Group with a source of secured funding than can achieve a reduction in funding costs by offering typically AAA rated securities secured by the underlying financial asset.
SME lending Lending to nonretail customers including overdrafts asset and lease financing term lending bill acceptances foreign currency loans international and trade finance securitisation and specialised finance.
Sovereign exposures Exposures to governments ministries departments of governments embassies consulates and exposures on account of cash balances and deposits with central banks.
Specific impairment provision A specific provision relates to a specific loan and represents the estimated shortfall between the carrying value of the asset and the estimated future cash flows including the estimated realisable value of securities after meeting securities realisation costs.
Standardised approach In relation to credit risk a method for calculating credit risk capital requirements using External Credit Assessment Institutions ECAI ratings and supervisory risk weights.
In relation to operational risk a method of calculating the operational capital requirement by the application of a supervisory defined percentage charge to the gross income of eight specified business lines.
Stress testing The term used to describe techniques where plausible events are considered as vulnerabilities to ascertain how this will impact the own funds or liquidity which a bank holds.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 258 Term Definition Structured entities SE An entity created to accomplish a narrow welldefined objective e. of financial assets.
An SE may take the form of a corporation trust partnership or unincorporated entity.
SEs are often created with legal arrangements that impose strict limits on the activities of the SE.
May also be referred to as an SPV.
Subordinated debt Liabilities which rank after the claims of other creditors of the issuer in the event of insolvency or liquidation.
Term Funding Scheme TFS Launched in 2016 by the BoE to allow banks and building societies to borrow from the BoE at rates close to base rate.
This is designed to increase lending to businesses by lowering interest rates and increasing access to credit.
Tier 1 capital A measure of a banks financial strength defined by CRD IV.
It captures Common Equity Tier 1 capital plus other Tier 1 securities in issue subject to deductions.
Tier 2 capital A component of regulatory capital including qualifying subordinated debt eligible collective impairment allowances and other Tier 2 securities as defined by CRD IV.
Unauditedunverified Financial information that has not been subject to validation by the Groups external auditor.
Unsecured lending Lending in which the borrower pledges no assets as collateral for the lending such as credit cards and current account overdrafts.
Unutilised Covered Amount The amount of any unutilised accounting provision in the accounts of a member of the Group for matters covered by the Capped Indemnity to the extent indemnified by NAB pursuant to the Capped Indemnity or covered by an amount of a released or reduced provision interest or tax deduction applied or required to be applied against such provision pursuant to the Conduct Indemnity.
Unutilised Indemnity Amount The amount of support available pursuant to the Capped Indemnity at any given time following the demerger of the Group from NAB.
Value at risk VaR A measure of the loss that could occur on risk positions as a result of adverse movements in market risk factors e. given level of confidence.
Write down A reduction in the carrying value of an asset due to impairment or adverse fair value movements.
Additional information
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 259 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information
ALCO Assets and Liabilities
ASX Australian Securities Exchange AT1 Additional Tier 1 BCBS Basel Committee on Banking
BoE Bank of England bps Basis points BTL Buytolet mortgages CAGR Compound Annual Growth
CCB Capital Conservation Buffer CCyB Countercyclical Capital Buffer CET1 Common Equity Tier 1 Capital CIR Cost to income ratio CMA Competition and Markets
CPI Consumer Prices Index CRD Capital Requirements Directive CRR Capital Requirements
DB Defined benefit DPD Days past due DTR Disclosure and Transparency
EAD Exposure at Default EaR Earnings at risk eCRS electronic Customer Rating
EPS Earnings per share FCA Financial Conduct Authority.
FPC Financial Policy Committee FRC Financial Reporting Council FSCS Financial Services Compensation Scheme FTE Full time equivalent GHG Greenhouse Gases HMRC Her Majestys Revenue and
IAS International Accounting
IASB International Accounting Standards Board ICAAP Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards ILAAP Internal Liquidity Adequacy Assessment Process IPO Initial Public Offering IRB Internal ratingsbased IRHP Interest rate hedging products IRRBB Interest rate risk in the banking book ISDA International Swaps and Derivatives Association LCR Liquidity coverage ratio LDR Loan to deposit ratio LGD Loss Given Default LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate.
LSE London Stock Exchange LTIP Long term incentive plan LTV Loan to value MREL Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities MRT Material Risk Takers NAB National Australia Bank NIM Net interest margin NPS Net promoter score NSFR Net stable funding ratio OLAR Overall liquidity adequacy rule PBT Profit before tax PCA Personal current accounts PD Probability of Default PPI Payment protection insurance PRA Prudential Regulation Authority RAS Risk Appetite Statement RMBS Residential mortgagebacked securities
RMF Risk Management Framework
RoTE Return on Tangible Equity RPI Retail Price Index RWA Risk weighted assets SME Small or medium sized enterprises SRB Systemic Risk Buffer TCC Transactional Credit Committee TFS Term Funding Scheme TNAV Tangible net asset value TSA Transitional Services
VaR Value at risk CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 260 Additional information Country by country reporting The Capital Requirements CountrybyCountry Reporting Regulations 2013 came into effect on 1 January 2014 and place certain reporting obligations on financial institutions that are within the scope of the European Unions Capital Requirements Directive CRD IV.
The purpose of the Regulations is to provide clarity on the source of the Groups income and the locations of its operations.
The vast majority of entities that are consolidated within the Groups financial statements are UK registered entities.
The activities of the Group are described in the Strategic report.
The total operating income and the average number of FTE employees during the year to 30 September 2017 were
Average FTE employees number 6040 Total operating income m 1036 Profit before tax m 268 Corporation tax paid m Public subsidies received m The only other nonUK registered entity of the Group is a Trustee company that is part of the Groups securitisation vehicles Lanark and Lannraig.
Lannraig Trustees Limited is registered in Jersey.
This entity plays a part in the overall securitisation process by having the beneficial interest in certain mortgage assets assigned to it.
This entity has no assets or liabilities recognised in its financial statements with the securitisation activity taking place in other UK registered entities of the structures.
This entity does not undertake any external economic activity and has no employees.
The results of this entity as well as those of the entire Lanark and Lannraig securitisation structures are consolidated in the financial statements of the Group.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 261 Strategic report Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Annual general meeting AGM The AGM of the Company will be held at 10am GMT on Wednesday 31 January 2018 at the offices of Pinsent Masons LLP 30 Crown Place Earl Street London EC2A 4ES United Kingdom.
The Notice of AGM can be found on the CYBG PLC website site Shareholder enquiries The Companys share register is maintained by the Companys Registrar Computershare.
Shareholders with queries relating to their shareholding should contact Computershare directly using one of the methods below
Computershare UK Computershare Investor Services PLC The Pavilions Bridgwater Road
United Kingdom BS99 6ZZ Tel within UK tel Tel outside UK  44tel Email sitentactus Web site Computershare Australia Computershare Investor Services Pty Limited Yarra Falls 452 Johnston Street Abbotsford VIC 3067
Tel within Australia tel Tel outside Australia tel Email sitentact Web siteau Duplicate shareholder accounts If you receive more than one copy of Company mailings this may indicate that more than one account is held in your name on the register.
This happens when the registration details of separate transactions differ slightly.
If you believe more than one account exists in your name you may contact the Companys Registrar Computershare to request that the accounts are combined.
There is no charge for this service.
Electronic communications CYBG PLC uses its website site as its primary means of communication with its shareholders provided that the shareholder has agreed or is deemed to have agreed that communications may be sent or supplied in that manner.
Electronic communications allow shareholders to access information instantly as well as helping the Company reduce its costs and its impact on the environment.
Shareholders who have consented or are deemed to have consented to electronic communications can revoke their consent at any time by contacting the Companys Registrar Computershare.
Shareholders can sign up for electronic communications online via the following links Holders of shares on the London Stock Exchange siteecomms Holders of CDIs on the Australian Securities Exchange siteau Corporate website Information on the Company is available at the CYBG PLC website site including Financial information  annual and halfyearly reports as well as trading updates Share price information  current trading details and historical charts Shareholder information  investor presentations and share register profile News releases  current and historical.
Unsolicited telephone calls and communication Shareholders are advised to be wary of any unsolicited advice offers to buy shares at a discount or offers of free reports about the Company.
These are typically from overseas based brokers who target shareholders offering to sell them what often turns out to be worthless or high risk shares.
These operations are commonly known as boiler rooms and the brokers can be very persistent and extremely persuasive.
Shareholders are advised to deal with only financial services firms that are authorised by the FCA.
You can check a firm is properly authorised by the FCA before getting involved by visiting www. ca. iteregister.
If you do deal with an unauthorised firm you will not be eligible to receive payment under the Financial Services Compensation Scheme if anything goes wrong.
For more detailed information on how you can protect yourself from an investment scam or to report a scam go to www. ca. consumersreportscamunauthorisedfirm.
Shareholder information CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 262 Additional information Shareholder information Shareholder interests as at 30 September 2017 By size of holding
No. of shareholders %
11000 164561 82.66 55671494 6.3 10015000 29868 15 58880465 6.66 500110000 2863 1.44 19986937 2.26 10001100000 1611 0.81 35298906 3.99 100001999999999 187 0.09 713768264 80.78 Totals 199090 100.00 883606066 100.00 Proposed financial calendar Q1 Trading update 30 January 2018 Annual General Meeting 31 January 2018 Interim results announcement 15 May 2018 Q3 Trading update 2 August 2018 Full year results announcement 20 November 2018 CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 263 Governance Financial results Risk report Financial statements Additional information Strategic report Forwardlooking statements The information in this document may include forward looking statements which are based on assumptions expectations valuations targets estimates forecasts and projections about future events.
These can be identified by the use of words such as expects aims targets seeks anticipates plans intends prospects outlooks projects believes estimates potential possible and similar words or phrases.
These forward looking statements as well as those included in any other material discussed at any presentation are subject to risks uncertainties and assumptions about the Group and its securities investments and the environment in which it operates including among other things the development of its business and strategy trends in its operating industry changes to customer behaviours and covenant macroeconomic andor geopolitical factors changes to its board andor employee composition exposures to terrorist activity IT system failures cybercrime fraud and pension scheme liabilities changes to law andor the policies and practices of the BoE the FCA andor other regulatory bodies inflation deflation interest rates exchange rates changes in the liquidity capital funding andor asset position andor credit ratings of the Group the repercussions of the UKs referendum vote to leave the European Union and future capital expenditures and acquisitions.
In light of these risks uncertainties and assumptions the events in the forward looking statements may not occur.
Forward looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties.
Other events not taken into account may occur and may significantly affect the analysis of the forward looking statements.
No member of the Group or their respective directors officers employees agents advisers or affiliates gives any assurance that any such projections or estimates will be realised or that actual returns or other results will not be materially lower than those set out in this document andor discussed at any presentation.
All forward looking statements should be viewed as hypothetical.
No representation or warranty is made that any forward looking statement will come to pass.
No member of the Group or their respective directors officers employees agents advisers or affiliates undertakes any obligation to update or revise any such forward looking statement following the publication of this document nor accepts any responsibility liability or duty of care whatsoever for whether in contract tort or otherwise or makes any representation or warranty express or implied as to the truth fullness fairness merchantability accuracy sufficiency or completeness of the information in this document.
The information statements and opinions contained in this document do not constitute a public offer under any applicable legislation or an offer to sell or solicitation of any offer to buy any securities or financial instruments or any advice or recommendation with respect to such securities or other financial instruments.
CYBG PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 264 The paper used for this report is produced using 100% virgin wood fibre from wellmanaged forests.
The pulp is bleached using an Elementary Chlorine Free ECF process and the mill has both FSC and PEFC certification.
Registered number  England and Wales ARBN 609 948 281 Australia WE ARE PROUD TO HAVE BEEN SERVING OUR CUSTOMERS AND COMMUNITIES FOR OVER 175 YEARS site Head Ofce 30 St.
Vincent Place
