ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 31.6tel 2017 Headline prot before tax 152.6tel 2017
8.1tel 2017 Headline diluted earnings per share pence 98.0tel 2017 Forward bookings Highlights 2017 Headline profit before tax is defined as profit before tax and adjusting items which include amortisation of acquired intangibles impairment of goodwill intangible assets and investments profits or losses arising on disposal of Group undertakings restructuring costs transaction and integration costs on completed and pending acquisitions and disposals tax on income from associates and joint ventures gains or losses on the revaluation of deferredcontingent consideration and on equity option liabilities over noncontrolling interests and imputed interest charges on discounted equity option liabilities  see note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
Headline diluted earnings per share is calculated using profit attributable to shareholders before adjusting items  see notes 4 and 5 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
Likeforlike results are stated on a constant currency basis after excluding events which took place in the current period but did not take place under our ownership in the comparative period and after excluding events which took place in the comparative period but did not take place under our ownership in the current period.
For clarity this excludes all biennial events timing differences i. acquired events in the comparative period that didnt take place under our ownership in the comparative period i. they took place preacquisition.
Forward bookings are contracted revenues for the year ending 30 September 2018.
These are the bookings as at 24 November 2017 unless otherwise stated.
Core events are those of strategic importance to our future and include the Groups largest events those with the greatest potential for growth and a number of smaller but strategically important events.
Following the strategic review the Group deliberately segmented its business into Core and NonCore enabling management to increase its focus on events that present the greatest opportunities whilst reducing distraction from smaller events.
Diluted earnings per share 2016 3.6p Volume sales 679900m 2016 684700m Loss before tax 2016 4.1m Full year dividend per share 2016 4.5p Net debt 2016 59.1m Financial highlights Revenue of 152.6m growth of 5% on a likeforlike basis for the first time in four years Headline profit before tax of 31.6m impacted by timing of events and the planned investment of the TAG programme Statutory loss before tax after noncash impairments of goodwill and costs associated with the TAG programme Moscow has stabilised but a number of other regions remain challenged Strong cash generation from new sales initiatives and reduced net debt by 16% to 49.7m Full year dividend cover maintained at more than two times headline diluted earnings per share Forward bookings of 98m already contracted for FY2018 up 20% on a likeforlike basis Strategy update Comprehensive review of the strategy and business completed Three year TAG programme underway to create a scalable platform and drive organic growth Investment of up to 20m to be funded by existing cash generation anticipated strong ROI by 2020 Heads of best practice have been recruited Focus on onsite rebooking at a number of Core events has proved successful Traction evidenced in the growth across our Core events TAG programme is on track with signs of success from early initiatives ITE is one of the worlds leading organisers of international trade exhibitions and conferences.
Introduction
CONTENTS
Strategic report IFC Introduction 01 Highlights 2017 02 Business Overview
04 Chairmans Statement
06 Chief Executive Officers Statement
12 Business Model 14 Strategic Priorities and KPIs 16 Chief Financial Officers Statement 24 Divisional Trading Summary 34 Market Overview
36 Board of Directors 38 Environmental Impact 39 Corporate Social Responsibility 41 Corporate Governance Report 43 Directors Report 46 Audit Committee Report 49 Risk Committee Report 50 Principal Risks and Uncertainties 54 Nomination Committee Report
55 Remuneration Committee Report
57 Remuneration Policy Report
62 Annual Report on Remuneration 73 Directors Responsibilities Statement Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report
82 Consolidated Income Statement Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 88 Net Debt Reconciliation Notes to the Consolidated Accounts Company Statement of Financial Position 123 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 124 Notes to the Company Accounts 132 Shareholder Information Directors Advisers and Other Information I am pleased to report that ITE has posted likeforlike revenue growth of 5% after three years of difficult trading.
On our top ten events we have driven likefor like top line growth of 15%.
This growth in part reflects the successful roll out of the first phase of our TAG initiatives and our decision to focus on Core events that have the greatest capacity for growth.
Whilst there have been challenging trading conditions in Russia outside of Moscow Central Asia and in Turkey we have seen the benefit of improved trading in Moscow.
Our
TAG programme is on track during 2017 we have assembled the right team structure and processes that we believe will lead to success.
Even at this early stage we are clearly seeing the benefits of our TAG initiatives through growth in our Core events and forward bookings.
ITE is well placed to realise its vision of creating the worlds leading portfolio of contentdriven mustattend events that deliver an outstanding experience and ROI for our customers.
A fast pace has been set in the last year which we look forward to continuing into 2018 and beyond.
Mark Shashoua CEO of ITE Group plc Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40% 24% 9% 20% 7% Volumes by division %
Asia
Central Asia Eastern and S Europe
47% 16% 14% 11% 12% Revenues by division %
Asia
Central Asia Eastern and S Europe
53% 14% 13% 9% 11% Headline prot before tax by division %
Asia
Central Asia Eastern and Southern Europe
Strategic report Our operating divisions
Key sectors Build and Interiors Food and Packaging Manufacturing Industrial Technology Advanced Technologies sold 000s 2016 256
2016 51.6m Headline profit before tax 2016 19.8m
Key sectors Build and Interiors Manufacturing Industrial Technology Connect sold 000s 2016 125
2016 17.1m Headline profit before tax 2016 5.5m Central Asia Key sectors Build and Interiors Energy Food and Packaging sold 000s 2016 70
7m 2016 22.0m Headline profit before tax 2016 7.0m Eastern and Southern
Key sectors Build and Interiors Travel and Tourism Beauty and Healthcare Food and Packaging sold 000s 2016 172
2016 19.3m Headline profit before tax 2016 5.6m
Key sectors Transport and Logistics Energy
2016 62
7m 2016 24.4m Headline profit before tax 2016 1 1.0m Divisional review Divisional review Divisional review Divisional review Divisional review
Overview Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report
Statement
ITE is entering a period in the transformation that requires dynamic change.
The Group has embraced the change to date with a renewed energy and an appetite for success which is shared by the Board.
I am pleased to introduce to shareholders the Groups Annual Report for the year ended 30 September 2017.
These results demonstrate a return to growth in a year of substantial change.
A new vision for ITE This was Mark Shashouas first full year as Chief Executive Officer and Andrew Beach joined early in the year as Chief Financial
The new executive team and the Board have undertaken a full strategic review of the business to identify the optimum way forward for the Group.
This review involved a number of specialist advisors working together with the senior management team covering every aspect of the business and the recommendations were carefully considered by the Board.
The result of the review unveiled in May is an evolved strategy for the Group to generate organic growth focussed around our marketleading events.
This will involve significant investment in event content and marketing with the intention to make our leading shows mustvisit events in their market sectors.
The Group has also adopted a new salesled culture to drive revenue and has invested in a central best practice team to ensure that the Group is consistent in delivering a highquality experience for exhibitors and visitors alike anywhere in the world.
Our TAG programme which will see the Group invest up to 20m over the next three years with anticipated strong return on investment by 2020 was presented to a number of shareholders in May and we were pleased with the support it received.
You will find more detail in the
Chief Executive Officers Statement.
Performance
Revenue was 152.6m 2016 134.4m growth of 5% on a likeforlike basis.
This is the first year of likeforlike revenue growth for four years and a pleasing result from the implementation of the first initiatives of the Groups new strategy.
As expected headline profit before tax was lower at 31.6m 2016 36.5m after the planned investment in the new TAG programme.
Loss before tax was 3.2m 2016 loss of 4.1m.
Net debt has been reduced by 16% to 49.7m 2016 59.1m.
In Russia and in particular in Moscow there are good signs that the economy is improving after the geopolitical issues of recent years yet we are still experiencing challenges in many of our other markets.
Dividends
Full year dividend cover has been maintained at more than two times headline earnings per share.
The full year dividend per share is proposed at 4.0p 2016 4.5p.
With the current lower levels of Group profit and the TAG programme investment the Board believes this to be in the longterm interests of shareholders.
The final dividend of 2.5p is proposed for payment on 5 February 2018 to shareholders on the register on 5 January 2018.
Board
The Board recognise that strong corporate governance is at the heart of a good business.
We remain focussed on implementing robust processes that identify and mitigate risk and deliver best practice in the context of delivering on our promises to all of our stakeholders.
After five years tenure Marco Sodi stepped down from the Board at the end of the financial year having stepped down as Company Chairman in July 2017.
Marco led the business through a difficult period and provided invaluable support to the management team through the design and launch of ITEs new strategy.
Marco leaves with the Boards thanks and best wishes.
A search is underway to recruit a new Chairman to lead the business through the implementation of the TAG programme and the Board intends to further strengthen its nonexecutive team during the course of 2018.
Sharon Baylay has taken over as the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee for the coming year to allow Linda Jensen to focus on her role as Senior Independent Director.
Our people ITE is a business whose success is dependent on the hard work and loyalty of all of its employees.
It has been a challenging year as we have reviewed our operations and introduced new ways of working in many areas to position the Group for future success.
These initiatives have been fully and positively embraced and on behalf of the Board I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of our 1374 people for their continued commitment.
Outlook
We have allocated a significant amount of resource to the Groups new strategy and have recruited a substantial knowledgeable new team under the leadership of Mark Shashoua to implement this.
The Board are pleased with the early signs as we seek to drive sustainable growth and shareholder value.
The Group enters the new financial year with a higher level of visibility with forward bookings 20% ahead of last year on a likeforlike basis.
With its three year TAG programme well underway ITE is entering a period in the transformation that requires dynamic change.
The Group has embraced the change to date with a renewed energy and an appetite for success which is shared by the Board.
With the potential for further improvement in both the geopolitical and economic markets in which we operate the Board is confident for the future.
Neil England
27 November 2017
Likeforlike revenue growth 5% Neil England
Dividend per share 4.0p Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
Strategic report
Chief Executive Officers
Statement
ITEs performance in 2017 reflects a return to revenue growth following implementation of early TAG initiatives.
Revenues for the year were 152.6m 2016 134.4m up 5% on a likeforlike basis.
This is the first year of likeforlike revenue growth since 2013 driven by Russia and in particular Moscow where many of our Core events are located.
The reported loss before tax of 3.2m 2016 loss of 4.1m was after including oneoff restructuring costs of 5.0m 2016 nil 4.6m of which were incurred as part of the TAG programme and impairment charges of 14.3m 2016 26.5m.
Headline profit before tax was 31.6m 2016 36.5m and headline diluted EPS was 8.1p 2016 10.7p.
Both of these measures reflect event timing differences and are after incurring costs associated with the TAG programme within headline results in relation to the delivery of the Groups new strategy.
After I joined the business on 1 September 2016 we set three main priorities for the year ended 30 September 2017.
These were to Complete a comprehensive review of the business in order to develop our future strategy and vision Improve our trading position and Set an operating rhythm to increase the operational rigour and breed a culture of success.
I am pleased to report clear progress has been made against each of these priorities and a firm commitment has been made to invest in our people systems and products so we can deliver better experiences for our customers and accelerate growth.
Strategic Review and evolution of our strategy At the start of the year we undertook a thorough and detailed review of the business which included reviews by product geography structures systems sales marketing IT and finance.
The outputs of this review unveiled in May 2017 resulted in an Headline profit before tax Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
TAG oneoff investment evolved strategy and the introduction of a three year TAG programme.
At our strategy update in May our new vision for the Group was announced To create the worlds leading portfolio of contentdriven mustattend events delivering an outstanding experience and ROI for our customers.
By putting exhibitors and visitors at the heart of everything we do we plan to drive sustainable growth for our shareholders.
ITE strives to run the best shows and offer the best service to its customers throughout the world regardless of location.
The Groups focus on a product led strategy will see ITE focus on events that are market leading or have a clear path to become number one in their sector.
To deliver our vision TAG is being implemented across the Group and comprises three pillars Create a scalable platform to generate real organic growth Actively managing our portfolio and Make selective productled acquisitions.
As part of our TAG programme we are investing up to 20m across the next three years which underpinned by a performanceled culture will accelerate organic revenue growth as follows Create a scalable platform Transformational levers and TAG investment will be spread across five areas to Create best practice functions and teams Deliver bestinclass processes implemented globally across the Group greater efficiency via standardised processes a more structured and accountable leadership and a globally consistent ITE way driving efficiency and greater attendee experience.
Invest in show operations Enhance customer retention and exhibitor reach obtain enriched data insights and improve operational efficiency.
Build capability and talent Attract and retain talent develop internal capabilities and establish the right capabilities to drive business and adapt to market changes.
Drive a performance culture Create a valuesdriven organisation that encourages high performance and rewards success and talent building a winning team with an aspirational culture.
Build and maintain fit for purpose IT infrastructure and systems Create a global IT function and infrastructure that can support the requirements of a flexible mobile and highly effective workforce that operates globally but delivers locally and supports and enables a One ITE way of working.
As part of creating a scalable platform as a result of the above the Group will move decisively from being a decentralised geographically structured business to one that is more centralised and product led with strong regional platforms.
The evolution of customer expectations implies that every local market now expects events of a truly international quality.
Global multinationals are starting to choose one events company that will cater for them globally rather than a variety in different markets and the trend is towards a onestop shop that is able to deliver a consistently high standard of service everywhere.
Early progress with implementing the strategy has been good the framework for the TAG programme has been finalised based around the five areas noted above.
The governance for the programme has been set the TAG programme team created and heads of best practice have been recruited.
Having focussed our early efforts on sales and marketing initiatives in order to drive trading performance I am pleased to report we have started to see tangible evidence of progress.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report
Chief Executive Officers
Statement continued Transformational lever 2017 progress 2018 milestones Create best practice functions and teams New onsite rebooking strategy launched Design of the ITE way Complete design of the ITE way Begin implementing the ITE way Invest in show operations Setup of Central customer success team Setup of dedicated Central content team Setup of Regional customer success team Setup of dedicated Regional content team Implementation of valuebased pricing methods Rollout of show blueprint New show content deployed Build capability and talent Governance framework in place Recruitment of key Central organisational roles Rollout of dedicated specific training programmes Recruitment of key Regional organisational roles Drive a performance culture New sales incentive scheme launched Review of performance structure Development of sales leadership Standardisation of performance management Build and maintain fit for purpose IT infrastructure and systems Rollout of new hardware underway Systems design and development in progress Launch of integrated sales and marketing systems Completion of systems design and development Systems deployed in phased waves Actively manage the portfolio The Group will continue to implement a more rigorous approach to allocation of capital.
Having deliberately segmented its business into Core and NonCore this development is enabling management to increase its focus on events that present the greatest opportunities whilst reducing distraction from smaller events.
The Core shows are of strategic importance to our future and include the Groups largest shows those with the greatest potential for growth and a number of smaller but strategically important shows.
The NonCore shows consist of smaller shows with less potential for growth.
As part of the Groups strategy a top priority remains to apply a full suite of transformational levers to its Core events to realise their full potential.
This includes investing in content to drive great customer experience retention and pricing.
Each segment of the Groups portfolio requires a different degree of focus and different transformational levers to maximise their growth.
Our international sales structures have been repositioned to focus on our Core marketleading events and this has seen strong revenue growth which has offset the cancellation of smaller NonCore low yielding events.
During the year we discontinued 37 unprofitable or less profitable shows.
In line with its productled strategy the Group will continue to proactively review its portfolio on an ongoing basis.
Work is underway to develop an ITE way creating a blueprint to run events that is consistent globally.
With the Best Practice team now established the Group has implemented new performance management processes and sales incentive schemes leading to demonstrable results as it transitions towards a salesled performance culture.
One area of particular focus has been onsite rebooking at a number of Core events and this has been successful in improving sales visibility into the next financial year.
Overall the programme is progressing according to plan with implementation underway and progress evidenced across the five levers Productled acquisitions In due course the Group will look to make selective productled acquisitions to accelerate growth in line with its strict MandA criteria.
Each opportunity will be carefully reviewed but will not be limited to any particular geography as the Group aims to run the best shows in the best industries anywhere in the world.
Several criteria will determine what the Group will consider.
Acquisitions are likely to meet most but not necessarily all of the following Scalability  in sectors with high growth potential A distinct customer value proposition serving a clear part of an industry sector Position in attractive markets for events serving a high growth underlying market Evidence of strong organic revenue growth and profit margins Potential to roll out internationally dependent on the product Earnings accretive  offering a good return on invested capital The Group is building a pipeline of productled opportunities but will only proceed if such opportunities meet most of these criteria.
Trading
Having focussed our early efforts on sales and marketing initiatives in order to drive trading performance I am pleased to report we have started to see tangible evidence of progress.
All sales people across the Group have been set monthly sales targets and a new commission structure has been rolled out.
This has led to monthly sales league tables which are continually reviewed and has enhanced visibility.
We have also announced Club
This initiative recognises and rewards our top sales talent on a quarterly basis and is instilling a culture of success.
It has proven so effective that we have actively rolled this out across the Group to incorporate marketing content and support services enabling us to embed and reward high performing talent.
I am pleased to say that these early initiatives have contributed to our performance as the Group has posted its first year of likeforlike revenue growth in four years.
Operating rhythm Efforts to refocus the organisation on organic trading in the last year and embed a culture of engagement are well underway.
For example we have introduced weekly trading meetings weekly review of sales monthly regional boards event level strategy pre and post show and new global communication channels to showcase event successes globally helping staff to feel part of One ITE.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report
Chief Executive Officers
Statement continued
ITEs approach is based on a view of what our customers want  and to be clear customers include both exhibitors and visitors.
Customer needs are continually evolving.
Return on Investment ROI is now a key metric for exhibitors and an increasing request to justify spend and demonstrate return.
ROI is typically best delivered by attending the main event in any given sector since that will deliver the largest and most relevant audience.
For visitors Return on Time ROT is equally important.
They dont have time to visit every event and so they will choose the event that delivers the best ROT.
ROT is also typically best delivered by the main event with the largest number of exhibitors content networking opportunities and the best experience.
Running marketleading events is therefore critical and it is becoming harder and harder to successfully run second tier events since they cant compete on ROI or ROT.
In response to this we are making content investment a priority.
Visitors no longer want to attend events that act just as trading platforms.
Good quality events have become places to learn network discuss and debate they act as an industry platform bringing a business community together under one roof.
Visitors use events to gauge what their competitors are doing and where their industry is going and so investing in high quality content  from distinguished keynote speakers to detailed technical seminars  is critical to engage and drive high quality audiences and senior levels of participation.
New technology has also impacted the industry.
People once thought that technology would diminish the need for facetoface events but in reality it is the opposite.
Technology has enabled organisers to be more efficient engage better with our customers and help them measure return on investment more effectively.
New technology also enables organisers to drive retention since improving events drives increases in retention rates for exhibitors and increases in visitor numbers.
This in turn attracts new business.
Retention in an events business is crucial.
In order to focus on retention you need detailed customer insight and data analysis.
Marketleading events  ROI  ROT Customer insight and data Contentled  high on relevance Customer service Retentionled business enabled by technology Strong sales and marketing performancebased culture This ties directly into customer service where earlier booking of exhibitors generally improves retention by helping them to prepare for a successful event.
Within the organisation itself I believe in a strong performancebased culture both in sales and marketing.
Training monitoring managing performance and breeding a culture of success by rewarding achievement is the basis for strong sustainable organic growth.
We believe that a strong sales and marketing culture with an emphasis on quality of events retention and operational efficiency can drive sustainable growth and shareholder value.
Priorities for 2018 The Group has achieved much in a short space of time since we announced our evolved strategy and TAG programme.
2017 has put in place the building blocks and we believe that we have the elements in place to succeed.
Now it is about rigorous attention to detail and execution of our plan.
In the year ahead our main focus within TAG will be on lead generation content and customer service.
Outlook
Whilst we continue to roll out the TAG programme across our Core events we remain focussed on trading performance.
The stabilisation of trading conditions in Moscow is having a positive impact on the outlook for next year but is tempered by challenging trading conditions elsewhere in the markets in which we operate.
As at 24 November 2017 the Group has contracted 98m of revenues in respect of 2018 events compared to 81m at this stage last year in respect of 2017 events.
This represents an increase of 20% on a likeforlike basis.
The Board remains confident of the Groups prospects as it enters the new financial year.
ITE is well placed to realise its vision of creating the worlds leading portfolio of contentdriven mustattend events that deliver an outstanding experience and ROI for our customers.
A fast pace has been set in the last year which we look forward to continuing into 2018 and beyond.
Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
27 November 2017
Whilst we continue to roll out the TAG programme across our Core events we remain focussed on trading performance.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report
Events and brands that customers view as truly marketleading
Relentless focus on improving every part of the customer experience ROI for our customers Strong returns on investment and time for all customers
Events seen by all attendees as unmissable items on the annual business calendar
Model
Scalable platform for growth The One ITE Way applied consistently across all events One ITE salesled excellence culture Clear and consistent culture of excellence in customer value delivery across ITE Best teams in place Deeply ingrained community industry and local knowledge delivered by passionate teams Centreled best practice functions Bestinclass functions working in tandem with event teams to deliver ROI to customers Effective appropriate and scalable technologies Leading technology used to enhance customer experience and improve internal effectiveness and efficiency Embedded defined and sustainable ways of working High quality scalable operations delivering consistent experiences to customers across ITE A strong scalable platform to drive organic growth with an emphasis on retention content and customer service.
ITE organises high quality international businesstobusiness events globally running exhibitions in 15 countries in 2017.
We have been operating in emerging markets and developing economies for over 20 years and have developed extensive experience and local knowledge.
As a Group we are focussed on improving the quality of the events we operate and are pursuing a productled strategy focussed on marketleading events irrespective of geographic location or industry segment.
We hire exhibition space from local venue owners and generate our revenues primarily from the sale of exhibition space at our events charging exhibitors by the square metre for space sold.
Our
Both our exhibitors and visitors needs are continually evolving.
ROI is a key metric for our exhibitors while ROT is becoming a key metric for visitors.
To run and maintain marketleading events we are committed to investing in content to ensure our events are places to learn network discuss and debate.
Our events act as an industry platform bringing a business community together under one roof.
Content driven Thoughtprovoking content programmes tailored to attract significant numbers of target visitors Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Strategic Priorities and KPIs Strategic priorities Indicative KPIs Performance Link to principal risks and uncertainties Drive sustainable revenue growth
Forward bookings Retention rate 2016 134.4m 2016 81m Political uncertainty and regulatory risk page 50 Economic instability reduces demand for exhibition space page 50 Financial risk  foreign currency risk page 50 Competitor risk page 52 Focus on profitability to increase shareholder value Headline profit before tax Headline diluted earnings per share 2016 36.5m 2016 10.7p Commercial relationships page 52 Competitor risk page 52 Integration and management of acquisitions page 52 Create a leading portfolio of must attend events Visitor density Customer satisfaction Venue availability page 52 Competitor risk page 52 Manage cash flows to ensure the longterm viability of the Group Cash conversion Net debt  EBITDA 134% 2016 112% 2016 1.5x Financial risk  liquidity risk page 50 Financial risk  covenant risk page 50 Develop an engaged talented and high performing workforce Employee engagement People page 52 We have identified successful execution of the TAG programme as a principal risk see page 52.
This represents a risk to achieving the Groups vision.
The TAG programme announced in May 2017 is being implemented to transform the Group and position it to achieve its vision.
The ultimate success of the Group will come through realising its vision which is underpinned by five strategic priorities set out opposite.
Each of these has been identified with the Groups vision in mind.
Key performance indicators KPIs have been identified and linked to the strategic priorities.
Data is not currently available to report performance against all of these KPIs  this will come with the full implementation of TAG and the rollout of the new global CRM and finance systems  but a number of these measures are already being reported against internally.
The KPIs are expected to evolve over time as TAG becomes fully implemented and the Group focusses on its longerterm strategic aims.
Our vision To create the worlds leading portfolio of contentdriven mustattend events delivering an outstanding experience and ROI for our customers.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group revenue bridge FY 2016 FY 2017 Net biennial and timing
Launches and cancellations FX impact
15tel13telGroup headline prot before tax bridge FY 2016 FY 2017 Net biennial and timing
Launches and cancellations FX impact TAG costs Central costs adjustments
Headline diluted EPS bridge pence FY 2016 FY 2017 TAG costs
Decrease in NCI prots Change in eective tax rate Change in number of shares in issue Net debt bridge Sep 2016 Sep 2017 Cash ow from
Dividends and tax
TAG
Other
Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
Strategic report Chief Financial Officers
We delivered likeforlike growth for the first time since 2013 up 5% reflecting the successful rollout of the first wave of our TAG initiatives assisted by the stabilisation of Moscow.
Revenues for the year were 152.6m 2016 134.4m as we delivered likeforlike growth for the first time since 2013 up 5%.
Overview
This growth reflects the successful rollout of the first wave of our TAG initiatives such as a new sales incentive structure assisted by the stabilisation of Moscow and in spite of challenging trading conditions in some of our other markets.
Our focus has been and will continue to be on our Core events and this is reflected in the growth experienced across our Core events in the year which grew at a much faster rate than our NonCore events.
Looking ahead the TAG initiatives are also having a positive impact with deferred income at 30 September 2017 of 82.6m 2016 61.9m with a significant proportion of the increase coming from the introduction of our new onsite rebooking initiative.
The Group reported losses before tax of 3.2m against a prior year loss before tax of 4.1m.
This was after including oneoff restructuring costs of 5.0m 2016 nil 4.6m of which were incurred as part of the TAG programme and impairment charges of 14.3m 2016 26.5m.
Headline profit before tax is a non statutory measure of performance used by the Group as it better reflects underlying trading performance.
After excluding adjusting items detailed below headline profit before tax was 31.6m 2016 36.5m.
Included within headline profits were 2.8m of costs associated with the TAG programme such as the best practice teams and the impact of changes to the sales commission structure.
On a likeforlike basis headline profit before tax has grown by 2% reversing the trend reported in recent years.
Basic and diluted earnings per share were 3.1p 2016 3.6p.
The Group achieved headline diluted earnings per share of 8.1p 2016 10.7p with the decrease largely due to the reduction in headline profits in the year and the increase in the Groups effective tax rate which is discussed in more detail below.
Group operating cash conversion for the year was 134% 2016 112%.
The significant increase is largely as a result of the onsite rebooking initiative which has brought our cash inflows forward and also from an increase in forward bookings for next years events attributable to an upturn in trading particularly across our Core events.
Net debt at the yearend has reduced to 49.7m from 59.1m at 30 September 2016 as a result of strong cash flows from operations.
The Groups 6.7m cash investment in the new TAG programme 10.0m of previously committed acquisition and transaction costs and 8.7m of dividend payments to shareholders have been funded entirely through cash flows from operations.
Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Chief Financial Officers
A refinancing of the Groups external debt facility was completed in November 2017 and gives the Group access to a new 100m facility from a syndicate of four banks HSBC Barclays Citibank and
The facility amortises by 10m each year and expires in November 2021 giving us certainty over funding through the life of the TAG programme.
The facility has more favourable pricing and more appropriate covenants including a leverage ratio which is now assessed on a net debt to EBITDA basis replacing the gross debt covenant in place under the previous facility.
The facility is also structured to allow the flexibility we require to achieve our plans including larger acquisition baskets and more flexible use of disposal proceeds.
Trading summary In 2017 the Group ran 234 events 2016 252.
The decrease is primarily attributable to cancellations of smaller less profitable events.
A detailed analysis of volumes and revenues is presented below
Revenue
Average yield per m 2016 All events 685 134.4 196 Biennial 41 4.6 Timing 12 4.5 Nonrecurring 34 4.9 Disposals  0.5 2016 Annually recurring 598 119.9 201 Acquisitions 49 6.0 Launches 18 3.2 FX translation  11.6 TAG costs Likeforlike growth 2 6.7 2017 Annually recurring 663 147.4 222 Timing 3 0.8 Biennial 14 4.4 2017 All events 680 152.6 224 Segmental results Revenue Headline profit before tax mtel 2016 Central Asia 21.7 22.0 6.5 7.0 Eastern and Southern Europe 17.0 19.3 4.8 5.6 Other income   0.7 0.6 Central costs   16.2 11.9 Foreign exchange gain   0.3 2.0 Net finance costs   3.1 3.1 Refer to the Divisional trading summary section for commentary on each operating segment.
Other income relates primarily to rental income from subleasing unused office space.
Central costs include all costs that are not allocated to the Groups operating segments when headline profit before tax is reported to the Senior Operating Board for the purposes of allocating resource and making strategic decisions.
These include the Groups corporate overheads and other central costs that are included within cost of sales.
The corporate overheads are the costs of running the head office in London and are primarily comprised of the staff costs which include the Groups Executive and Nonexecutive Directors depreciation of the Groups centrally held assets office rent and professional fees.
The other central costs included within cost of sales include digital marketing costs that are not eventspecific but span the Groups portfolio of events.
The increase in central costs in 2017 follows higher bonus payments in the year an element of which is based on the achievement of target Group results for the financial year.
Central costs in 2017 include 1.3m of TAG costs and 1.4m of central structure costs.
Of the 2.8m of costs associated with the TAG programme that have been included within headline results 1.3m do not directly relate to the reportable segments and have been recognised within central costs.
The central structure costs represent costs in London that were primarily incurred prior to the launch of the TAG programme to ensure that we were positioned appropriately to determine the Groups new strategic direction and ultimately to implement it successfully.
These include the staff costs and recruitment costs of the new Strategy Team and the CFO to the extent that there was no comparable cost in the prior year.
The foreign exchange gain represents the retranslation of monetary assets and liabilities held in our subsidiary companies that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currencies of the subsidiaries.
See the Foreign exchange section for further details.
Net finance costs relate to the interest payable on our external banking facility and bank fees net of interest income for the period.
Headline results In addition to the statutory results headline results are presented which are the statutory results after excluding a number of adjusting items as the Board consider this to be the most appropriate way to measure the Groups underlying performance.
In addition to providing a more comparable set of results year onyear this is also in line with similar adjusted measures used by our peer companies and therefore facilitates comparison across the industry.
With the exception of restructuring costs the adjusting items presented are consistent with those presented in the previous year.
The restructuring costs have been presented separately in order to report what the Board consider to be the most appropriate measure of underlying performance of the Group and to provide additional information on the scale and progress of the Groups transformation programme.
Reconciliation of loss before tax to headline profit before tax m 2017 2016 Loss before tax 3.2 4.1 Operating items Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 14.1 15.5 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 12.6 24.7 Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures 1.7 1.9 Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions 0.4 0.3 Loss on disposal of investments 3.7 1.5 Restructuring costs including TAG 5.0 Tax on income from associates and joint ventures 1.5 1.1 Financing items Revaluation of liabilities on completed acquisitions 4.2 1.2 Headline profit before tax 31.6 36.5 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets Amortisation of acquired intangible assets relates to the amortisation charge in respect of intangible assets acquired through business combinations.
The charge has declined in the year as a result of a number of our historical Russian intangible assets reaching the end of their estimated useful lives offset in part by the amortisation on the intangible assets recognised on completion of the acquisition of Gehua in the year.
See the Portfolio management section for further details on the Gehua acquisition.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets In the year impairment charges were recognised in respect of our India Turkey and Africa Oil Week AOW cash generating units CGUs.
Recent trading in these CGUs has improved.
However the forecast cash flows include an increase in the Central cost allocation following our move to a more centralised model and an update to the discount rate methodology which when coupled with the low headroom of these CGUs results in the value in use not being sufficient to support the carrying value of the assets.
Prior to these changes the Turkey and AOW CGUs had lower headroom as a result of the adverse macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions faced in the last few years in Turkey and the significant downturn in the oil price in 2015 which has affected our AOW oil conference in South Africa.
The
India CGU had lower headroom due to the writedown of the assets to the value in use of the CGU in the prior year.
As well as the impairment charge recognised at our India CGU last year the prior year charge also included impairments of our South East Asia and Siberia CGUs.
Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures The current year charge is recognised in respect of our Indonesian joint venture following the update to the discount rate methodology in determining value in use discussed above.
In the prior year we impaired our investment in our Malaysian joint venture.
Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions relates principally to costs incurred on the Gehua acquisition completed in December 2016.
Loss on disposal of investments During the year the Group disposed of its investment in Gima International Exhibition Group GmbH and Co KG GiMA a sales agency business based in Germany.
As a result of the disposal the goodwill held on the balance sheet from the original acquisition of GiMA over a decade ago this has resulted in the recognition of a loss on disposal.
Chief Financial Officers
Restructuring costs including TAG Restructuring costs relate to costs incurred in transforming the business and largely relate to the TAG programme.
The costs included within adjusting items are the one off costs of designing and implementing the Groups new strategy.
The most significant of these costs are professional and consultancy fees incurred in relation to the strategic and business reviews carried out on the existing business and underlying markets the costs of designing the Groups new strategy and its future operating model and the costs of implementing the new strategic initiatives launched to date.
The TAG programme has led to certain costs such as those associated with new best practice roles and changes to the sales commission structure that are expected to remain as part of the Groups new operating model posttransformation.
These costs have not been included within adjusting items and are presented within headline results.
Tax on income from associates and joint ventures Statutory reported profits from associates and joint ventures are presented post tax.
In order to present a measure of profit before tax for the Group that is purely pretax the tax on associate and joint venture profits is added back.
The yearonyear increase reflects the increase in profits from associates and joint ventures this year primarily due to strong performance from Sinostar and ITEMF as discussed further below.
Revaluation of liabilities on completed acquisitions A number of the Groups acquisitions completed in recent years have future earn out commitments either through deferred or contingent consideration payments or through equity option liabilities to increase our current shareholdings.
These are held on the balance sheet at fair value and therefore change based on the latest foreign exchange rates the proximity of the settlement date and the latest expectation of the settlement value.
All such revaluations are presented outside of adjusted results as they do not relate to the underlying performance of the Group.
Revaluation of liabilities on completed acquisitions include the revaluation of the equity option liabilities in respect of ABEC and ITE Ebseek Fasteners and the revaluation of contingent consideration in respect of Gehua and Fasteners prior to the settlements of these obligations in the year.
Foreign exchange As a result of the territories in which we operate we are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates and significant movements particularly in the Russian ruble can have a significant impact on our results.
Translational FX Each month our subsidiary company results are translated into sterling from the functional currencies of the subsidiary companies on consolidation using the prevailing foreign exchange rates for the month.
Changes in foreign exchange rates result in fluctuations of the level of profits reported for the Group.
The impact of the changes in foreign exchange rates is included within both the statutory and adjusted reported results within the relevant lines in the Consolidated Income Statement.
To aid comparability of trading results when presenting likeforlike performance we adjust for the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates on translation.
Largely as a result of the strengthening of the ruble against sterling the reported results were higher than in the comparative period by 11.6m for revenue and 2.4m for headline profit before tax.
Transactional FX As well as translational foreign exchange movements arising on consolidation the Group results are impacted by changes in foreign exchange rates within our subsidiary company results.
Where monetary transactions are entered into in different currencies than the functional currency of the entity this gives rise to revaluation gains and losses following changes in exchange rates between the transaction date month end and the settlement date.
Each revaluation of the monetary assets and liabilities held on the balance sheet results in gains and losses which are reported within the Consolidated Income Statement within the Foreign exchange gain on operating activities line.
The relative stability of the ruble throughout 2017 when compared to 2016 has contributed to the smaller gain recognised of 0.3m 2016 2.0m.
As a result of the Uzbekistan Government removing the som peg to the US Dollar in September a gain on revaluation of 0.7m arose in the month as a result largely of the US dollar debtor book held locally in our Uzbekistan subsidiary companies.
In order to minimise our exposure to changes in foreign exchange rates particularly on eurodenominated cash inflows held in sterling subsidiary companies which accounts for approximately 1520% of total revenues the Group takes out foreign exchange forward contracts to provide certainty over the future euro cash inflows.
The gains and losses on the forward contracts are deferred and recognised within revenue at the point at which the revenue is recognised.
In the year a loss of 0.7m 2016 profit of 2.0m was recognised within revenue in respect of our forward contracts reflecting the strengthening of the euro against sterling in the year naturally offsetting the benefit received from this strengthening within our reported revenues.
Foreign currency translation reserve Finally our results are impacted by the translation of the subsidiary company balance sheets each month on consolidation into sterling.
A change in foreign exchange rates gives rise to a movement which is recognised within reserves in the foreign currency translation reserve.
This is on translation of the company balance sheets of our subsidiary companies which are reported in their functional currencies before being translated into sterling on consolidation at the prevailing period end rates.
The foreign currency translation reserve increased by 3.0m largely due to the weakening of the Turkish lira and the Uzbekistani som against sterling between the beginning and the end of the financial year.
Due to the considerable goodwill and intangible assets held in Turkey as well as the dollardenominated debtors in Uzbekistan the value of the net assets within the consolidated statement of financial position have reduced.
This was offset to some extent by a strengthening of the ruble and euro but these movements were not of sufficient magnitude to prevent a loss being recognised within equity reserves.
Share of results of associates and joint ventures Profits after taxation for the financial year arising from investments in joint ventures and associates increased by 1.5m to 5.1m 2016 3.6m.
Sinostar our 50% owned Chinese joint venture continues to perform well whilst ITEMF our 50% owned joint venture in Russia has benefited from the stabilisation in Moscow and a strengthening of the Russian ruble.
Finance costs Statutory net finance costs are 1.0m 2016 net finance income of 1.8m.
On a headline basis after excluding the revaluations relating to liabilities on completed acquisitions net finance costs are 3.1m 2016 3.1m.
These represent the interest cost on the Groups borrowings of 2.5m 2016 2.4m and bank charges of 1.3m 2016 1.1m net of interest income of 0.7m 2016 0.4m.
Tax charge A tax charge of 3.3m 2016 3.1m was recognised in the year.
Tax on associate and joint venture profits which is presented within the share of profit from associates and joint ventures was 1.5m 2016 1.1m reflecting the higher level of joint venture profits discussed above.
The total tax charge was 4.8m 2016 4.2m.
The headline tax charge for the period was 8.3m 2016 7.1m equating to a headline effective tax rate of 26% 2016 19%.
The increase in the tax rate was primarily due to an increase in withholding tax on dividends from our Russian subsidiaries following the stabilisation of trading in Moscow.
Profits attributable to noncontrolling interests NCIs NCI profits for the year were 1.8m 2016 2.2m down 0.4m.
In May 2016 we increased our interest in AOW to 75% and in May 2017 to 100% reducing the proportion of profits attributable to NCI for the event that runs each October.
This was offset by the firsttime impact of the 40% of ABECs profits that were preacquisition in the prior year and the 30% of the postacquisition profits from the current period acquisition of Gehua.
Consolidated statement of financial position The Groups Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2017 is summarised in the table below Goodwill and other intangible assets 154.4 166.7 Interests in associates and joint ventures 45.5 45.7 Other noncurrent assets 11.7 8.4 Total noncurrent assets 211.6 222.8 Trade debtors 44.1 32.5 Cash 23.3 15.5 Other current assets 20.2 20.2 Total current assets 87.6 68.2 Deferred income 82.6 61.9 Bank loan 73.0 74.6 Other liabilities 54.3 58.2 Total liabilities 208.9 194.7 Share capital and share premium 31.3 23.3 Translation reserve 45.3 42.3 Other reserves 81.6 89.9 Total equity 90.3 96.3 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Chief Financial Officers
Total noncurrent assets Goodwill and intangible assets decreased during the year due to the impairments recognised in the India Turkey and AOW CGUs the annual amortisation charge in respect of the intangible assets and the retranslation of overseas balances to Sterling at year end exchange rates.
The movement was offset to some extent by the acquisition of Gehua.
The intangible assets balance represents acquired customer relationships trademarks and licences visitor databases and computer software.
Interests in associates and joint ventures has remained flat with strong profitability in the larger joint ventures particularly Sinostar and ITEMF offset by the payment of dividends from these entities and the impairment of the Indonesian joint venture.
Other noncurrent assets has increased for the most part due to an increase in deferred tax asset to 5.4m 2016 3.1m.
Total current assets Trade debtors increased compared to the prior year as a result of the increase in forward bookings aided by our new onsite rebooking initiative.
This contributed to trade debtors increasing by over 30% yearonyear.
Trade debtor recoverability remains strong and cash flow from operations and cash collection have been important areas of focus over the past year.
Cash balances increased to 23.3m 2016 15.5m as a result of earlier cash collection following the onsite rebooking initiative reduced expenditure on acquisitions compared to previous years and the strengthening of foreign currencies against Sterling which create unrealised gains when translated into Sterling on consolidation.
This was in part offset by the investment in TAG during the year.
Other current assets comprising other debtors prepayments and tax prepayments have remained broadly consistent yearonyear.
Total liabilities As with trade debtors deferred income grew considerably following the introduction of our onsite rebooking initiative with the balance as at 30 September 2017 being 82.6m 2016 61.9m up by over 30% year on year.
This represents 54% of the total revenue recognised in 2017 compared to 41% of the 2017 revenues being contracted at this stage last year.
The bank loan balance of 73.0m 2016 74.6m is broadly flat yearon year.
A new loan facility agreement was entered into subsequent to the year end as mentioned previously.
Other liabilities decreased to 54.3m 2016 The decline is primarily in respect of equity option liabilities and deferred contingent consideration following the exercise of the AOW put option in May 2017 and settlement of earnout obligations in respect of ABEC and Fasteners.
Total equity During the year the Company issued 7140601 2016 5166043 ordinary shares of 1p.
2050102 of the total new issues were to shareholders who elected to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares as part of the scrip dividend alternative that was made available.
The remaining shares issued were consideration for the exercise of options to acquire the remaining 25% stake in AOW 2791120 not previously held and the element of the Gehua consideration settled in shares 2299379.
As at 30 September 2017 the Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT held 2783585 1.0% of the Companys issued share capital 2016 2869603 1.1%.
The movement in the translation reserve from a debit balance of 42.3m to 45.3m represents the loss on the yearend retranslation of the Groups overseas assets denominated in foreign currencies as discussed above.
This is driven primarily by movements in the SterlingLira and SterlingSom exchange rates.
The decreases in the put option reserve and NCI were caused by the exercise of the AOW equity option.
The Groups ability to pay dividends is secure with distributable reserves in the Parent Company accounts of 16.8m.
Venue arrangements The Group has longterm arrangements with its principal venues in its main markets setting out ITEs rights over future venue use and pricing.
The arrangements can take the form of a prepayment of future venue fees advance payment or a loan which can be repaid in cash or by offset against future venue fees venue loan.
Generally the arrangements bring rights over future venue use and advantageous pricing arrangements through longterm agreements.
Venue advances and prepayments are included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position under noncurrent and current assets.
Portfolio management On 9 December 2016 the Group acquired a 70% holding in ITE Gehua Exhibitions Co Ltd Gehua a company incorporated in China for total consideration of No put or call options exist over the remaining 30% stake.
The acquired business has contributed 3.0m to Group revenue and a 1.0m to headline profit before tax since acquisition.
During the year 3.7m was paid in respect of deferred and contingent consideration obligations in respect of the acquisitions of ABEC and Fasteners completed in previous years and of Gehua in the current period.
At 30 September 2017 there remains an outstanding obligation of 1.0m in respect of the acquisition of ABEC.
One equity option was settled during the year in respect of the remaining 25% in AOW discussed above.
At 30 September 2017 equity options are held over further interests in our subsidiary companies ABEC Fasteners and Scoop and our joint venture companies ECMI and Debindo.
As part of our ongoing focus on Core events 37 events were cancelled in 2017 which had in 2016 contributed 1.1m to Group revenue and 0.4m to headline profit.
TAG overview In May 2017 we announced our intention to invest up to 20m in the TAG programme over the threeyear transformation period.
In 2017 we invested 5.0m comprised of 4.6m of oneoff restructuring costs which are presented within adjusting items and 0.4m of capital expenditure.
The restructuring costs were principally in relation to the design and implementation of the Groups new strategy.
The capital expenditure largely related to building fit forpurpose IT infrastructure and systems.
Having invested 5.0m since May we anticipate investing up to 10m over the coming financial year.
The investment will reflect the acceleration of our systems design and development work over the coming twelve months and ultimately the introduction of the new sales and marketing systems that will help us create fitforpurpose IT infrastructure and systems.
We remain confident of delivering the overall TAG programme within the 20m oneoff investment indicated.
During 2017 2.8m of costs were included within our statutory and headline results in relation to the TAG programme.
These represent costs that are associated with the TAG programme in relation to the delivery of the Groups new strategy rather than the costs of designing and implementing the strategy.
These are costs that have arisen following changes to the way we operate as a result of the TAG programme and are expected to continue to be incurred as the Groups new operating model becomes fully embedded.
Of the 2.8m incurred in the year 1.9m was included within cost of sales 0.5m of which was included within central costs and 0.9m is included within overheads 0.8m within central costs.
The cost of sales represent costs incurred to date that are direct costs incurred to drive revenue growth to date principally in future periods.
Overhead costs are ongoing costs largely incurred in relation to creating best practice functions and teams and building capability and talent.
Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer 27 November 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28% 25% 8% 8% 8% 5% 5% 9% 4% Revenue by sector % Build and Interiors
Food and Packaging Manufacturing Industrial
Travel and Tourism Transport and Logistics Beauty and Healthcare Advanced Technologies
Strategic report On a likeforlike basis volume sales in Russia increased by 9% revenues increased by 14% and headline profits before tax increased by 17% from the prior year Divisional Trading Summary
During the year ITE held 96 events in Russia 2016 110 with total volume sales of 274400m 2016 256000m Revenue of 71.4m was 38% higher than the previous year and headline profit before tax of 26.3m was 33% higher than the previous year reflecting early TAG benefits stabilisation of the trading environment  particularly in Moscow  and the strengthening of the Russian Ruble.
On a likeforlike basis volume sales in Russia increased by 9% revenues increased by 14% and headline profits before tax increased by 17% from the prior year.
Moscow is ITEs largest office in Russia with events accounting for around 74% of the regions revenues.
Volume sales for the year on Moscow events were 182300m 2016 164100m an increase of 9% on a likeforlike basis.
ITEs leading events in Moscow responded favourably to the stabilisation of the trading environment and benefited from managements reallocation of resources to focus on these events.
The Moscow International Travel and Tourism exhibition MITT which is held annually in March delivered sales of 13700m 2016 11700m as the Russian international tourism sector recovered confidence and relations between Turkey and Russia improved.
In April Mosbuild WorldBuild Moscow saw volumes increase by 8% to 34500m 2016 31800m with the growth being led by domestic exhibitors as the construction sector in Moscow also gained confidence from the stabilisation in the local economy.
The packaging event Rosupack also performed strongly with volume growth of 21% from 9400m to 11400m
2016 7200m and 10400m 2016 10600m respectively.
The previously biennial Moscow International Oil and Gas Exhibition MIOGE annualised and changed venues to better respond to a competitive launch and met expectations in delivering volumes of 12000m 2015 event 18500m WorldFood Moscow in September also grew volumes by 5% to 21300m 2016 20200m as both domestic exhibitors and international suppliers increased their space requirements.
The Krasnodar region in south west Russia is one of the most prosperous outside Moscow.
The Group is the anchor tenant at the citys exhibition centre and runs events across a broad range of sectors.
The single largest event is the agriculture event Yugagro which grew by 9% to 31700m 2016 29000m The stabilisation of the economic environment in Moscow has not yet spread to all regions.
The Groups events in St Petersburg delivered overall volume sales of 9400m 9500m a likeforlike decline of 7%.
In Novosibirsk Siberia ITE is the anchor tenant in the citys main venue.
During the year management reduced the number of events held to 22 2016 34.
On a likeforlike basis which excludes these cancellations revenue was down 1%.
Revenue 71.4 51.6 38% 14% Headline profit before tax 26.3 19.8 33% 17% Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44% 2% 10% 26% 4% 8% 2% 2% 2% Revenue by sector % Build and Interiors
Food and Packaging Manufacturing Industrial
Fashion
Travel and Tourism Beauty and Healthcare Advanced Technologies
Strategic report The Group benefited from another strong performance by its Sinostar joint venture Divisional Trading Summary
The Groups operations in this region are based in India China and South East
During the year the Group ran 35 2016 27 events in the region.
Overall the Groups majorityowned businesses in the region sold 160000m in 2017 2016 124600m reflecting acquisitions in China offsetting the weaker biennial pattern and the challenging trading environment in
The Group benefited from another strong performance by its Sinostar joint venture which is not included in consolidated revenues but is included in consolidated headline profits before tax for the region.
Therefore on a likeforlike basis the region reports a decrease of 2% in volumes and 3% in revenues but a 16% increase in headline profits before tax.
The Group operates two businesses in India one through a small wholly owned subsidiary ITE India which had its weaker biennial year in 2017 and the other through ABEC Indias largest private exhibition organiser in which ITE has a 60% stake.
ABECs portfolio of over 20 exhibitions across different industry sectors includes Acetech  Indias leading construction event.
Acetech Mumbai in October 2016 delivered 27800m 2016 27900m despite the impact of demonetisation although the impact on the rest of the ABEC portfolio was more pronounced and the business delivered likeforlike volume and revenue declines of 3% and 4% respectively reflecting the challenges faced in the market.
In China the Group has offices in Beijing Shanghai and Guangzhou and operates through its Hong Kong headquartered 50% joint venture partner Sinostar the ChinacoatSurface Finishing China event.
The November 2016 ChinacoatSurface Finishing China event in Guangzhou saw 11% growth on the equivalent event reporting record sales of over 37800m with another strong performance expected at the November 2017 event.
A 70% stake in Gehua was acquired in December 2016.
It has a small portfolio of events of which the major event is a Food event which ran in August 2017 for the first time under ITE ownership delivering 20000m
Groups Fasteners event acquired in 2016 grew by 10% to 16300m 2016 14800m In South East Asia the Group operates through three organisations based in Indonesia and Malaysia.
In Jakarta Indonesia the Group owns 50% of PT Debindo which runs the Indobuildtech series of construction exhibitions the largest of which takes place annually in Jakarta.
After moving to the new International Convention and Exhibition Centre last year and growing to over 22000m this year the event focussed on driving yield and while volumes reduced slightly to 18700m the revenues increased by over 10%.
In Kuala Lumpur Malaysia the Group owns 100% of Tradelink which runs the Metaltech event serving the machine tool technology and metal fabrication industries.
The event takes place each May in Kuala Lumpur and although volumes reduced revenues held up despite local economic uncertainty impacting on the industry.
Also based in Kuala Lumpur is the Groups 50% joint venture ECMI a panASEAN organiser operating in Malaysia Indonesia Vietnam and Myanmar and focussed on the professional beauty and lifesciences sectors.
Revenue m % change % change likeforlike Revenue 23.8 17.1 39% 3% Headline profit before tax 6.9 5.5  23% 16% Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 22% 27% 13% 8% 8% 3% 9% 8% 2% Revenue by sector % Build and Interiors
Food and Packaging Manufacturing Industrial
Travel and Tourism Transport and Logistics Beauty and Healthcare Advanced Technologies
Strategic report The fall in the oil price and the Russian economic recession continue to have a significant impact on trading conditions within the region Divisional Trading Summary Central Asia ITEs principal offices in Central Asia are in Kazakhstan Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan.
All of the economies in this region are heavily dependent on oil and gas for their overseas earnings and economic wealth and in the case of Kazakhstan a significant level of trade with Russia as well.
The fall in the oil price and the Russian economic recession continue to have a significant impact on trading conditions within the region.
This year ITE organised a total of 66 events 2016 74 across these territories delivering total volume sales of 64000m 70400m revenues of 21.7m 2016 22.0m and headline profits before tax of 6.5m 2016 7.0m.
Overall on a likefor like basis volumes decreased by 9% over the previous year with revenues increasing by 5% and headline profit before tax increasing by 7% as Dollar pricing protected revenues from currency fluctuations.
Kazakhstan is the Groups largest office in the region selling 32200m 2016 34400m The largest event in the region Kazakhstan Oil and Gas Exhibition KIOGE which took place in Almaty in October 2016 was smaller than the prior edition at 3700m 5800m However reflecting the improvement in the environment during the year Mining World Central Asia held in September 2017 grew volumes by over 20% from 2500m to 3000m Azerbaijan achieved volume sales of 14200m 2016 19300m a decrease of 27% on the prior year on a likefor like basis with all sectors suffering reduced volumes and likeforlike revenues down 11% on the prior year.
ITEs Uzbekistan business is slightly more insulated from the oil price due to the nature of the local economy and it performed strongly in 2017 selling 2016 16100m On a likeforlike basis volumes have increased by 23%.
Revenue m % change % change likeforlike Revenue 21.7 22.0 1% 5% Headline profit before tax 6.5 7.0 7%  7% Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 47% 2% 1% 8% 17% 9% 16% Revenue by sector % Build and Interiors
Food and Packaging Travel and Tourism Transport and Logistics Beauty and Healthcare
Strategic report On a likeforlike basis revenues were down 9% better than anticipated at the start of the year Divisional Trading Summary Eastern and Southern Europe The Eastern and Southern Europe region is represented by the Groups offices in Turkey and Ukraine.
Overall the region sold 134500m in 2017 2016 172200m reflecting growth in Ukraine offset by the weaker biennial pattern and the challenging trading environment in Turkey.
On a like forlike basis this represents a decrease of 8% in volumes flat revenues and a 10% decrease in headline profit before tax.
Overall total volumes in Turkey were down reflecting the weaker biennial pattern and the challenging local environment.
On a likeforlike basis revenues were down 9% better than anticipated at the start of the year.
The prior year events were protected to some extent by bookings taken in advance of the coup attempt and so the current year results reflect the full year effect of the events of 2016.
Trading in Ukraine has recovered strongly.
Overall volume sales were up with a 34% increase in revenue on a likeforlike basis.
Revenue m % change % change likeforlike Revenue 17.0 19.3 12% 0% Headline profit before tax 4.8 5.6 15% 10% Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18% 1% 55% 26% Revenue by sector % Build and Interiors
Fashion
Transport and Logistics Strategic report The Breakbulk portfolio overall saw a drop in volumes and revenues compared with the previous year as Breakbulk Americas ran in September 2016 and October 2017 and therefore through timing did not run in the 2017 financial year.
However on a likeforlike basis the portfolio grew volumes by 3% and revenues by 16% Divisional Trading Summary
The Groups Brands business contains the results of our UK fashion events the Africa Oil Week event and the Breakbulk portfolio of events.
Overall
On a likeforlike basis revenues decreased by 6% and headline profits before tax decreased by 21%.
In Moda the Group owns the leading midmarket fashion event for Womenswear Menswear Footwear and Accessories which runs twice a year in Birmingham
In London the Group operates Bubble a niche highend childrenswear event Jacket Required a designerled menswear event and Scoop a designerled womenswear event.
Overall the portfolio achieved volume sales of 34800m 39600m a 10% likeforlike volume decline and a 7% revenue decline on the prior year with Moda continuing to see the effects of a changing market place for midmarket independent fashion retailers.
Africa Oil Week ran in October 2016 and as expected was adversely affected by the difficult trading conditions affecting the oil industry.
There was still excellent representation from all usual participating companies although many companies sent fewer delegates with a resulting impact on revenues of 20% compared with the 2015 event.
ITE acquired the remaining 25% stake in the event in May 2017 financed through a small equity placing following the exercise of the put option granted to the previous owners.
Revenues for the October 2017 event have stabilised and we believe that with investment this event is positioned for recovery.
The Breakbulk portfolio overall saw a drop in volumes and revenues compared with the previous year as Breakbulk Americas ran in September 2016 and October 2017 and therefore through timing did not run in the 2017 financial year.
However on a likeforlike basis the portfolio grew volumes by 3% and revenues by 16%.
Revenue m % change % change likeforlike Revenue 18.7 24.4 23% 6% Headline profit before tax 5.4 11.0 51% 21% Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report
Overview
ITE is the ninth largest organiser by revenue and has historically had strengths in a number of emerging markets.
ITE is the dominant exhibition organiser in Russia and although the Russian market has been impacted by currency factors and an economic slowdown there are strong drivers for growth in the medium to long term.
These include strong prices a highly internationalised outlook and new venue capacity.
ITEs position in Central Asian markets is also strong as it is the dominant international exhibition organiser.
The distribution of the worlds exhibition businesses highlights that developed markets continue to account for the majority of the global market with the US alone comprising over 50%.
Emerging markets have a 22% share of the global market compared to circa 15% six years ago and China remains the second largest exhibition market globally having overtaken Germany in 2015.
After a year of falling volumes and revenues Russia Turkey and the CIS countries  ITEs historic market areas  account for approximately 3% of the global market whilst Asian markets China India and South East Asia account for approximately 9%.
The exhibitions market is supported by a strong business model that provides High margins Excellent cash flow characteristics Resilient revenues Good growth prospects Global exhibition market value
Geographically the industry is split between large mature markets and rapidly growing emerging markets.
Growth in the industry is expected to be driven by the recovery of larger markets such as Russia Brazil and Turkey as well as continuous strong growth in Asia.
Source AMR International Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts
Board of
Stephen Puckett Nonexecutive Director Stephen Puckett was appointed a Non executive Director of the Company in July 2013 and Chairman of the Audit Committee in January 2014.
Stephen is also Chairman of Hydrogen Group plc and a Nonexecutive Director of Redcentric plc and chairs its Audit Committee.
He is a Chartered Accountant with over 20 years experience as Finance Director of quoted companies.
In 2012 Stephen retired from the Board of Page Group plc formerly Michael Page International plc after more than eleven years as Group Finance Director during which time he oversaw a period of significant overseas expansion and growth.
Sharon Baylay Nonexecutive Director Sharon Baylay was appointed a Non executive Director of the Company in April 2014 and became Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in October 2017.
She is Nonexecutive Director at Restore plc and Chairman of Exclaimer
From 2009 to 2011 Sharon was Marketing Director and a Main Board Director of the BBC responsible for all aspects of marketing communications and audiences.
She was also on the Board of BBC Worldwide Freesat and Digital UK.
Prior to the BBC Sharon held a number of senior roles at Microsoft Corporation over a period of 15 years including General Manager of the UK Online and Advertising business.
Sharon is an Advanced Coach and Mentor accredited by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development CIPD and a Member of Women in Advertising and Communications London WACL.
Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer Andrew Beach was appointed as ITEs Chief Financial Officer in October 2016.
He is Chairman of ITEs Risk Committee.
He was previously the Chief Financial and Operating Officer of Ebiquity Plc the AIM listed marketing analytics specialists where he spent nine years overseeing the rapid expansion of the business to 20 offices in 14 markets employing over 900 staff.
Prior to joining Ebiquity Andrew spent nine years at PwC as part of the Entertainment and Media assurance practice where he qualified as a Chartered Accountant ICAEW in 2000.
Andrew headed up the UK Publishing sector knowledge network and managed a portfolio of large media clients.
Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
Mark Shashoua was appointed as ITEs
Chief Executive Officer in September
2016.
He was previously the CEO of i2i Events Group the event arm of Ascential plc where he spent five years and led the internationalisation and diversification of the business to what it is today.
Mark is a prominent figure in the international events industry and was one of the founding members of the ITE Group in 1991 where he served in senior Director roles and as a Board Director until August 1999.
From 2001 he was a cofounder and Chief Executive Officer of Expomedia Group Plc and from 20092011 Mark was the operating partner of Advent International a leading private equity fund.
Neil England Nonexecutive Chairman Neil England was appointed a Non executive Director of the Company in March 2008 and Chairman in July 2017.
He has a breadth of sales and marketing experience and an extensive knowledge of ITEs key geographic markets.
Neil was formerly Vice President for Mars Incorporated with responsibility for all the CIS countries and he built a marketleading business there.
More recently Neil was Group Commercial Director on the Main Board of Gallaher Group plc.
Neil is currently Nonexecutive Chairman of four companies including BlackRock Emerging Europe plc an emerging market investment company focussed on Eastern Europe.
Neil is a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Marketing.
Linda Jensen Nonexecutive Director Linda Jensen was appointed a Non executive Director of the Company in July 2011 as the Companys Senior Independent Director in January 2014 and was the Companys Remuneration Committee Chairman from November 2015 to October 2017.
Linda was CEO of HBO Europe for ten years until December 2015 and was responsible for all business operations of the HBO channels in the European region.
Prior to HBO Europe she was the President of MTV Russia based in Moscow and also gained valuable experience in the central European region as the Director of Development at Central European Media Enterprises CME.
Board changes that occurred during the year Marco Sodi Nonexecutive Chairman Marco Sodi was appointed as a Nonexecutive Director in February 2012 and became Chairman in March 2012.
He stepped down as Chairman in July 2017 and retired from the Board in October 2017.
Marco has extensive experience of the media and technology sectors and the exhibitions sector in particular.
In 2015 Marco founded Volpi Capital a private equity firm focussed on techenabled information and services businesses prior to which he spent 23 years with the private equity firm Veronis Suhler Stevenson.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Environmental
Impact
Corporate Social
As a media services company the Group acknowledges that its business has an impact on the environment albeit relatively minor and ITE follows current best practice in each of its markets by observing country legislation and leading industry practice.
The Group is aware that this is an area of increasing concern to employees shareholders and customers alike.
By identifying environmental improvements we expect to see increased efficiencies and with that reduced costs and the management of environmental issues is part of our business strategy to create longterm value for shareholders.
Senior management level responsibility The COO has direct responsibility for environmental matters and chairs the Environmental Matters Committee which monitors the Groups emissions considers and makes recommendations for improvements and mitigations of the Groups environmental impact and commissions and reviews external reporting of the Groups environmental impact for regulatory or voluntary disclosure.
The Groups reporting protocol The Group recognises that its operations have an impact on the environment primarily through the GHG Greenhouse Gas emissions.
As a result the Group continues to measure and report its material GHG emissions with the aim of minimising energy usage improving environmental management across its offices and driving efficiencies which in turn is expected to reduce costs and create longterm value for shareholders.
The scope of the Groups reporting continues to cover GHG emissions at the global level covering all of the Groups subsidiary offices.
This is consistent with previous years.
Overview
The Board of ITE believes that corporate and social responsibility is an important part of the Groups culture and that the adoption of good practice will have a positive impact on profits and increase the longterm value for shareholders.
Due consideration is given to risks arising from social ethical and environmental issues as part of an ongoing risk review process.
Employees
The Board recognises the importance of diversity amongst its employees and is committed to ensuring that employees are selected and promoted on the basis of merit and ability regardless of age gender race religion sexual orientation or disability.
The gender split across the Group as at 30 September 2017 is illustrated in the table below Male Female Board 4 2 Senior management 26 15 All employees Includes Board and senior management.
A global Groupwide biannual performance review process was introduced in 2017 marking a major milestone in our drive to develop a highperforming culture and support employees career development.
Sponsored training is provided where there is a benefit to both the individual and the Group and includes custom designed leadership and management development programmes.
In the coming year the Group is committed to building on its learning and development offering and investing in additional training to support the objectives of its Transformation and Growth programme.
To raise awareness of how to recognise and deal with mental health issues headquarters held its first Wellness Week in 2017.
This initiative is now expanding to include other offices in the Group.
The Groups GHG Reporting Protocol which was developed with the assistance of Carbon Smart is based on DEFRA and World Resource Institute guidelines.
The Group measures GHG emissions based on financial control boundaries so operations which are consolidated as subsidiaries in the Groups financial statements have been included in the measurement exercise.
Associates and joint ventures of the Group have not been included as the Group does not exercise sole control over these operations.
As the Group does not exercise financial control over the properties in which exhibitions are held emissions arising from these properties have not been measured.
The Group does not manufacture or sell any tangible products and has identified the following key activities as being within the GHG reporting requirements Scope 1 Natural gas Company cars onsite fuel consumption and fugitive emissions i. refrigerants.
Scope 2 Purchased electricity and heat and steam.
At present Scope 3 activities e. are excluded from the reporting scope.
It is believed that at present the quality of the data would not be sufficiently robust for accurate reporting in these areas.
All senior staff are eligible to receive share options or awards under the Employees Performance Share Plan as the Board feels that it is important for them to take an active part in the success of the Group and to share in the longterm value they help to create.
The Board recognises the need to provide a safe working environment for employees exhibitors and visitors at the Groups events.
Each office is responsible for ensuring that their business operates in compliance with Group policies and the relevant local health and safety legislation.
Employees receive health and safety training appropriate to their role.
Staff from all regions with lead responsibility for the operation of the Groups exhibitions on site also attend regular training courses.
Social interaction The Board is aware of both the benefits to its business of engaging with its various constituencies in a sociallyresponsible manner and the risks of failing to do so.
As an operator of internationallyfocussed businesses in emerging markets the Group ensures that it is culturally sensitive in its dealings with the local community and that its employment and development policies are nondiscriminatory and encourage the employment of local nationals at all levels in the Group.
The Group actively supports its employees in their support of local community projects.
Charitable donations across the Group totalled 25292 in 2017 2016 27240.
The Group has a strong record of supporting local charities in the countries in which it operates particularly those which work to benefit children.
During
2017 this has continued to include providing direct financial funding as well as providing volunteers to assist on specific projects and workshops.
Measurement of environmental impact in 2017 The Group has identified GHG emissions per employee as the most appropriate
To measure this the Group collected data on a Groupwide basis from most of its offices on the activities identified for the year ended 30 April 2017.
Results from similar offices have been extrapolated based on the number of employees to estimate total emissions.
In some offices where electricity and heat charges are included in office rental cost and the information is not provided by office landlords an estimate has been calculated based on similar offices usage and office floor space data.
When compared to prior years the Group is pleased that it was able to reduce its total GHG emissions from 1070 tonnes of CO to 1021 tonnes of CO e largely as a result of a reduction in district heat emissions and electricity consumption.
The Groups emissions per staff member have also decreased from 0.86CO e to 0.75CO e.
Over the next three years the Group will target to reduce its GHG emissions by 10% excluding the impact of new UK conversion factors which are outside Group managements direct control and acquisitions.
In the UK a fundraising campaign raised nearly 1800 for Salusbury World a charity local to ITEs London headquarters that supports refugee and migrant children and families.
A further 800 was raised for Red Nose Day a nationwide fundraising event held by the charity Comic Relief which works to alleviate poverty in the UK and around the world.
In Russia our Moscow office held a collection of unwanted clothes shoes and accessories to be donated to those in need.
More than 800 items of clothing were collected with just under half sent to provide humanitarian aid and the rest either sorted and processed for textile recycling or selected for sale at one of three charity shops.
The Moscow office also held a Small Change Big Difference charity event to fundraise for the Life Line Foundation which provides treatment for sick children.
In China the Beijing office took part in a charity sale and benefit concert for Alanahs Home organised by China Childrens Hope
Staff contributed toys plants flowers kitchenware and school supplies.
In Azerbaijan the local office continued its close ties with AngloAzerbaijani Society by sponsoring a charity concert and dinner in aid of United Aid for Azerbaijan UAFA raising vital funds to maintain their work with children from the Saray and Shagan childrens homes.
ITECA
Caspian also became a partner for the BR student volunteering programme in recognition of its active support for the volunteer movement in the country.
It is the Groups aim to develop a global giving initiative linking charitable efforts across all offices in 2018.
Global GHG emissions data comparisons for the period from 1 May 2016 to 30 April 2017 Tonnes of CO 2 etel 2014 Scope tel232 Scope tel936 Estimated emissions for offices that have not reported data Total GHG emissions CO e 1021 1070 1144 1188 Average staff number for period of measurement 1357 1241 1369 1362 Companys chosen intensity measurement Emissions per staff member 0.75 0.86 0.84 0.87 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Corporate Social
Ethics and human rights issues Integrity is core to the Groups values which it actively promotes in its dealings with employees shareholders customers and suppliers and with the authorities of the countries in which it operates.
The Group recognises that reputation is a valuable and fragile asset gained over a substantial period of time and is committed to good practice in respect of human rights.
The leadership position of the Groups exhibitions and the longterm growth of its core shows is a testament to the success of its practices.
All ITE staff are required to comply with the laws and regulations of the country in which the Group operates and with the Groups Human Rights Policy.
The Group promotes high ethical standards in carrying out its business activities and has clear guidelines for dealing with gifts hospitality corruption fraud and the use of inside information.
These together with the Human Rights Policy are made available to all staff.
The UK Bribery Act places obligations on the Group and senior management.
Key management are required to complete an elearning course designed to train and test the individuals on the UK Bribery Act.
The course covers the requirements of the Bribery Act along with example scenarios and implications of Act breaches.
It is the Groups intention during the coming year to review and where appropriate refresh its policies in the area of AntiBribery and Corruption.
The Group is a member of UFI the Worldwide Exhibition Organisers Association and through this the attendance figures at our key exhibitions are audited by independent bodies.
This helps to provide assurance to our exhibitors and visitors as to the standard of our exhibitions.
The Group aims to provide a high quality of service at all its events in all locations.
The Group maintains strict minimum quality levels to ensure events are provided to exhibitors and visitors at appropriate standards irrespective of where they are held.
The Group ensures that all advertising and public communications avoid untruths or overstatements.
ITE builds a relationship with suppliers based on mutual trust and undertakes to pay suppliers on time and in accordance with agreed terms of business.
All information regarding the relationship between the Group and a supplier must remain confidential.
Corporate Governance
UK Corporate Governance Code compliance The Company is committed to high standards of corporate governance and supports the principles laid down in the UK Corporate Governance Code issued by the Financial Reporting Council in September 2012 the Code.
This statement describes how the principles of the Code are applied and reports on the Companys compliance with the Codes provisions.
The Board considers that the Company has been in compliance with all the principles and provisions of the Code throughout the year ended 30 September 2017 and to the date of this report.
The Board The Board of Directors the Board currently has six members comprising of the Nonexecutive Chairman the Chief
Executive Officer the Chief Financial Officer
Directors.
There were two changes to the membership of the Board during the financial year.
Firstly Andrew Beach joined the Board as Chief Financial Officer on 17 October 2016.
Secondly Marco Sodi resigned as Chairman on 13 July 2017 and retired from the Board on 11 October 2017.
Neil England was appointed as Chairman on 13 July 2017 and will serve in that role whilst the Board searches for a new Chairman.
All of the Directors bring strong judgement to the Boards deliberations.
During the year the Board has been of sufficient size and diversity that the balance of skills and experience was considered to be appropriate for the requirements of the business.
The Nonexecutive Directors including the Chairman are all independent of management and free from any business or other relationship including those relationships and circumstances referred to in provision B.1.1 of the Code that could materially interfere with the exercise of independent and objective judgement.
The Company considered that Marco Sodi was independent on his appointment as Chairman.
Neil England had served for more than nine years when he was appointed as Chairman however the Board believe he is the most appropriate member of the Board to chair the Company whilst a permanent successor is found.
Role of the Board The Board has overall responsibility to shareholders for the proper management of the Company.
It met eight times during the financial year.
It has a formal schedule of matters reserved to it for decision making including responsibility for the overall management and performance of the Group.
This includes development and approval of its strategy longterm objectives and commercial initiatives approval of annual and interim results annual budgets material acquisitions and disposals material agreements and major capital commitments approval of treasury policies and assessment of its going concern position.
Board discussions are held in an open and collaborative atmosphere with sufficient time allowed for debate and challenge.
Board members receive appropriate documentation in advance of each Board or Committee meeting which normally includes a formal agenda a detailed report on current trading and full papers on matters where the Board will be required to make a decision or give approval.
Updates from the Board Committees are also received at Board meetings.
Board papers are delivered through an electronic platform improving the efficiency of its communications and reducing paper usage.
There is an established procedure for the preparation and review at least annually by the Board of mediumterm plans and the annual budget.
Management accounts are circulated to the Board on a monthly basis and business performance and any significant variances to budget are formally reviewed at scheduled Board meetings.
All major investment decisions are subject to postcompletion reviews.
During the year the Chairman met with the Nonexecutive Directors without the Executive Directors present.
The Non executive Directors also met without the Chairman or Executive Directors present.
The Directors The biographical details of the Board members are set out on page 37.
All of the Directors have occupied or occupy senior positions in UK and or international listed companies and have substantial experience in business.
At all times at least half the Board excluding the Chairman has comprised independent Nonexecutive Directors.
The Nonexecutive Directors were all appointed for an initial threeyear term and in common with the Executive Directors are subject to reelection each year by shareholders at the Companys Annual General Meeting AGM and as set out in the Code the Board continues to be satisfied that they remain independent.
At the AGM on 25 January 2018 all of the Directors will once again offer themselves for reelection in compliance with Code provision B.7.1.
The Board believes that all of the Directors continue to be appropriate and effective in their role and believes that the Company and its shareholders should support their reelection at the AGM.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in any of the Groups pension schemes or in any of the Groups bonus share option or other incentive schemes.
The Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer
The different roles of the Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer are
A responsibility statement for each of those roles has been agreed and adopted by the Board.
Senior Independent Nonexecutive Director Linda Jensen was appointed as the Companys Senior Independent Non executive Director SID in 2014.
Her responsibilities include being available to liaise with shareholders who have concerns which are not able to be resolved through the normal channels being a sounding board for the Chairman and leading the annual performance evaluation of the Chairman.
Board effectiveness review The formal annual review of the performance of the Board its Committees and the Directors was carried out during the year.
This year the process consisted of an internally run exercise led by the Chairman and assisted by the Company
The appraisal questionnaire used as part of the process was wide ranging and included questions covering both Board and Committee performance.
Individual
Independent Director after consultation with both the other Nonexecutive Directors and the Executive Directors.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The appraisal confirmed that the Board and its Committees were operating effectively.
The feedback was discussed with the Board and the Chairman.
It was agreed that steps would be taken to strengthen the Nonexecutive team once the new Chairman has been appointed to ensure a correct balance of skills and abilities is maintained on the Board.
Support and advice The Board has access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who is responsible for ensuring that all Board procedures have been complied with.
The Board has approved a procedure for all Directors to take independent legal and financial professional advice at the Companys expense if required to support the performance of their duties as Directors of the Company.
No such advice was sought by any Director during the year.
Training and development An induction programme is arranged for newlyappointed Directors which includes presentations on the business current strategy and shareholder expectations.
Guidance is also given on the duties responsibilities and liabilities of a Director of a listed company and key Board policies and procedures.
Business familiarisation involves Directors visiting exhibitions in markets in which the Group operates to gain a greater understanding of the Groups activities and to meet senior managers throughout the business.
Every Director has access to training as required and is encouraged to continue his or her own professional development through attendance at seminars and briefings.
Conflicts of interest The Companys Articles of Association in line with the Companies Act 2006 allow the Board to authorise potential conflicts of interest that may arise and impose limits or conditions as appropriate.
The Company has established a procedure whereby any decision of the Board to authorise a conflict of interest is only effective if it is agreed without the conflicted Directors voting or without their votes being counted.
In making such a decision as always the Directors must act in a way they consider in good faith will be most likely to promote the success of the Company.
Board Committees There are a number of standing Committees of the Board to which various matters are delegated.
They all have formal Terms of Reference approved by the Board which are available on the Groups website site.
The Committee reports are set out on pages 46 to 76.
Attendance by Directors at Board and Committee meetings in the financial year ended 30 September 2017
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Sharon Baylay 88 55 77 22 Andrew Beach 88 Neil England 88 55  55 Linda Jensen 88 11 77 55 Mark Shashoua 88 Marco Sodi 78  66 23 Stephen Puckett 88 55 11 55 Total number of meetings Shareholder relations The Company is committed to ongoing engagement with shareholders and has an established cycle of communication based on the Groups financial reporting calendar.
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have dialogue with institutional shareholders and general presentations are given to analysts and investors covering the annual and interim results.
The Board also received institutional and analysts feedback following both the interim and annual results roadshows.
All shareholders will have the opportunity to ask questions at the Companys AGM on 25 January 2018.
At the AGM the Chairman will give a statement on current trading conditions.
The Chairmen of the Nomination Remuneration Audit and Risk Committees will be available to answer questions at the AGM.
In addition the Groups website containing published information and press releases can be found at site The Strategic report set out on pages 1 to 35 details the financial performance of the
The key risks and uncertainties the Company identifies and monitors are laid out in the Risk Committee Report on pages 50 to 51.
Whistleblowing arrangements The Company has a policy which enables and encourages employees to report in confidence any possible improprieties in either financial reporting or other matters.
ASB guidance on narrative reporting The Company considers that it is in compliance with the additional guidance on narrative reporting for UK companies published by the Accounting Standards Board ASB in January 2008.
AntiCorruption Policy and Modern Slavery Act 2015 As part of ITEs commitment to preventing bribery and establishing a culture that does not tolerate corruption wherever and in whatever form it may be encountered a formal AntiCorruption Policy was approved by the Board in 2011 and updated in 2017 and appropriate procedures put in place in line with guidance provided by the Ministry of Justice to ensure compliance with current legislation and the Companys policy and related procedures.
The Group has considered the Modern Slavery Act 2015 and confirms to the best of its knowledge that there is no slavery or human trafficking within its supply chain.
The Directors have pleasure in submitting their Report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2017.
Principal activities and review of the business The principal activities of the Group comprise the organisation of trade exhibitions and conferences.
The main subsidiary and associate undertakings which affect the profits or net assets of the Group in the year are listed in note 18 to the financial statements of the Company and note 5 to the financial statements of the Group.
Details of the Groups performance during the year and expected future developments are contained in the Chief Executive Officers Statement on pages 8 to 13 the Chief Financial Officers Statement on pages 18 to 25 and in the Divisional Trading Summaries on pages 26 to 35.
Details of the Groups financial risk management policies are contained on pages 50 to 55.
Results and dividends The audited accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 are set out on pages The Group loss for the year after taxation was 6.4m 2016 loss of 7.2m.
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 2.5p 2016 3.0p.
The total dividend for the year including the proposed final dividend is 4.0p 2016 4.5p.
The Company operates a SCRIP Dividend Programme which is available to the holders of ordinary shares in the capital of the Company from time to time.
The
Programme was approved at the Annual General Meeting held in 2016 and allows participants to receive ordinary shares in the capital of the Company for every cash dividend entitlement where the SCRIP is offered.
The Directors retain the discretion
Report
Corporate Governance dividend.
The Board believes that for those shareholders who would like to choose to take their dividend in shares rather than cash the SCRIP Dividend Programme is an attractive alternative as UK shareholders who elect to take new shares in the Company under the Programme are able to increase their holdings without incurring stamp duty.
It is the Directors current intention to offer the SCRIP alternative for each dividend paid.
The full Terms and Conditions of the Programme is available on our website at www. teexhibitions. com or from our Registrars Equiniti.
Capital structure Details of the Companys issued share capital and movements during the year are shown in note 9 to the financial statements of the Company.
The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
Each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
There are no specific restrictions on the size of a holding or on the transfer of shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the Articles of Association and prevailing legislation.
The
Directors are not aware of any agreements between holders of the Companys shares that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
No person has any special rights of control over the Companys share capital and all shares are fully paid.
Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 28 to the financial statements of the Group.
The Trustee of the ITE Group Share Trust is not permitted to vote on any unvested shares held in the Trust unless expressly directed to do so by the
A dividend waiver is in place in respect of the Trustees holding apart from the shares which are held in the Trust as part of the Directors Deferred Bonus Plan.
There are a number of agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company such as commercial contracts bank facility agreements property lease arrangements and employee share plans.
None of these are considered to be significant in terms of their likely impact on the business of the Group as a whole.
Furthermore the Directors are not aware of any agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees that provide compensation for loss of office or employment that occurs because of a takeover bid.
Articles of Association The Companys Articles of Association may be amended by a special resolution at a general meeting of the shareholders.
The Company Directors The Directors who served throughout the year are as follows Executive Directors Mark Shashoua Andrew Beach  appointed 17 October Nonexecutive Directors Neil England  Chairman Linda Jensen Sharon Baylay Stephen Puckett Marco Sodi  Resigned as Chairman with effect 13 July 2017 and from the Board with effect from 11 October 2017 Their biographical details are set out on page 37.
Directors and Officers insurance cover is provided by the Company in line with normal market practice for the benefit of Directors in respect of claims arising in the performance of their duties.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Company Directors shareholdings The Directors who held office at 30 September 2017 had the following interests including family interests in the ordinary shares of the Company Name of Director 30 September 30 September Executive Directors Mark Shashoua 55535 535 Andrew Beach 15000 na Nonexecutive Directors Neil England 50000 50000 Linda Jensen 5000 5000 Sharon Baylay 10300 10300 Stephen Puckett 10000 10000 Marco Sodi 200000 200000 The Directors as employees and potential beneficiaries have an interest in 649356 shares held by the ITE Group Employees Share Trust at 30 September 2017.
The ITE Group Employees Share Trust held 2783585 ordinary shares at 27 November 2017.
There were no changes in the interests of Directors between 30 September 2017 and 27 November 2017.
As in line with the Companys Remuneration Policy a third of the value received under the Groups Bonus Plan by Mark Shashoua and Andrew Beach for the year ended 30 September 2017 will be deferred into shares held in the ITE Group Employees Share Trust.
Companys shareholders At 27 November 2017 the Company had been notified under Rule 5 of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following interests in its ordinary shares Name of holder
Percentage held Brandes Investment Partners 37534742 Ordinary Shares 124100 ADRs Neptune Investment Management 24514923 9.10 Invesco Trimark 18826084 6.99 Fidelity Management and Research 17021059 6.32 BlackRock 16373540 6.08 Amiral Gestion 13948634 5.18 Mawer Investment Management 10348042 3.84 MN Services 9692584 3.60 Fidelity Institutional Asset Management 8895901 3.30 JO Hambro Capital Management 8526324 3.17 Legal and General Investment Management 8145246 3.02 Authority to purchase the Companys shares At the AGM on 26 January 2017 shareholders authorised the Company to make one or more market purchases of up to 26213967 of the Companys ordinary shares to be held in treasury at a price between 1p exclusive of expenses and 105% of the average closing middle market price of a share for the five business days immediately preceding the date on which the shares are purchased.
No purchases were made during the year and the Directors propose to renew this authority at the 2018 AGM.
Charitable and political donations The Group made 25292 of charitable donations 2016 27240 during the year.
No political donations were made 2016 nil.
Employees
The Groups human resources strategy is to attract and retain talented high calibre employees focussed on achieving excellent results.
The Remuneration Policy is designed to help achieve this aim.
The Group places great importance on the development of its staff to support the business in meeting its objectives.
This is reflected in the training initiatives in place for staff both internally and externally.
The Group keeps employees informed on matters affecting them and on matters affecting the Groups performance through emails announcements intranet regular newsletters and through meetings both formal and informal.
Employees are able and are encouraged to move around the Group in order to experience the business environment in other offices.
The Group actively encourages the participation of employees in activities of offices other than their own.
The Group distributes longterm incentives widely to senior staff in all offices.
At 30 September 2017 approximately 41% of staff held longterm incentives in some form.
As a result the Groups employees identify strongly with ITEs overall objectives.
It is the Groups policy to consider fully applications for employment from anyone qualified to apply regardless of their status disability age gender sexual orientation or belief.
Subsequently opportunities for advancement and development will be offered on merit and regardless of the factors noted above.
The Group has family friendly policies for those with children and in the event of a member of staff becoming disabled every effort would be made to ensure their continued employment and progression in the Group.
It is Group policy that training career development and promotion of disabled employees match that of other employees as far as possible.
Supplier payment policy The Companys policy which is also applied to the Group is to agree payment terms with suppliers when entering into each transaction to ensure that suppliers are made aware of the terms of payment and abide by the terms of payment.
ITE
Group plc has no trade creditors.
Trade creditors of the Group consolidated at 30 September 2017 were equivalent to 9.8 days 2016 9.9 days purchases based on the average daily amount invoiced by suppliers during the year.
Greenhouse gas emissions Information on the Companys greenhouse gas emissions is set out in the Environmental Impact section of the Annual Report on page 38.
Annual General Meeting The Notice convening the AGM to be held at 12 noon on 25 January 2018 is contained in a circular sent to shareholders at the same time as this report.
Auditors
Deloitte LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in office.
Companys auditors and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
Fair balanced and understandable statement Each of the Directors considers that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Directors statement as to disclosure of information to auditors Each Director of the Company at the date when this Report was approved confirms so far as heshe is aware there is no relevant audit information as defined by the Companies Act 2006 of which the Companys auditors are unaware and heshe has taken all the steps that he she ought to have taken as a Director to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
This confirmation is given in accordance with section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Going concern and viability statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the 2014 revision of the Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the prospect of the Group over both a one and a threeyear period.
The oneyear period has a greater level of certainty and is therefore used to set detailed budgetary targets at all levels across the Group.
The threeyear period offers less certainty but is aligned with the Boards periodic strategic review as well as the longterm incentives offered to management.
The Directors assessment considered a range of factors including the Groups expected trading performance based on approved budgets riskadjusted where appropriate and the resulting cash flows covenant compliance and other key ratios over the period.
These metrics are subject to sensitivity analysis which evaluates the potential impact of the Groups principal risks as disclosed in the Risk Committee Report.
The Group operates in territories that can be unpredictable and unexpected geopolitical and economic events such as acts of terrorism sanctions currency controls and exchange rate movements can have an impact on the Groups reported trading performance.
A significant deterioration in trading from the major markets notably Russia and Turkey could impact on certain banking covenants.
However the refinancing referred to on page 20 increases headroom and significantly reduces this risk.
There are also a range of mitigating actions available and within the Groups control.
However the Directors have a range of mitigating actions available and within their control.
As the Group continues to implement the TAG programme the appropriate funding arrangements for the Group will be considered.
Directors
Report continued On the basis of this and other matters considered and reviewed by the Board during the year the Board has reasonable expectations that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the periods used for the assessment.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
In doing so it is recognised that such future assessments are subject to a level of uncertainty that increases with time and therefore future outcomes cannot be guaranteed or predicted with certainty.
By order of the Board Anneka Kingan Company Secretary 27 November 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Audit Committee the Committee was in place throughout the financial year and is chaired by Stephen Puckett.
The Board considers that Stephen has the appropriate financial expertise as required by Principle C3.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code as Stephen is a Chartered Accountant has held executive roles in financial positions in other companies and chairs other listed companies Audit
All members of the Committee are independent Nonexecutive Directors and they are considered to provide a wide range of international financial and commercial expertise necessary to fulfil the Committees duties.
Members of the Committee are appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee in consultation with the Chairman of the Audit Committee for an initial period of three years which can then be followed by an additional two further threeyear periods.
During the financial year all Committee members played an active role in all Committee meetings held throughout the year.
During the year Linda Jensen joined the Committee.
There were no other changes during the year to membership of the Committee.
The Chief Financial Officer is invited to attend meetings unless he has a conflict of interest.
The External Audit Partner the Financial Controller and the Company Secretary are also invited to attend the Committees meetings providing there is no conflict of interest.
Other relevant people from the business were also invited to attend certain meetings or parts of meetings to provide a deeper level of insight into certain key issues and developments.
To maximise effectiveness meetings of the Committee generally take place just prior to a Company Board meeting.
The
Chairman of the Committee reports to the Board as part of a separate agenda item on the activity of the Committee and matters of particular relevance to the Board in the conduct of their work.
The Chairman of the Committee has also held individual meetings with the Chief Financial Officer and the External Audit Partner.
Terms of Reference The Audit Committees Terms of Reference are available on the Groups website site or can be obtained from the Company Secretary.
The Terms of Reference are reviewed annually and presented to the Board for approval.
Committee members Chairman of the Committee Meeting attendance Stephen Puckett 55 Sharon Baylay 55 Neil England 55 Linda Jensen 11 Audit Committee
Activities during the financial year Each of the Committee meetings held during the year has a particular specific focus.
This years meetings focussed on the management letter from the external auditor following the prior years audit the review of the external auditors interim review work and the interim financial statements the external audit plan the key areas of focus in advance of the commencement of the yearend audit an update on the progress of the external audit the results of the external audit and review of the annual financial statements and associated investor presentations.
During the year the Committee focussed on the following areas Alternative performance measures and ensuring an appropriate balance between the prominence given to statutory and headline results Increasing the transparency of the alternative performance measures presented and reviewing the refinements made to the likeforlike definition presented Adjusting items in particular the inclusion of restructuring costs as an adjusting item in the year and the appropriateness of the treatment and presentation of the costs incurred in developing and implementing the TAG programme Changes made to the reportable segments and in particular the inclusion of Brands as a separate operating segment The appointment of PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC as internal auditor The external auditor effectiveness review Independent tax reviews and An assessment of the appropriateness of the going concern and longterm viability statements.
In addition every meeting reviews summaries of the latest internal audit reports the update of the risk assessment and any correspondence received by the Board which falls within the Committees remit.
In assessing the appropriateness of the financial statements the Committee concentrated on the following significant audit risks which were agreed with Deloitte in advance of the audit and were the focus of their audit and on which the Committee received written reports from management and Deloitte as part of the audit process Impairment of goodwill intangible assets and investments which involves measuring the carrying value of goodwill intangible assets and investments against the value in use of each of the cashgenerating units CGUs and investments.
There are a number of judgements and estimates to consider in the valuation in use calculations principally regarding the forecast cash flows the discount rates used and the growth rates applied.
Forecast cash flows are based on Boardapproved budgets and plans.
Discount rates are selected to reflect the riskadjusted cost of capital for the respective territory.
Growth rates reflect managements view of the longterm forecast rates of growth using third party sources such as the International Monetary Fund.
In the year impairment charges were recognised in respect of the India Turkey and Africa Oil Week AOW CGUs and the investment in the Indonesian joint venture.
The Committee considered closely the recent trading improvements at the CGUs the increased allocation of central costs following the move to a more centralised operating model and refinements to the discount rate methodology made in the year.
The Committee agreed on the impairments in respect of the India Turkey and AOW CGUs and the Indonesian joint venture.
Taxation which involves ensuring that that there is appropriate support for the key assumptions in the tax provisions that deferred tax assets are deemed recoverable and that provisions for international tax exposures are appropriate.
As the Group operates and derives profits from a range of international markets it is subject to tax in a number of territories.
Developments in international tax legislation in the period have been considered and managements assessment of the impact of those developments on the Group presented to the Committee.
Consideration has been given to the provisions held in respect of potential challenge to historical arrangements in light of changes to tax rules and recent challenges made by tax authorities in the markets in which the Group operates.
Where unused tax losses are available for offset against future profits the appropriateness of future profit projections has been considered.
The
Committee agreed on the appropriateness of the tax provisions and deferred tax assets recognised.
Internal control and risk management The Group has a formal process of internal audit.
During the year PricewaterhouseCoopers PwC were appointed to run the Groups internal audit programme.
PwC perform audits on a rolling basis across the Groups operating units.
The reports are made available in summary form to the Committee and in detailed form to the Chief Financial Officer the Company Secretary relevant operating management and the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
The Committee reviews the reports and considers progress against the recommendations.
The Group operates across a number of territories and the role of internal audit and the follow up process on the findings in internal reports are important parts of the Groups overall control environment.
The effectiveness of the internal control process is assessed throughout the year through discussions with local management teams and others involved in the process.
The Committee believes that the current internal audit process is operating effectively.
The Groups risk management process is covered in detail in the report of the Risk Committee on pages 49 to 53.
The role and responsibilities of the
The Audit Committee meets at least three times a year and as and when required.
The Committee is responsible for monitoring the integrity of the financial statements of the Company and for providing effective corporate governance over the appropriateness of the Groups financial reporting.
The Committee works closely with the Risk Committee and this ensures effective and sufficient coverage of financial reporting risks within the Groups risk management processes.
Individual members of the Committee have visited a range of the Groups offices and shows and held meetings with local staff and where appropriate followed up on matters previously identified by external and internal audits.
Specific Committee responsibilities include reviewing the financial results announcements and financial statements and monitoring compliance with relevant statutory and listing requirements reporting to the Board on the appropriateness of the accounting policies and practices including critical accounting policies and practices advising the Board on whether the Committee believes the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy overseeing the relationship with the external auditor advising the Board on the appointment of the external auditor agreeing their audit scope and audit fees and assessing the effectiveness of the external audit process considering and making recommendations to the Board on the nature and extent of the significant risks to which the Group is exposed and monitoring managements mitigation plans reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups internal controls and assessing the effectiveness of the Groups internal audit process and monitoring the Groups whistleblowing bribery prevention and fraud detection processes.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
External audit The effectiveness of the external audit process is dependent on appropriate audit risk identification at the start of the audit cycle.
A detailed audit plan is received from Deloitte which sets out the key risks identified.
For the financial year ended 30 September 2017 the primary risks were as set out on page 47.
Deloitte provided the Committee with their views on these issues at the Committee meeting held to consider the financial statements.
In addition they provided the Committee with details of any identified matters greater than 55000 and any other adjustments that were qualitatively significant which management had not corrected on the basis that the matters were not individually or in aggregate material.
Private meetings were held with Deloitte at both of the Audit Committee meetings which considered the financial statements in November and May to provide additional opportunity for open dialogue and feedback from the Committee and the auditors without management being present.
Matters discussed were the preparedness and efficiency of management with respect to the audit the strengths and any perceived weaknesses of the financial management team confirmation that no restriction on scope had been placed on them by management and how they had exercised professional judgement.
The Chairman of the Committee also meets with the external audit partner outside the formal Committee process through the year.
The effectiveness of the 2016 external audit process was formally assessed by the Committee at the beginning of 2017.
Feedback was sought from various participants in the process Audit Committee members Executive Directors members of the finance team and management of subsidiary units.
The effectiveness of the audit partner the audit team their approach to audits including planning and execution communication support and value were assessed and discussed.
Overall the effectiveness of the external audit process was assessed to be performing as expected.
Appointment and independence of the external auditor The Committee considers the reappointment of the external auditor including the rotation of the Audit Partner each year and also assesses their independence on an ongoing basis.
The external auditor are required to rotate the Audit Partner responsible for the Group audit every five years.
Mark LeeAmies the current Audit Partner was appointed in 2013 and therefore 2017 is his final year end as Audit Partner.
For 2018 Rob Knight has been appointed and was invited to the latest Audit Committee meeting to ensure a smooth and orderly transition.
He was selected from a shortlist of three suitable and available partner candidates provided by Deloitte LLP following interviews conducted separately by the Chief Financial Officer and the Chairman of the Audit
The Committee reviewed and endorsed their recommendation.
Deloitte LLP were first appointed by the Company in 2002.
Whilst the Group has not formally tendered for the audit since then the Committee has undertaken a review of the objectivity and effectiveness of the audit process each year.
When considering the suitability of the external auditors the Committee takes account of the ability of the auditors to deliver an audit across the geographies in which the Group operates.
In addition considerable importance is placed on the findings set out in the Public Report on the most recent inspections of Deloitte carried out by the Financial Reporting Councils Audit Quality Review Team and their reports on all other auditors in its sample.
The Committee notes the consistently good assessment of Deloitte against its peers.
When considering suitable external auditors the Committee also takes account of the ability of the auditors to add value through observations from the audit process and their interactions with management.
The Committee is cognisant of its responsibility under the revised Code to tender the audit every ten years and notes that this period can be extended to coincide with the period ending the current engagement partners rotation if longer.
Under transition rules set out in the Competition and Markets Authority CMA final order in response to recent EU regulations the Group has to mandatorily tender the audit by the Annual General Meeting held after 17 June 2023.
The
Committee will nevertheless review on an annual basis whether a tender process should be conducted sooner.
For the year ending 30 September 2018 the Committee has provided to the Board its recommendation to the shareholders on the reappointment of Deloitte LLP as the Groups auditors.
During the year Deloitte LLP and member firms of Deloitte LLP charged the Group 358500 2016 364600 for audit and auditrelated services.
Nonaudit services To safeguard the objectivity and independence of the external auditors from becoming compromised the Committee has a formal policy governing the engagement of the external auditors to provide nonaudit services.
No material changes have been made to this policy during the year.
In addition nonaudit fees on any specific project cannot exceed 50000 without the express approval of the Committee Chairman who must report to the Committee on the use of this delegated authority at the next Committee meeting.
Our policy ensures that the Committee challenges the decision to use Deloitte LLP where suitable practical and reasonably priced alternatives exist.
In addition the Committee considers the overall level of nonaudit fees and would not expect these fees to be in aggregate greater than the audit fee.
Full details of the split between audit and nonaudit fees can be found in note 4 to the financial statements of the Group.
On behalf of the Audit Committee Stephen Puckett Chairman of the Audit Committee 27 November 2017 Audit Committee
Former Committee members Chairman of the Committee Meeting attendance Andrew Beach 11 Andrew Watkins 11 Anneka Kingan 11 John Gulliver 11 Mandy Hossami 11 Neil Burman 11 During the year the Risk Committee was reconstituted with a change in the membership.
The newly formed Committee comprises the Chief Financial Officer Andrew Beach who chairs the Committee the General Counsel Andrew Watkins the Company Secretary Anneka Kingan the Chief Operating Officer John Gulliver the HR Director Mandy Hossami and the IT Director Neil Burman.
One meeting of the newly constituted Risk Committee took place during the year with the above attendance.
Prior to the change in the Risk Committee composition one meeting took place with the below attendance.
Committee members Chairman of the Committee Meeting attendance Des McEwan 11 Alexander Shtalenkov 01 Edward Strachan 11 Stephen Puckett 11 Vincent Brain 11 Terms of Reference The Risk Committees Terms of Reference are available on the Groups website site or can be obtained from the Company Secretary.
The Terms of Reference are reviewed annually and presented to the Board for approval.
The role and responsibilities of the Committee The Company Board is ultimately responsible for the Groups risk management framework.
The Board regularly reviews the Groups key risks and to support the discharge of this responsibility in addition to the Audit Committee the Board established the Risk Committee in 2014.
The purpose of the Risk Committee the Committee is to identify measure track mitigate and manage risks faced by the Group over time with the intention of exposing threats to be mitigated and opportunities to be exploited.
The Committee works closely with the Audit Committee which remains responsible for risks arising in financial reporting.
The Groups Key Risk Matrix containing an estimated financial impact is regularly shared with the Board and discussed.
The Committees work is primarily driven by the assessment of its principal risks and uncertainties.
These risks and uncertainties are the output of a series of risk registers which are developed across the Group and then are accumulated and reviewed by the
After the accumulation of the main risk register it is shared with the Board twice a year.
The Committee reviews these assessments and makes adjustments to the overall risk plan as appropriate.
Risk Committee
Activities during the financial year The Committee met twice during the year.
During the first meeting the Committee reviewed and discussed health and safety across the Group use of risk monitoring tools viability reporting and scenario planning.
The second meeting launched the newly constituted Committee.
It was agreed how the Committee would operate and agreed to focus on implementation and review of a more thorough risk register and to begin the rollout of business continuity plans for offices and core events.
During the year we launched a Global Authority Matrix which sets out the key business decisions and the level of approval that is required for those decisions.
The
Regional Directors and Regional Finance Directors are required to certify compliance with the matrix on a quarterly basis.
Assessment of the Groups risk profile The key risks identified and monitored by the Group as identified by the Risk Committee prior to the recent reconstitution are set out in the following section with an assessment of how the potential impact of the individual risk has changed compared to the previous financial year.
The Committee is currently in the process of thoroughly reviewing the key risks and will present an update in the next Annual
The Committee is clear that the identification and appropriate management of the identified key risks is vital for the Group to achieve its strategic objectives and to support its longterm growth.
On behalf of the Risk Committee Andrew Beach Chairman of the Risk Committee 27 November 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The principal risks facing ITE are reviewed regularly by both the Risk Committee and the Board who confirm that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that could threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
The risks described represent those that we consider have the potential to have the greatest impact on our ability to meet our strategic objectives.
The Group has established
risk management
Principal Risks and Uncertainties Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in probability andor impact of risk vs prior year Political uncertainty and regulatory risk Changes in law or the regulatory environment could have an effect on some or all of the exhibitions of the Group.
As an international organisation political and regulatory changes in the regions in which we organise our exhibitions could impact our ability to operate in these territories.
We have established local companies that fully contribute to the local economy in the countries where we operate.
Over recent years we have diversified our business geographically through acquisitions and expansion into new regions and markets reducing the proportion of our business that is exposed to a single country or regions political and regulatory environment.
Our largest market represents approximately 47% of the Group revenues.
Towards the end of the year we hired a General Counsel to amongst other things monitor and report on regulatory matters affecting our markets and recommend appropriate actions to minimise risk.
Economic instability reduces demand for exhibition space An economic downturn or period of uncertainty could reduce demand for exhibition space which would in turn reduce the profitability of our exhibitions.
We operate across a wide range of sectors and countries to minimise our exposure to any single market.
The nature of our business cycle is such that with revenues largely generated in advance of the costs we incur we can react to periods of economic instability to protect the profitability of our exhibitions.
Through strong relationships with venues and staff we have a relatively flexible cost structure allowing us to manage our event margins in the short and medium term.
The implementation of the TAG programme is designed to make our events mustattend which should have the benefit of protecting them somewhat from economic instability.
Economic weakness in certain Central Asian countries and Turkey has continued during 2017 reducing demand for exhibition space yearonyear.
However our largest market Russia is showing early signs of improvement following the stabilisation of Moscow.
Financial risk foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to movements in foreign exchange rates against Sterling for both trading transactions and for the translation of overseas operations.
The principal exposure is to the Euro and the Ruble which form the basis of our invoicing and to the Ruble which is the functional currency of our Russian operations.
The Group seeks to minimise exposure by protecting a certain amount of Eurodenominated sales with forward contracts seeking to maximise the matching of costs and revenues in the same currency and employing a hybrid pricing strategy which ensures local customers are exposed to currency risk.
Financial risk liquidity risk The Group operates in a number of countries with complex local requirements surrounding overseas payments.
There is a risk that excess cash is trapped in subsidiaries resulting in liquidity shortages within the Group.
The Group has wellestablished payment mechanisms to repatriate cash from its subsidiaries.
Overseas cash balances are monitored on a weekly basis by Group management.
During the year a review of trapped cash was conducted with the support of external advisors resulting in an action plan to reduce exposure going forward.
Financial risk covenant risk The Group has a debt facility with a number of covenants.
There is a risk that the impact of the other risks noted could challenge key covenant metrics.
The Group reports covenant compliance to its banks on a quarterly basis and all covenants have been complied with and are expected to be complied with based on current forecasts.
Subsequent to the year end we have refinanced our debt facility on improved terms with greater headroom and more appropriate covenants.
Trading has also improved with the recent return to growth.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Principal Risks and Uncertainties continued Changes in our risk profile We review our risk profile regularly meaning that the list of key risks and uncertainties will evolve over time.
The list of risks is consistent with the list of risks presented last year with the addition of a risk around the TAG programme implementation.
As noted in the Risk Committee report a thorough review of our risks is currently being undertaken and the key risks identified where different to those set out here will be summarised in the next Annual Report.
Risk Potential impact Mitigation Change in probability andor impact of risk vs prior year
The Group has key commercial relationships with venues which secure our rights to run our exhibitions in the future.
The breakdown of a relationship with a key venue provider could reduce the profitability of any exhibitions that have to be relocated to an alternative venue and could increase competitor risk if a rival exhibition is launched at the previous venue.
The key commercial relationships are regularly reviewed.
We seek to maintain our exhibition rights for at least the next threeyear period for significant exhibitions.
In the longerterm the Group seeks to maintain good relationships with its principal venues to ensure the continuance of availability.
Venue availability Damage to or unavailability of a particular venue could impact the Groups shortterm trading position.
We carry business interruption insurance policies which protect profits on our largest fullyowned events against such an event in the short term.
Competitor risk Competition has existed in ITEs markets for some years and we face competitive pressures on a marketbymarket basis.
A single exhibition or sector in a market could have its prospects curtailed by a strong competitor launch.
In all of our markets we have a strong position as an international organiser achieved through the effective use of our international sales network and the established brands of our major events.
The breadth of our portfolio of events with its geographic and sector diversity reduces the risk of a competitive threat to our overall business.
Integration and management of acquisitions With new acquisitions there can be no assurances that the Group will achieve the expected return on its investment.
Integration issues and a failure to realise planned operational and synergistic benefits are a risk to delivering the expected returns on our investments.
The Group has formal investment decision criteria to identify suitable earnings enhancing acquisition targets and we employ experienced professionals to drive the acquisition process and perform when appropriate financial tax legal and commercial due diligence.
Postacquisition plans are prepared to ensure businesses are effectively integrated into the Group and that planned synergies are realised.
People
A failure to attract and retain high calibre people could adversely affect our ability to meet our strategic objectives.
Given the longstanding relationships our employees have with our customers a loss of key staff could negatively impact the shortterm prospects of a specific event or sector.
We have sought to build loyalty in our staff by ensuring remuneration is competitive and through a wide distribution of the Groups longterm incentive plans.
We have wellestablished management development programmes in place and are committed to the development of all of our people.
We monitor staff satisfaction levels through the use of employment engagement surveys and act on the results to ensure we have motivated as well as talented employees.
These are currently being reassessed as part of the TAG programme.
Transformation and Growth TAG programme The TAG programme initiatives may not be delivered on time or within budget.
Growth may not be delivered within the expected timeline or at a rate that will cover investment costs which will impact financial performance and stated growth objectives.
There are defined structures in place to support and deliver the TAG programme. the overall programme to ensure it delivers the strategic objectives.
Each workstream within the programme has a dedicated workstream lead who manages a particular part of the programme and these separate teams meet frequently.
The Steering Committee controls the finances available to each workstream and ensures the workstream is delivered to plan.
The Steering Committee is comprised of a team of functional and industry specialists.
All risks to workstreams are considered through regular review forums.
Management have considerable experience of executing largescale transformation programmes.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Nomination Committee the Committee was in place throughout the financial year and is chaired by the Chairman of the Company.
Neil England assumed the role as Committee Chair following the resignation of Marco Sodi on 13 July 2017.
All of the members of the Committee who served during the year were independent Nonexecutive Directors as required under section B2.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Financial Officer may also be invited to attend meetings unless they have a conflict of interest.
During the year the Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer
The Company Secretary and HR Director may be invited but only as appropriate and only if they do not have a conflict of interest.
The
Committee is also assisted by executive search consultants as and when required.
Terms of Reference The Nomination Committees Terms of Reference are available on the Groups website site or can be obtained from the Company
The Terms of Reference are reviewed annually and presented to the Board for approval.
The role and responsibilities of the Committee The Nomination Committee meets a minimum of twice a year and as required.
The Committee is responsible for considering and recommending to the Board suitable candidates for appointment as Executive and Nonexecutive Directors.
Committee members Chairman of the Committee Meeting attendance Neil England 55 Marco Sodi 23 Linda Jensen 55 Stephen Puckett 55 Sharon Baylay 22 Nomination Committee
When the need to appoint either an Executive or a Nonexecutive Director arises the Committee reviews what skills and experience are required for the position whilst taking into account the Boards existing composition.
Appointments to the Board follow a formal rigorous and transparent process which involves the Committee interviewing candidates proposed by either existing Board members or by external search consultants.
Careful consideration is given to ensure appointees have sufficient time available to devote to the role and that the balance of skills knowledge and experience on the Board is maintained or improved.
ITE has adopted a Board Diversity Policy which recognises and embraces the benefits of having a diverse Board and sees increasing diversity at Board level as an important element in maintaining a competitive advantage.
A truly diverse Board in its broadest sense will include and make good use of differences in the skills regional and industry experience background race gender and other qualities of Directors.
These differences will be considered in determining the optimum composition of the Board and when possible should be balanced appropriately.
All Board appointments are made on merit in the context of the skills and experience the Board as a whole requires to be effective.
When dealing with the appointment of a successor to the Company Chairman the Senior Independent Nonexecutive Director will chair the Committee instead of the Company Chairman.
When the Committee has found a suitable candidate the Chairman of the Committee will make a proposal to the whole Board and the appointment is the responsibility of the Board following recommendation from the Committee.
Activities during the financial year The Committee met five times during the financial year.
The Committee met more frequently than usual due to the resignation of the Chairman in July 2017 and the need to appoint a successor.
After a tender process was completed the external search consultants Blackwood Group were appointed to carry out the search for the role of the Chairman.
At the time of their appointment Blackwood Group had no connection to the business.
Whilst the search for a Chairman continues the Committee appointed Neil England as Chairman of the Group.
Subsequent to the resignation of Marco Sodi as Chairman the Committee appointed Sharon Baylay to join the Nomination Committee.
In addition to the search for a new Chairman the Committee met to review and discuss the balance of skills and experience on the Board and considered if any changes were necessary the annual Board evaluation responses Membership and Chairmanship of the plc committees the Committees Terms of Reference the reelection of all Directors at the 2018 Annual General Meeting the Companys succession plans for the Companys Board its Executive Team and other key roles across the Group and talent development and management across the Group.
On behalf of the Nomination Committee Neil England Chairman of the Nomination Committee 27 November 2017 Remuneration Committee Chairmans
Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present to you the Remuneration Committees report for the year to 30 September 2017.
This is my first time of writing to you as Chair of the Remuneration Committee I took over from Linda Jensen on 1 October 2017.
What is in this Report The report includes an overview of the Remuneration Policy set out on pages 57 to 61 that was introduced with effect from 26 January 2017.
It also includes the amount paid to our Executive and Non executive Directors for the year ended 30 September 2017 and details of how the Policy will be implemented during the financial year ended 30 September 2018.
A complete copy of the Remuneration Policy can be found in the 2016 Annual Report and is available on our website.
This Annual Statement set out on pages 55 to 56 and the Annual Report on Remuneration set out on pages 62 to 72 will be subject to an advisory vote at this years AGM on 25 January 2018.
Committee members Chairman of the Committee Meeting attendance Linda Jensen 77 Sharon Baylay 77 Stephen Puckett 11 Former Committee members Marco Sodi 1 Marco Sodi stepped down from the Committee on 13 July 2017.
Remuneration Committee
This Report complies with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and Schedule 8 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in 2013.
The Report has been prepared in line with the recommendations of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the requirements of the UKLA Listing Rules.
Alignment of remuneration with strategy Our current Remuneration Policy was approved by over 96% of shareholders at last years AGM following a number of refinements to align the Policy better with our strategy and developments in institutional investors best practice expectations.
The key changes made included a modest rebalancing of incentive quantum towards annual performance targets but with the introduction of compulsory deferral of part of the annual bonus into Company shares and a twoyear holding period on shares that vest under our longterm incentive plan.
As an events based business with a heavy weighting towards emerging markets biasing our incentive arrangements towards annually set targets enables the Committee to have an appropriate level of flexibility to respond to fast moving economic and political developments in our key markets.
However the inclusion of deferral of annual bonus to operate with share ownership guidelines and a holding period on vested shares ensures that any shortterm success retains a clear link to our longterm performance.
This is particularly relevant in light of the Boards approval during the year of the transformation and growth strategy.
2017 performance and reward Our focus at the start of 2017 was on delivering profitable growth from our operations at the same time as driving strong cash conversion from our profits and creating a high performing culture.
As detailed in the Strategic report the Board approved a refined strategy during the year that focusses on transforming and growing the business over the next three to five years.
In what was a transitionary year we made strong progress in our key markets at the same time as successfully executing the early investments targeted through our Transformation and Growth TAG strategy.
Strong progress was also achieved against a number of strategic priorities that included a review of international sales an assessment and strengthening of the senior management team and a review of recent acquisitions.
As a result bonuses were paid at 79.9% of the maximum level to the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.
Full disclosure of the bonus targets set and performance against them is included on page 65.
In approving bonus awards the Remuneration Committee noted the financial results achieved during the year with headline profit before tax of 31.6 million 2016 36.5 million and was comfortable with the overall remuneration awarded.
The longterm incentive award vesting in 2018 is based on a threeyear performance period ending 30 September 2017.
There will be no vesting as the challenging range of headline diluted EPS targets were not met.
The deterioration in the market environments in which the Company operated during this period meant it was not possible to meet the targets.
Overall the Committee is comfortable that there has been a robust relationship between performance and reward.
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Implementation of Policy for 2018 The base salaries of the Executive Directors will be increased with effect from 1 October 2017.
The increase in salary for Mark Shashoua at 3% was consistent with the typical increase awarded across the Company.
The increase in salary for Andrew Beach at 5% took account of his appointment on a salary at the lower end of the relevant market range for a Company of comparable size and complexity to ITE in October 2016.
The 5% increase represents the Committees desire to move him inside the typical market range over time.
The increase is consistent with the treatment of employees in the Company where they have been performing strongly in post but fell towards the lower end of relevant market data ranges.
Given the Remuneration Policy implemented in 2017 is working well we are to retain the same quantum structure and performance metrics for 2018.
The annual bonus will continue to operate based on a combination of challenging headline profit before tax revenue growth and cash conversion targets with a small but significant proportion of the total bonus opportunity reserved for the delivery of tailored strategic objectives.
Onethird of any bonus earned will continue to be subject to deferral into the Companys shares to provide a bridge between the attainment of shortterm objectives and longerterm performance.
In addition robust recovery and withholding provisions will also continue to apply to any bonus earned in relation to 2018.
With regards to the longterm incentive plan the threeyear performance targets will again relate to headline earnings per share growth and relative total shareholder return performance versus a pansector group of companies of a similar size.
As with the annual bonus robust recovery and withholding provisions apply along with a twoyear holding period on any shares that vest.
In line with best practice the Committee also retains discretion to override the formulaic outcomes of incentive plans if it considered there to be a disconnect between performance and reward.
Shareholder engagement We are committed to maintaining an ongoing dialogue with shareholders on the issue of Executive remuneration and we welcome any feedback you may have.
We look forward to your support on the resolution relating to remuneration at the AGM on 25 January 2018.
On behalf of the Remuneration Committee Sharon Baylay Chair of Remuneration Committee 27 November 2017
Remuneration Policy Report
Set out below is an overview of the Groups Remuneration Policy.
The complete shareholderapproved Remuneration Policy is available on our website.
Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance metrics Base salary fees Set at competitive levels in the markets in which ITE operates in order to attract and retain Executives capable of delivering the Group strategy.
Reviewed annually with changes normally effective from 1 October of each year.
Decisions influenced by scope of the role and the markets in which ITE operates performance and experience of the individual pay levels at organisations of a similar size and complexity and pay and conditions elsewhere in the Group.
Salaries will be eligible for increases during the threeyear period that the Remuneration Policy operates from the effective date 26 January 2017.
During this time salaries may be increased each year in percentage of salary terms in line with increases granted to the wider workforce.
Increases beyond those granted to the wider workforce in percentage of salary terms may be awarded in certain circumstances such as where there is a change in responsibility experience or a significant increase in the scale of the role andor size value andor complexity of the Group.
Not applicable.
Benefits Designed to be competitive in the market in which the individual is employed.
Benefits include life insurance private medical insurance and income protection insurance.
Where appropriate other benefits may be offered including but not limited to allowances for car accommodation relocation other expatriate benefits and participation in allemployee share schemes.
Benefits vary by role and individual circumstance and eligibility is reviewed periodically Benefits are not pensionable.
The value of benefits may vary from year to year depending on the cost to the Company from third party providers.
Not applicable.
Pension To provide costeffective retirement benefits.
Participation in defined contribution plan or cash allowance in lieu.
Up to 10% of base salary.
Not applicable.
Remuneration Committee
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance metrics
Designed to reinforce individual performance and contribution to the achievement of sustainable profit growth and strategic objectives.
Compulsory deferral of onethird of any bonus paid into shares for three years with the balance of the bonus paid in cash.
Deferred shares typically vest after three years and are normally subject to continued employment.
Dividend equivalent payments may be made in cash or shares on deferred shares at the time of vesting and may assume the reinvestment of dividends.
Annual bonus awards are not pensionable.
Payments made under the annual bonus are subject to recovery and withholding provisions which enable value over paid to be recouped to the later of oneyear following the date of payment or the completion of the next audit of the Groups accounts in the event of a fraud or material misstatement of results being identified in relation to the year in which the bonus was earned.
Maximum potential opportunity of up to 150% of base salary.
For the current Executive Directors the annual bonus will be limited to the following levels during the threeyear policy period 150% of salary Chief Executive Officer and 120% of salary Chief Financial Officer.
Details of the performance measures used for the current year and targets set for the year under review and performance against them will be provided in the Annual Report on
Bonus will be predominantly based on a challenging range of financial targets set in line with the Groups KPIs for example revenue growth cash conversion and profit.
For a minority of the bonus targets relating to the Groups other KPIs will operate for example strategic targets.
For financial targets and where practicable strategic targets bonus starts to accrue once the threshold target is met 0% payable rising on a graduated scale to 100% for outperformance.
The Committee may adjust bonus outcomes based on the application of the bonus formula set at the start of the relevant year if it considers the quantum to be inconsistent with the Companys overall performance during the year.
For the avoidance of doubt this can be to zero and bonuses may not exceed the maximum levels detailed above.
Any use of such discretion would be detailed in the Annual
Report on Remuneration.
Element Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance metrics
Share Plan
Ensures that the Executive Directors interests are aligned with those of shareholders through providing sharebased awards linked to sustained improvements in longterm targeted performance metrics.
Awards of nominal cost or nil cost options or similar may be granted annually as a percentage of base salary.
Vesting is based on performance measured over three years.
The performance period normally starts at the beginning of the financial year in which the date of grant falls.
Dividend equivalent payments may be made in cash or shares on PSP shares at the time of vesting on vested shares and may assume the reinvestment of dividends.
Payments made under the PSP are subject to recovery and withholding provisions which enable recoupment of the value overpaid for the later of one year following the date of vesting or the completion of the next audit of the Groups accounts in the event of fraud or material misstatement of results being identified in relation to the years in which the PSP is earned.
The maximum award limit under the PSP is capped at 150% of salary other than in exceptional circumstances e. of salary.
For the current Executive Directors the annual PSP award limit for the threeyear Remuneration Policy period excluding any buyout awards will be limited to 100% of salary Chief Executive Officer and 80% of salary Chief Financial Officer.
Granted subject to challenging financial e.
EPS and total shareholder return performance targets tested over three years.
20% of maximum vests for threshold performance for the CEO 30% of maximum for other participants rising on a graduated basis to full vesting for equalling or exceeding the maximum performance targets no awards vest for performance below threshold.
The Committee may adjust PSP vesting outcomes based on the result of testing the performance condition if it considers the quantum to be inconsistent with the Companys overall performance during the threeyear performance period.
For the avoidance of doubt this can be to zero.
Any use of such discretion would be detailed in the Annual
Report on Remuneration.
Non executive
To reflect the time commitment in preparing for and attending meetings the duties and responsibilities of the role and the contribution expected from the Nonexecutive
Annual fee for Chairman.
Annual base fee for Nonexecutive Directors.
Additional fees are paid to the Senior Independent Director and the Chairmen of the Audit and Remuneration Committees to reflect additional responsibilities.
Fees are reviewed annually taking into account time commitment responsibilities and fees paid by comparable companies.
All Nonexecutive Directors are reimbursed for travel and related business expenses reasonably incurred in performing their duties.
There is no prescribed maximum.
Nonexecutive
Director fee increases are applied in line with the outcome of the periodic reviews and considering wider factors for example inflation.
Not applicable.
Remuneration Policy Report
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Notes to policy table In addition to the above elements of remuneration any commitment made prior to but due to be fulfilled after the approval and implementation of the Remuneration Policy detailed in this Report will be honoured.
Performance measure selection and approach to target setting Performance targets are set at such a level as to be stretching and achievable with regard to the particular strategic priorities and economic environment.
Annual bonus Annual bonuses are based 50% on profit 20% on revenue growth 15% on cash conversion and 15% on individually tailored strategic targets.
These metrics and weightings are to be retained in 2018 having been introduced in 2017 for the first time.
The range of metrics chosen provides a keen balance between incentivising operational success and delivering growth.
Profit will be measured on a reported basis i. noting the international nature of ITEs operations.
The Committee will review the choice of metrics and weightings at the start of each financial year in light of developments in the strategy.
Performance Share Plan PSP PSP awards are granted 70% based on adjusted EPS and 30% on relative total shareholder return TSR versus a combination of the FTSE Small Cap and FTSE 250 Index constituents excluding investment trusts.
These metrics and weightings are to be retained in 2018 having been introduced in 2017 for the first time.
The Committee considers that EPS adjusted on such basis as the Committee considers necessary to ensure consistent testing of the condition across the performance period is the most appropriate financial measure of longterm performance of the Group as it is well aligned with shareholder interests and provides good line of sight.
Relative TSR will provide clear alignment between Executives and our shareholders with vesting only taking place if we deliver at or above median market returns for shareholders.
The Committee will review the performance conditions choice of metric weightings and TSR comparator group to apply to PSP awards annually prior to the start of the performance period taking into account a number of internal and external reference points to help ensure they are appropriately stretching.
Executive Director shareholding guidelines The Committee recognises the importance of aligning the interests of Executive Directors with shareholders through the building up of a significant shareholding in the Group.
Executive Directors are required to retain shares of a value equal to at least 25% of any gain made after tax on the vesting of awards under the Plans until they have built up a minimum shareholding of a value equivalent to at least 200% of annual base salary.
Remuneration Policy for new Executive Directors When appointing a new Executive Director including by way of internal promotion the Committee may make use of all the existing components of remuneration as follows Component Approach Maximum value Base salary Determined in line with the stated Policy and taking into account their previous salary.
Initial salaries may be set below market and consideration given to phasing any increases over two or three years subject to development in the role.
Not applicable.
Benefits In line with the stated Policy.
Pension In line with the stated Policy.
Annual bonus In line with stated Policy with the relevant maximum pro rata to reflect the proportion of the year served.
150% of base salary.
PSP In line with the stated Policy.
100% of base salary 200% in exceptional circumstances as detailed in the previous table.
In connection with recruitment the Committee may consider it appropriate to grant an award under a structure not included in the Policy detailed above to buy out incentive arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
Any buy out of incentive arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer would be on broadly similar terms and awards would have a fair value no higher than the awards forfeited.
In cases of appointing a new Executive Director by way of internal promotion the Group will honour any contractual commitments made prior to their promotion to Executive Director.
In cases of appointing a new Nonexecutive Director the approach will be consistent with the Policy.
Service contracts and exit payments policy In line with UK Corporate Governance Code Provision B.7.1 all Directors are subject to reelection annually at the Companys AGM.
The previous Chairman Marco Sodi had a sixmonth notice period and the Nonexecutive Directors have a onemonth notice period.
Although
Neil England has been appointed Chairman as we are recruiting a permanent successor Neils notice period remains at one month.
The effective dates of their letters of appointment are as follows
Date of letter of appointment Notice period Neil England 18 March 2008 One month Linda Jensen 7 July 2011 One month Stephen Puckett 16 May 2013 One month Sharon Baylay 24 March 2014 One month Marco Sodi 1 February 2012 Six months 1 Resigned as Chairman on 13 July 2017 but remained on the Board as a Nonexecutive Director until 11 October 2017.
Executive Director service contracts have no fixed term and have a notice period of up to 12 months from either the Executive Director or the Group.
The Executive Director service contracts are available to view at the Groups registered office and at the AGM.
The dates of the Executive Director service contracts and the relevant notice periods are as follows
Effective date of contract Notice period Mark Shashoua 1 September 2016 12 months Andrew Beach 17 October 2016 12 Months The Committees policy is to limit severance payments on termination to preestablished contractual arrangements and the rules of the relevant incentive plans.
In doing so the Committees objective is to avoid rewarding poor performance.
Furthermore the Committee will take account of the Executive Directors duty to mitigate his loss.
Termination payments are limited to base salary benefits and pension during the notice period and the Company may elect to make a payment in lieu of notice.
If an Executive Directors contract is terminated he may be eligible for a pro rata annual bonus over the period to the date of cessation of employment subject to performance.
In addition to the contractual provisions regarding payment on termination set out above the Groups incentive plans and share schemes contain provisions for termination of employment.
Unless an individual is a good leaver under the terms of the incentive plans e.
Committee decides entitlements to incentives are lost on cessation of employment.
In good leaver circumstances an individual may remain eligible to participate in the incentive but following the application of performance targets and a pro rata reduction unless the Committee determines otherwise.
Awards may remain eligible to vest.
Remuneration Policy Report
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Directors Remuneration Report
In line with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended in 2013 the following parts of the Annual Report on Directors Remuneration are audited the single total figure of remuneration for each Director including annual bonus and PSP outcomes for the financial year ending 30 September 2017 scheme interests awarded during the year pension entitlements payments to past Directors and payments for loss of office and Directors shareholdings and share interests.
All other parts of the Directors Remuneration Report are unaudited.
The Remuneration Committee was in place throughout the financial year and was chaired by Linda Jensen.
Linda stepped down from the role of Committee Chair with effect from 1 October 2017 and was succeeded by Sharon Baylay.
During the year Stephen Puckett joined the Committee.
Committee members are all Nonexecutive Directors or the Company Chairman as instructed in Provision D.2.1 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
Members of the Committee are appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Nomination Committee in consultation with the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee for an initial period of three years which can then be followed by an additional two further threeyear periods.
During the financial year all Committee members played an active role in all Remuneration Committee meetings held.
Where there is no conflict of interest the Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer the Human Resources Director and the Company Secretary may be invited to attend the Committees meetings to assist the Committee in making informed decisions.
To maximise effectiveness meetings of the Committee generally take place just prior to a Company Board meeting.
The Chairman of the Committee reports to the Board as part of a separate agenda item on the activity of the Committee and matters of particular relevance to the Board in the conduct of its work.
No individual is present when their own remuneration is being discussed.
The Chairman of the Committee also meets separately with the Chief Executive Officer the Chief Financial Officer the Chairman of the Audit Committee the Human Resources Director and the Committees external adviser.
Advisers
Korn Ferry Hay Group KFH are the appointed Committee remuneration advisers and were appointed by the Committee after a competitive tender in 2016.
Total fees paid to KFH in respect of providing their services to the Committee during the 2017 financial year were 70050 excluding VAT with the fees charged on a time spent and materials provided basis.
KFH are signatories to the Remuneration Consultants Group Code of Conduct and any advice provided is governed by that Code.
Advisers attend Committee meetings as appropriate and provide advice on Remuneration Policy best practice and market updates.
The Committee evaluates the support provided by its advisers annually and is comfortable that the individual advisers detailed did not have any connections with the ITE Group that may have or continue to impair their independence.
Terms of Reference The Remuneration Committees Terms of Reference are available on the Groups website site or can be obtained from the Company Secretary.
The Terms of Reference are reviewed annually and presented to the Board for approval.
The role and responsibilities of the Committee The Remuneration Committee meets at least three times a year and on other occasions as required.
The Committee has delegated responsibility from the Board to set the Remuneration Policy for all Executive Directors and the Company Chairman.
The objective of such Policy shall be to ensure that members of the executive management of the Company are provided with appropriate incentives to encourage enhanced performance and are in a fair and responsible manner rewarded for their individual contributions to the success of the Company.
For clarification the Company Chairman and the Executive Directors are responsible for setting the remuneration of the Nonexecutive Directors.
Annual Report on Remuneration Committee responsibilities include determine and agree with the Board the Policy for the remuneration of the Executive Directors and members of the executive management including pensions review the ongoing appropriateness and relevance of the Remuneration Policy approve the design of and determine targets for any performancerelated pay schemes operated by the Company and approve the total annual payments made under the schemes oversee any major changes in employee benefits structures throughout the Group measuring subsequent performance as a prelude to determining the Executive Directors and executive management total remuneration on behalf of the Board determining the structure and quantum of shortterm remuneration and granting awards under longterm incentive plans and options under the various ITE Group share option schemes.
Activities during the financial year The main issues discussed andor approved during the financial year under review included approval of the prior year Directors Remuneration Report review of shareholder comments and AGM voting on the Report annual review of the Company Chairman and Executive Directors salaries or fee arrangements and benefits review of the Executive Directors and executive management performance against the targets set under the 2016 Annual Bonus proposed by the Chief Executive Officer.
Statement of shareholder voting at the 2017 AGM The following tables shows the results of shareholder voting at the AGM held on 26 January 2017.
Resolution to approve the Directors Remuneration Policy Total number of votes % of votes cast For including discretionary 200874434 96.72 Against 6812667 3.28 Total votes cast excluding withheld votes 207687101 100 Votes withheld 4796056 Total votes cast including withheld votes 212483157 Resolution to approve the Directors Remuneration Report Total number of votes % of votes cast For including discretionary 211909377 99.76 Against 516008 0.24 Total votes cast excluding withheld votes 212425385 100 Votes withheld 57772 Total votes cast including withheld votes 212483157 64 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Remuneration paid to Directors for the year ended 30 September 2017 The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each Director for the year ended 30 September 2017 and the prior year.
Base salaryfees
Pension 4.
Annual bonus Longterm incentives Total remuneration Executive Directors Mark Shashoua 035 43 Andrew Beach Former Executive Directors Russell Taylor Nonexecutive Directors Marco Sodi 163 160         163 160 Sharon Baylay 46 46         46 46 Neil England 76 48         76 48 Linda Jensen 58 55         58 55 Stephen Puckett 53 52         53 52 1 See the Annual Report on Remuneration on page 59 for further details of Nonexecutive Director fees.
2 Taxable benefits include private medical insurance contributions.
3 Annual bonus paid for performance over the relevant financial year.
Details are set out below on pages 65 to 67 of the performance targets set and actual performance against them.
Consistent with the terms of the revised 2017 Remuneration Policy onethird of the bonus earned in relation to 2017 is deferred into the Companys shares for a period of three years with the balance payable in cash.
These shares will be held in the ITE Group Employees Share Trust.
The entire 2016 bonus was payable in cash.
Annual bonus awards may be subject to recovery and withholding provisions in line with the Companys Remuneration Policy.
4 There was no vesting of longterm incentive awards in relation to performance periods concluding 30 September 2017 or 2016.
5 This is a prorated amount of Mark Shashouas annual salary as he was appointed to the Board on 1 September 2016.
6 This is a prorated amount of Andrew Beachs annual salary as he was appointed to the Board on 17 October 2016.
7 As detailed in last years Directors Remuneration Report Russell Taylor ceased to be an Executive Director of the Company on 31 August 2016 as part of an orderly leadership transition.
As part of this transition he remained in active employment through to 31 December 2016 before being placed on garden leave for the balance of his twelvemonth notice period i. from 1 January 2017 to 5 May 2017.
This ensured that he remained available to assist the new Chief Executive Officer as required during the full period of his twelve months notice period.
For the period of his active employment during the leadership transition i.
1 October 2016 to 31 December 2016 he remained eligible to earn a pro rata bonus based on preset performance targets.
This bonus was paid wholly in cash as per the Groups policy for nonPLC Directors as it related to a period when Russell Taylor was not a PLC Board Director.
Executive Directors base salaries As both Mark Shashoua and Andrew Beach were appointed in 2016 they were not eligible for a pay review during the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
Details of the current Executive Director salaries are set out on page 71.
Pension and other benefits During the year the Group made pension contributions equal to 10% of each Executive Directors salary for the relevant pro rata period of their employment.
Benefits were provided in line with Policy.
Annual Report on Remuneration continued Annual bonus Framework and outcomes for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 For the 2017 financial year the continuing Executive Directors were eligible to participate in the Executive Bonus Plan  designed to reinforce delivery of sustainable profit growth and achievement of strategic objectives.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity was 150% of salary for Mark Shashoua and 120% for Andrew Beach.
The annual bonus was based 85% on financial targets and 15% on personal targets.
As detailed in last years Directors Remuneration Report the weightings were adjusted for the year under review from 70% financial and 30% personal to place a higher weighting on key financial objectives.
The range of financial targets set and actual performance against the targets is detailed below Weighting as a % of total bonus opportunity Performance targets
Actual bonus payable as a % of total bonus opportunity Financial measure Threshold Target Stretch Headline profit before tax 50% 30.05m Nil payout 50% payout 100% payout 34.3m 33.6% Revenue Growth 20% 138.1m Nil payout 50% payout 100% payout 150.6m 16.3% Cash Conversion 15% 90% conversion Nil payout 100% conversion 50% payout 110% conversion 100% payout 134% 15% 1 The actual FY2017 profit performance for comparison against the target is adjusted to add back the actual Transformation and Growth project costs incurred.
The target was also increased marginally to reflect the expected benefit of these investment costs.
The Committee in making these adjustments recognise that the Transformation and Growth strategy had not been determined at the time of setting the FY2017 targets.
Therefore adding back these items subsequently approved by the Board ensured that the annual bonus targets fulfilled their original purpose.
The actual FY2017 revenue performance for comparison against the target is adjusted to include budgeted foreign exchange rates the Transformation and Growth project costs and expected benefit and to exclude the impact of current year acquisitions.
Following these adjustments the Committee was comfortable that the targets were no more or less challenging than when originally set.
The personal targets set for Mark Shashoua and the Committees assessment of his performance against them is set out below Target Action Achievement Recommend new Groupwide strategy Undertake a strategic review and make recommendations to the Board.
Revised strategy and associated costing to be signed off by the Board.
Objective achieved The Committee considered that the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Improve Group structure and stakeholder relations Present recommendations to the Board in relation to key partners and venues.
Manage key stakeholder relations effectively.
Objective achieved The Committee considered that the objective set had been achieved Score 100% Senior management team  Lead a review of the senior management team and implement recommendations.
Objective achieved The Committee considered that each of the objective set had been achieved Score 100% Review international sales structure Review sales structure make recommendations and commence implementation across the Group.
Objective achieved The Committee considered that the objective set had been achieved Score 100% The four objectives detailed above were met in full resulting in 100% of this part of the bonus becoming payable.
Based on the performance detailed above the total bonus earned by Mark Shashoua was 79.9% of the maximum opportunity.
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Personal objectives set for Andrew Beach and the Committees assessment of his performance against them is set out below Target Action Achievement Recommend new Groupwide strategy Undertake a strategic review and make recommendations to the Board.
Revised strategy and associated costing to be signed off by the Board.
Objectives achieved The Committee considered that each of the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Recommend appropriate funding and structure Review the debt facilities and funding position of the Group and recommend revisions to the
Implement recommendations as approved by the Board.
Objectives achieved The Committee considered that each of the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Stakeholder relations  Manage relationships with key stakeholders.
Communicate conclusions of strategic review as approved by the Board.
Objectives achieved The Committee considered that each of the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Present strategy to the City  Project manage the preparation of a clear City presentation of the new strategy Objective achieved The Committee considered that this objective set had been achieved Score 100% Improve quality of financial reporting Improve quality and format of Board reporting packs.
Develop and implement improved Regional Board meeting information packs.
Launch new weekly sales reporting system covering leading events.
Objectives achieved The Committee considered that each of the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Improve risk identification and management processes Gain Board approval for a revised Risk Committee and Risk Register process.
Implement a new global authority matrix.
Objectives achieved The Committee considered that each of the objectives set had been achieved Score 100% Budgeting  Improve 2017 budgeting process.
Objective achieved The Committee considered that this objective set had been achieved Score 100% The seven objectives detailed above were met in full resulting in 100% of this part of the bonus becoming payable.
Based on the performance detailed above the total bonus earned by Andrew Beach was 79.9% of the maximum opportunity.
Reflecting the part year of his active employment in the 2017 financial year Russell Taylor was eligible for a prorated bonus based on a maximum annual bonus opportunity of 100% of salary for the full year for his period of active employment below the PLC Board.
Annual Report on Remuneration continued The objectives set by the Committee are set out below along with the extent of achievement Target Action Achievement 75% Revenue stability and forward sales booking
Group sales were at 60.5% of budget and therefore 100 % of this element was payable 48% 0% 54% 50% 60% 100% 25% Effecting an orderly handover Effective transfer of key stakeholder relations Objective achieved The Committee considered that this objective set had been achieved Score 100% Based on the performance detailed above the total bonus earned by Russell Taylor was 100% of the maximum opportunity with the total bonus payable being 100% of prorated salary.
Longterm incentive Vesting of awards granted in January 2015 with performance measures over the three financial years ending 30 September 2017 The purpose of the incentive was to align the Executive Directors with delivering sustainable profitable growth and above market shareholder returns.
The threeyear performance period of PSP awards granted on 13 January 2015 ended on 30 September 2017.
From 1 October 2014 to 30 September 2017 ITEs threeyear cumulative headline diluted EPS was 34.1p which was below the requirements of 62p to 70p.
As a result the minimum performance requirement for the award was not met and the awards will not be eligible to vest.
As recent joiners neither Mark Shashoua nor Andrew Beach are recipients of the 2015 PSP awards.
Scheme interests awarded during the year In line with the expectation set in last years Directors Remuneration Report Mark Shashoua and Andrew Beach received a normal policy award at 100% of salary and 80% of salary respectively and a performancerelated buyout award set at an extra 50% of salary that in both cases was in lieu of incentives forfeited when joining the Company.
The Committee was comfortable that the additional oneoff 50% of salary performancerelated PSP award was appropriate noting that the time horizon of the buyout element was greater than that of the awards forfeited with vesting to potentially take place in June 2020 and having had regard to the quantum foregone in agreeing to join the Company.
The performance conditions applicable to these awards are detailed below.
70% of the award is subject to a challenging range of earnings per share targets to be achieved in the financial year ending 30 September 2019.
30% of the award is subject to a performance target comparing the Companys TSR against the TSR of the constituents of the FTSE 250 and FTSE Small Cap Indices excluding investment trusts over the three financial years commencing 1 October 2016.
The performance targets are provided below Vesting percentage of EPS element 2019 Headline diluted EPS 0% Less than 11.3p 30% 20% for CEO 11.3p 100% 15.3p Straightline basis Between 11.3p and 15.3p 1 Headline diluted EPS is calculated as defined in the financial statements  see the Chief Financial Officers Statement on page 18.
Vesting percentage of TSR element ITE TSR vs TSR comparators 0% Below median 30% 20% for CEO Median 100% Upper quartile Straightline basis Between median and upper quartile To the extent that the awards vest they will be subject to a twoyear holding period.
Vested awards will be subject to clawback for the latter of one year following the date of vesting or completion of the next audit of the Groups accounts in the event of a fraud or material misstatement of results being identified in relation to the years in which the PSP is earned.
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
Details of awards granted on 19 June 2017 are set out below Executive Director Basis of award Face value Shares over which awards
Threshold vesting % of award Performance period Performance measure Mark Shashoua 150% of base salary 675000 434083 20% 1 October 2016 to 30 September 2019 inclusive Headline diluted EPS 70% and a relative TSR performance condition 30% Andrew Beach 130% of base salary 334750 215273 30% 1 October 2016 to 30 September 2019 inclusive Headline diluted EPS 70% and a relative TSR performance condition 30% 1 Calculated using the share price on the day immediately preceding the date of grant of 155.50p.
2 Awards granted as nominal cost options with an exercise price of 1p per share.
Chairman and Nonexecutive Director fees During the year the Committee reviewed the Chairmans fee in light of the time commitment required of the role and the fees payable at comparator companies and decided on an increase of 3%.
The Chairmans fee increases to 168100 2016 163200 per annum.
With effect from 1 October 2017 the Nonexecutive Directors receive a base fee of 47800 2016 46400 with an additional fee for the Senior Independent Director of 5250 2016 5100 and for the Audit and Remuneration Committee Chairs of 6400 2016 6200.
The revised fees were considered to better reflect the required time commitment of the roles.
Nonexecutive Directors fees for the year commencing 1 October 2017 are therefore as follows Name Reason for fees Total annual fees Neil England Company Chairman 168100 Stephen Puckett Nonexecutive Director Chair of the Audit Committee 54200 Linda Jensen Nonexecutive Director Senior Independent Director 53050 Sharon Baylay Nonexecutive Director Chair of the Remuneration Committee 54200 Marco Sodi Company Chairman 1 Marco Sodi resigned on 11 July 2017 and left the Board with effect 11 October 2017.
In line with his letter of appointment he was subject to a sixmonth notice period and continued to receive his fee on a monthly basis for the duration of the sixmonth notice period to 11 January 2018.
Relative importance of spend on pay The graph below shows ITEs total employee pay and distributions to shareholders for the financial years ended 30 September 2016 and 30 September 2017 and the percentage change.
20tel Total employee pay Dividend 33.7% 26.3% The increase in total employee pay from 2016 to 2017 relates to the increase in size of the Company with the total number of employees growing from 1340 to 1390 i. an increase of 3.7%.
Annual Report on Remuneration continued Performance graph The chart below compares the value of 100 invested in ITE Group plc shares including reinvested dividends on 30 September 2008 compared to the equivalent investment in the FTSE 250 Index and FTSE Small Cap Index over the last nine financial years.
The FTSE 250 and FTSE Small Cap Index have been chosen as the Company has been a constituent of both indices during the period since 2008.
The table below shows the single figure for the CEO over the same period.
5tel250 30Sep17 30Sep16 30Sep15 30Sep14 30Sep13 30Sep12 30Sep11 30Sep10 30Sep09 30Sep08 This graph shows the value by 30 September 2017 of 100 invested in ITE Group plc on 30 September 2008 compared with the value of 100 invested separately in both the FTSE 250 Index and FTSE Small Cap Index.
Total Shareholder Return rebased % ITE Group plc Source Datastream Thomson Reuters FTSE 250 Total Return Index FTSE Small Cap Index Financial year ended 30 Septembertelteltel CEO single figure of remuneration 000 614 1347 1348 1558 1951 1050 567 618 1035 Annual bonus awarded % of maximum opportunity 58% 100% 94% 80% 94% 68% 16% 27% 79.9% amount 000 21tel PSP vesting % of maximum opportunity na 100% 100% 100% 100% 70% 0% 0% 0% Change in CEO remuneration and for employees as a whole over FY2017 The graph below shows the change in CEO annual cash defined as salary taxable benefits and annual bonus compared to the average employees for 2016 to 2017.
CEO remuneration 000 Average employee remuneration 000 600tel
Average employee remuneration 72.9% 28.6% 70 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report
CEO
Average for other employees % change CEO annual cash 000 % change Salary 450 450 0% 24% Taxable benefits 1 1 0% 88% Annual variable 539 122 69% 117% Total 990 573 10% 30% 1 The change in salary and taxable benefits for other employees reflects a combination of a change in the size and geographical footprint of the Company and the impact of foreign exchange movement.
Payments to past Directors and payments for loss of office As detailed in last years Annual Report and on page 64 Russell Taylor ceased to be an Executive Director of the Company on 31 August 2016 as part of an orderly leadership transition.
He remained in active employment through to 31 December 2016 before being placed on gardening leave for the balance of his twelvemonth notice period i. from 1 January 2017 to 5 May 2017.
This ensured that he remained available to assist the Chief Executive Officer as required during the full period of his twelve months notice period.
For the period of his active employment during the leadership transition i. rata bonus based on preset performance targets.
He was not eligible to be considered for a bonus for the period from 1 January 2017.
With regards to Russell Taylors outstanding longterm incentive awards consistent with the rules of the relevant plans and the Companys Remuneration Policy the Committee exercised its discretion to allow Russell Taylors unvested PSP share awards over 286000 shares 459500 shares and 460750 shares granted in 2014 2015 and 2016 respectively to vest at the end of their respective performance periods subject to applicable performance conditions being satisfied and subject to time pro rata to reflect Russell Taylors actual service during the applicable performance period.
Neither the 2014 or 2015 awards performance targets were met and these awards will not vest.
The
185250 shares granted in 2013 and the 286000 shares granted in 2014 did not vest.
The remaining 154000 of the 164000 shares granted in 2011 reduced due to a prior exercise of 10000 shares and the remaining 135800 shares of the 194000 shares granted in 2012 scaled back to 70% of the original shares granted following a testing of the performance condition were exercised and sold in the previous financial year.
As noted on page 68 Marco Sodi resigned as Chairman on 11 July 2017 and left the Board with effect from 11 October 2017.
Marco Sodi continued to receive his fee on a monthly basis until the 11 January 2018 in line with the terms of his letter of appointment which included a sixmonth notice period.
No other payments were made in connection with his resignation and leaving of the Board.
Dilution limits The Group has at all times complied with the dilution limits set out in the rules of its share plans principally a limit of 10% in ten years.
The
Group will also operate within a dilution limit of 5% in any rolling tenyear period for discretionary schemes.
In the tenyear period to 30 September 2017 awards made under the Groups share schemes represented 0.41% 2016 0.6% of the Groups issued ordinary share capital.
Shares to satisfy awards granted under the PSP which are normally purchased in the market do not count towards the dilution limits.
Annual Report on Remuneration continued Directors shareholding guidelines and share scheme interests During the year the Executive Directors were required to retain shares of a value equal to 25% of the gain made after tax on the vesting of awards under the Plans until they have built up their minimum shareholding of at least 200% of annual base salary.
The table below shows the Directors interests in shares owned outright andor vested and the extent to which ITEs shareholding guidelines are achieved.
There have been no other changes in the holdings of the current Directors and any connected persons between 30 September 2017 and 27 November 2017 being the last practicable date before publication of the Remuneration Report.
Number of unvested shares subject to performance
30 September Number of shares held at 30 September
Mark Shashoua 434083 55535 535 200% No Andrew Beach 215273 15000 na 200% No Neil England na 50000 50000 na na Sharon Baylay na 10300 10300 na na Linda Jensen na 5000 5000 na na Stephen Puckett na 10000 10000 na na Marco Sodi na 200000 200000 na na 1 PSP awards are granted as nominal cost options.
2 Current shareholding includes net shares owned outright andor vested.
3 During the year both Mark Shashoua and Andrew Beach purchased shares in the Group.
As at 30 September 2017 neither Director had complied with the Groups shareholding guidelines.
However as recent appointments with Mark Shashoua being appointed on 1 September 2016 and Andrew Beach being appointed on 17 October 2016 the Committees expectations is that further progress will be made towards meeting the guidelines as a result of the future vesting of share awards as a minimum through the retention of an appropriate portion of shares vesting under the Companys share plans.
Directors interests in Performance Share Plans Details of outstanding PSP awards are as follows with details of the performance targets footnoted to the table
Scheme
1 Oct
Option
Exercised during the year Lapsed
30 Sep
Share price on date of grant
Exercisable to Gain on exercise Mark Shashoua 2014 Employees PSP 434083 0.
083 160617 155.5 160620 160627 0 Total 434083 0 0 434083 Andrew Beach 2014 Employees PSP 215273 0.
273 160617 155.5 160620 160627 0 Total 215273 0 0 215273 1 The performance condition applying to the award granted on 19 June 2017 are detailed on page 72.
Statement of implementation of Remuneration Policy for the year ending 30 September 2018 Full details of the Remuneration Policy to operate for the financial year ended 30 September 2018 and how it differs to the Remuneration Policy operated during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 are set out on pages 57 to 59.
Set out below is how the Committee anticipates applying this Remuneration Policy during the financial year ended 30 September 2018.
Executive Directors base salaries The base salaries of the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer were reviewed during the year.
The Chief Executive Officer was
The increase to Andrew Beach took into account the fact that his salary on appointment was set at a lower level to the role in similar sized companies and reflected the Committees objective of moving his salary to within the market range over time.
The revised salaries with effect from 1 October 2017 are 463500 for Mark Shashoua and 270375 for Andrew Beach.
The next salary review date will be 1 October 2018.
The Committee was comfortable setting base salaries at these levels given the size of the roles and the experience and calibre of the individuals.
Pension and other benefits Pension or cash in lieu of pension will be provided to a maximum of 10% of salary.
Benefits are in line with the Remuneration Policy.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Annual bonus framework For the financial year commencing 1 October 2017 the Executive Bonus Plan quantum will operate in line with details set out in the Remuneration Policy for the Executive Directors.
The metrics to apply include a challenging range of profit 50% revenue growth 20% cash conversion 15% and individually tailored strategic targets 15%.
Profit targets are set based on reported numbers with revenue growth and cash conversion targets set using budgeted exchange rates.
This approach aligns shareholders and management through the use of reported numbers when determining bonus earned based on profit with the use of budgeted exchange rates for revenue and cash conversion providing clear line of sight between performance and reward for the Executives given the potential for volatile exchange rates in the Groups key markets.
This is considered to provide a balanced approach to aligning overall performance and reward.
While the financial targets are considered commercially sensitive in advance full retrospective disclosure of the targets and performance against them will be included in next years
Directors Remuneration Report.
With regards to individually tailored strategic targets which include for example measurable objectives set against the development and execution of the Companys strategy leadership funding and stakeholder communication objectives full details of the complete range of targets set and performance against them will be included in next years Annual Report on Remuneration.
Should targets be considered to remain commercially sensitive as a minimum an overview of the extent to which bonus was earned against these targets will be included in the Annual Report on Remuneration next year to enable investors to make an informed view on the extent to which bonus was earned for this part of the bonus.
Further disclosure would then be considered in the following Directors Remuneration Report.
Longterm incentive framework PSP awards are anticipated to be granted in December 2017 in line with the Remuneration Policy to both Executive Directors.
For both Executive Directors awards this will be based on a normal Policy award at 100% of salary and 80% of salary to the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer respectively.
The vesting of the awards totalling 100% of salary and 80% of salary for the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer will be assessed against a combination of EPS growth 70% of the award and relative TSR 30% of the award.
The conditions will operate independently.
The EPS condition will be measured based on EPS in the year ending 30 September 2020 with the TSR condition measuring ITEs relative performance versus the constituents of the FTSE Small Cap and FTSE 250 Index constituents excluding investment trusts.
The EPS condition 70% of an award will be as follows Vesting percentage of EPS element of Award EPS at 30 September 2020 0% Less than 8.8p 30% 20% for CEO 8.8p 100% 14.4p Straightline basis Between 8.8p and 14.4p The TSR condition 30% of an award will be based on ITEs performance against a combination of the FTSE Small Cap and FTSE 250 Index constituents excluding investment trusts with vesting as follows Vesting percentage of TSR element of award Threeyear TSR relative to the FTSE Small Cap and FTSE 250 Index excluding investment trusts constituents to 30 September 2020 0% Below median 30% 20% for CEO Median 100% Upper quartile Straightline basis Between median and upper quartile With regards to the choice of metrics EPS aligns the Executive Directors with delivering a key objective of delivering longterm profitable growth with TSR providing alignment with the Companys shareholders in that vesting will only take place for creating above median total shareholder returns.
The range of EPS targets was set having had regard to internal planning expectations current market consensus expectations and the wider environment.
The lower end of the range was set to be a realistic target and motivational to the executive team with the maximum performance requirement set to be a stretch target.
The TSR comparator group was selected given ITE is a constituent member of the FTSE Small Cap Index.
However given our historical membership of the FTSE 250 Index and our medium to longterm aspiration of returning to the FTSE 250 we will again measure our performance for relative TSR purposes against a combination of the FTSE Small Cap and FTSE 250 Index constituents excluding investment trusts.
The awards to the extent that they vest will be subject to a twoyear holding period.
Annual Report on Remuneration continued Directors Responsibilities
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have elected to prepare the Parent Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that period.
In preparing the Parent Company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
In preparing the Group financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entitys financial position and financial performance and make an assessment of the Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Responsibility statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant financial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole the Strategic report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
This responsibility statement was approved by the Board of Directors on 27 November 2017 and is signed on its behalf by Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer 27 November 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report
Opinion
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of ITE Group plc the Parent Company and its subsidiaries collectively the Group which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement the related notes 1 to 30 the Company Statement of Financial Position the Company Statement of Changes in Equity and the related notes 1 to 9.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Parent Company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our Report.
We are independent of the Group and the Parent Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We confirm that the nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Parent Company.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Summary of our audit approach Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the current year were carrying value of goodwill other intangible assets and interests in associates and joint ventures and taxation in particular the assessment of risks relating to tax in overseas jurisdictions where the Group operates.
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 1.1m which we determined using 5.4% of an adjusted profit before tax measure being the Group loss before tax after adding back nonrecurring adjusting items.
Scopings We completed full scope audit work in London Russia Turkey and India.
In addition we performed specified audit procedures at Moda and Sinostar.
These entities represent the principal business units and account for 80% 2016 85% of the Groups revenue and 87% 2016 90% of the Groups headline operating profit of 34.8m 2016 39.6m as set out in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Significant changes in our approach Last year our Report included two audit matters which are not included this year Acquisition accounting  this was previously considered a key audit matter due to the number of acquisition and the judgements involved in the identification and valuation of intangible assets.
There was only one acquisitions in the current year Gehua and Foreign exchange FX on transactions and consolidation  whilst our approach to FX has not changed it was not considered a key audit matter as the number of errors previously identified during the course of prior audits has reduced.
Conclusions relating to principal risks going concern and viability statement We have reviewed the Directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 2 to the financial statements and the Directors statement on the longerterm viability of the Group contained within the Directors Report on page 45.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the disclosures on pages 50 to 53 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors confirmation on page 45 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the Directors statement in note 2 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Group and the Parent Companys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements the Directors explanation on page 45 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions or whether the Directors statements relating to going concern and the prospects of the Company required in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 are materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report continued
Carrying value of goodwill other intangible assets and interests in associates and joint ventures Key audit matter description As set out in notes 12 14 and 18 the Group carries 92.6m 2016 97.9m of goodwill 61.9m 2016 70.8m of other intangible assets and 45.5m 2016 45.7m of interests in associates and joint ventures on the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2017.
Management prepare a detailed assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets by cashgenerating unit CGU and interests in associates and joint ventures using a number of judgemental assumptions as described in note 12 to the financial statements.
These include 2018 Boardapproved forecasts longterm growth rates based on forecast GDP growth rates for the country and countryspecific discount rates.
There is a risk whether due to fraud or error that the application of inappropriate assumptions supports assets that should otherwise be impaired or further impaired.
Our work focusses on those cash generating units CGUs where the risk of impairment is higher due to amongst other things trading conditions in the market and growth prospects.
As a result of managements exercise a 12.6m 2016 24.7m impairment was booked in the year in India Turkey and Africa Oil Week 2016 India South East Asia and Siberia.
In addition an impairment of 1.7m 2016 1.9m was also booked against interests in associates and joint ventures.
This matter is disclosed in the Audit Committee Report included within the Annual Report.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We reviewed the design and implementation of controls over goodwill intangible assets and interests in associates and joint ventures recognition and impairment.
We considered whether managements impairment review methodology is compliant with IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
We challenged managements assumptions used in the impairment assessment for goodwill other intangible assets and interests in associates and joint ventures.
Our audit work on the assumptions used in the impairment model focussed on considering the appropriateness of the CGUs identified by management and the allocation of assets to these testing the integrity of managements model agreeing the underlying cash flow projections for each CGU to Boardapproved FY 2018 forecasts comparing shortterm cash flow projections against recent performance and historical forecasting accuracy and assessing whether there are other indicators of impairment based on this analysis engaging our valuation specialists to independently establish appropriate discount rates assessing the longterm growth rates used against independent market data considering post yearend trading performance calculating a range of reasonably possible sensitivities and comparing these to those calculated by management to ensure no further indicator of impairment is identified and assessing whether the disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts were appropriate to the Groupss situation and in line with IAS 36.
Key observations We are satisfied that the remaining carrying value of goodwill intangible assets and interests in associates and joint ventures is supportable and no further impairment at the year end is required
Key audit matter description The Group operates and derives profits from a range of international markets and as such it is subject to tax in a number of territories.
As a consequence the Group has to consider both the tax risks by country as well as the transfer pricing arrangements particularly in the light of the rules agreed between OECD territories developed as part of the OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting initiative.
The Group is also subject to Withholding Tax on remittances from overseas investments.
From time to time tax rules and treaties change and this can impact the amount of tax the Group has to withhold and pay on such remittances.
Currently the Group holds tax provisions of 2.9m 2016 2.0m in respect of potential risk of challenge to historical arrangements in these areas.
Judgement is also required in respect of deferred tax on acquired intangibles and other assets and further in respect of deferred tax assets in relation to interritory tax losses.
This requires judgement over the likelihood of future profits in those territories.
The Group has currently recognised deferred tax assets of 5.4m 2016 3.1m and has unrecognised tax losses of 13.1m 2016 5.2m.
This matter is disclosed in the Audit Committee Report included within the Annual Report.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We considered developments in international tax rules in the year and reviewed managements assessment of the impact of those developments on the Group.
In particular we reviewed documentation prepared by management to support the Groups global allocation of profits for transfer pricing purposes.
We reviewed managements calculations of uncertain tax provisions arising from the risk of tax authority challenge of historical arrangements and challenged the assumptions made in those calculations.
Through enquiry with management at Group and in each territory in scope we noted there were no significant ongoing tax authority challenges in any territory.
Our audit procedures also included reperforming provision calculations based on different assumptions to measure the potential risk relating to tax authority challenge including the availability of unrecognised tax attributes in respect of any such challenges.
Further based on our experience assessed of challenges typically raised by tax authorities we considered how they might apply to the Group.
Our audit work on the recognition of deferred tax assets included assessing the evidence supporting managements profit forecasts by territory taking into account our knowledge of likely tax authority acceptance of any future changes to transfer pricing arrangements and consideration of the appropriateness of the assumptions made.
We also considered the disclosure in the financial statements particularly in light of the Financial Reporting Councils thematic review encouraging more transparent reporting between tax charges and accounting profit and the factors that could affect that relationship in the future.
Key observations Based on our procedures performed we are satisfied that the provision for uncertain tax provisions appropriately reflects a balanced assessment of the risks and these risks are disclosed appropriately.
We are also satisfied there is support for future profits in jurisdictions where deferred tax assets are recognised.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group materiality 1.1m 2016 1.2m Basis for determining materiality We determined this using 5.4% 2016 5.6% of an adjusted profit before tax measure being the Group loss before tax after adding back nonrecurring adjusting items notably the restructuring costs of the TAG programme and the impairment charges see table below Loss before tax 3163 4095 Add back one off nonrecurring items Impairment charges 14276 26509 Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions 406 330 Lossprofit on disposal of investments 3712 1498 Restructuring costs 4982 0 Adjusted profit before tax 20213 21246 Materiality 1100 1200 % used 5.4% 5.6% Rationale for the benchmark applied Loss before tax adjusted for nonrecurring adjusting items recognised in the year has been used as the base for materiality as it is a key measure of underlying business performance for the
We have used this adjusted profit measure as it excludes volatility of oneoff items from our determination to aid consistency of the scale of the Group in determining our materiality base each year.
The materiality level is also 3.5% 2016 3.3% of headline profit before tax and 1.2% 2016 1.2% of equity.
The decrease in materiality is directly attributable to the fall in the profitability of the business in the year.
Group materiality 1.1m Audit Committee reporting threshold Component materiality range 0.6m to 1.0m Adjusted PBT Adjusted PBT Group materiality We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 55000 2016 57000 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
An overview of the scope of our audit The Group operates in a wide range of territories including Europe Asia and the US and our Group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including Groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on this assessment our Group audit scope focussed on the UK Russia Turkey and India 2016 UK Russia Turkey and
In addition we performed specified audit procedures at Moda and the joint venture entity Sinostar.
These entities represent the principal business units and account for 80% 2016 85% of the Groups revenue and 86% 2016 90% of the Groups headline operating profit 34.8m 2016 39.6m as set out in the Consolidated Income Statement.
They were also selected to provide an appropriate basis for undertaking audit work to address the risks of material misstatement identified above.
Our audit work at each location was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than Group materiality and ranged from 0.6m to 1.0m 2016 0.6m to 0.8m.
At the Group level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no significant risks of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
The Group audit team continued to follow a programme of planned visits that have been designed so that the Senior Statutory Auditor or a senior member of the Group team visits each of the principal locations where the Group audit scope is focussed at least once every two years and the most significant of them at least once a year 2017 Russia India and China 2016 Russia India and Turkey.
In addition for each component subject to full scope audits we reviewed and challenged the key issues and audit findings attended the component close meetings and reviewed formal reporting and performed a review of work papers.
Other information The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our Auditors Report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our Report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
In this context matters that we are specifically required to report to you as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information include where we conclude that Fair balanced and understandable  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit Committee reporting  the section describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code  the parts of the Directors Statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditors in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Independent Auditors Report continued
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report continued
Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an Auditors Report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our Auditors Report.
Use of our report This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our
Auditors Report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and of the Parent Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the Strategic report or the Directors Report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the Parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Other matters Auditor tenure Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the ITE Audit Committee in 2002 to audit the financial statements for the year ending 30 September 2002 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments of the firm is 16 years covering the years ending 30 September 2002 to date.
Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the audit committee Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee we are required to provide in accordance with ISAs UK.
Mark LeeAmies FCA Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London UK 27 November 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Consolidated Income Statement For the year ended 30 September 2017 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income For the year ended 30 September 2017
Loss for the year attributable to shareholders 6415 7171 Cash flow hedges Movement in fair value of cash flow hedges 1336 7042 Fair value of cash flow hedges released to the income statement 675 1293 Currency translation movement on net investment in subsidiary undertakings 2976 17414 8730 1908 Tax relating to components of comprehensive income 9 222 1669 Total comprehensive income for the year 8952 3577 Attributable to Owners of the Company 10783 1421 Noncontrolling interests 26 1831 2156 8952 3577 All items recognised in comprehensive income may be reclassified subsequently to the income statement.
The notes on pages 89 to 121 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Year ended 30 September 2017 Year ended 30 September 2016
Headline
Adjusting items note 5
Headline
Adjusting items note 5
Revenue 3 152623  152623 134422  134422 Cost of sales 93259  93259 75862  75862 Gross profit 59364  59364 58560  58560 Other operating income 741  741 615  615 Administrative expenses 32194 37445 69639 26203 40809 67012 Foreign exchange gain on operating activities 337  337 1956  1956 Share of results of associates and joint ventures 3 18 6510 1504 5006 4628 1078 3550 Operating profitloss 4 34758 38949 4191 39556 41887 2331 Investment revenue 6 688 5342 6030 554 6940 7494 Finance costs 7 3824 1178 5002 3606 5652 9258 Profitloss before tax 3 31622 34785 3163 36504 40599 4095 Tax chargecredit 9 8315 5063 3252 7059 3983 3076 Profitloss for the year 23307 29722 6415 29445 36616 7171 Attributable to Owners of the Company 21476 29722 8246 27289 36616 9327 Noncontrolling interests 26 1831  1831 2156  2156 23307 29722 6415 29445 36616 7171 Earnings per share p The results stated above relate to continuing activities of the Group.
The notes on pages 89 to 121 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Share premium account
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings Put option reserve
Hedge reserve
Noncontrolling interests
Balance as at 1 October 2016 2621 20629 2746 457 4370 115450 21317 42289 2992 70935 25427 96362 Net lossprofit for the year 8246 1831 6415 Currency translation movement on net investment in subsidiary undertakings 2976  2976  2976 Movement in fair value of cash flow hedges 1336 1336  1336 Fair value of cash flow hedges released to the income statement Tax relating to components of comprehensive income note 9 Total comprehensive income for the year 8246  2976 439 10783 1831 8952 Dividends note 10 21 21 8678 1315 9993 Exercise of share options Sharebased payments note 28 Issue of shares note 25 51 7959 8010  8010 Tax debited to equity note 9 Put option disposal Acquisition of subsidiary 4636 4636 Exercise put option on acquisition of subsidiary 75 7875 7800 7800 Balance as at 30 September 2017 2693 28567 2746 457 4240 98520 13255 45265 2553 67670 22652 90322
Share premium account
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings Put option reserve
Hedge reserve
Noncontrolling interests
Balance as at 1 October 2015 2570 14875 2746 457 4825 140031 16843 59703 3674 82982 16361 99343 Net lossprofit for the year      9327    9327 2156 7171 Currency translation movement on net investment in subsidiary undertakings        17414  17414  17414 Movement in fair value of cash flow hedges         7042 7042  7042 Fair value of cash flow hedges released to the income statement         1293 1293  1293 Tax relating to components of comprehensive income note 9         1669 1669  1669 Total comprehensive income for the year      9327  17414 6666 1421 2156 3577 Dividends note 10 5 5    15594    15594 1520 17114 Exercise of share options     455 452    3  3 Sharebased payments note 28      390    390  390 Issue of shares note 25 46 5759    449    6254  6254 Tax debited to equity note 9      16    16  16 Acquisition of subsidiary       13159   13159 17084 3925 Exercise put option on acquisition of subsidiary      31 8685   8654 8654 Balance as at 30 September 2016 2621 20629 2746 457 4370 115450 21317 42289 2992 70935 25427 96362 The notes on pages 89 to 121 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 12 92566 97855 Other intangible assets 14 61867 70816 Property plant and equipment 15 2783 2469 Interests in associates and joint ventures 18 45470 45677 Venue advances and prepayments 19 3548 2945 Deferred tax asset 24 5411 3070 211645 222832 Current assets Trade and other receivables 19 61425 50610 Tax prepayment 19 2880 2115 Cash and cash equivalents 19 23321 15508 87626 68233 Total assets 299271 291065 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 21 25166 20844 Deferred income 21 82591 61918 Derivative financial instruments 23 1795 5904 Provisions 22 527 240 110079 88906 Noncurrent liabilities Bank loan 20 72998 74604 Provisions 22 273 189 Deferred tax liabilities 24 12494 12675 Derivative financial instruments 23 13105 18329 98870 105797 Total liabilities 208949 194703 Net assets 90322 96362
Share capital 25 2693 2621 Share premium account 28567 20629 Merger reserve 2746 2746 Capital redemption reserve 457 457 ESOT reserve 4240 4370 Retained earnings 98520 115450 Put option reserve 13255 21317 Translation reserve 45265 42289 Hedge reserve 2553 2992 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent 67670 70935 Noncontrolling interests 26 22652 25427 Total equity 90322 96362 The notes on pages 89 to 121 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
The financial statements of ITE Group plc registered company number  were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 27 November 2017.
They were signed on their behalf by Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer 27 November 2017 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 30 September 2017 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement For the year ended 30 September 2017
Operating activities Operating loss from continuing operations 4191 2331 Adjustments for noncash items Depreciation and amortisation 4 16326 17191 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 4 12585 24650 Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures 4 1691 1859 Sharebased payments 28 218 390 Share of profit from associates and joint ventures 18 5006 3550 Increasedecrease in provisions 22 371 69 Foreign exchange gain on operating activities 4 337 1956 Lossprofit on disposal of investments 4 17 3712 1498 Fair value of cash flow hedges recognised in the income statement 661 1187 Dividends received from associates and joint ventures 18 3831 5373 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 28539 38872 Increase in receivables 10130 4254 Advances and prepayments to venues 5187 2867 Utilisation of venue advances and prepayments 5526 3901 Increase in deferred income 20673 12087 Increasedecrease in payables 2864 6736 Cash generated from operations 42285 41003 Tax paid 6790 6668 Net cash from operating activities 35495 34335 Investing activities Interest received 6 688 385 Investment in associates and joint ventures 18 21 220 2397 Acquisition of businesses  cash paid 13 21 9673 17185 Cash acquired through acquisitions 13 343 3404 Purchase of plant property and equipment and computer software 14 15 3136 2419 Disposal of plant property and equipment and computer software 14 15 238 112 Disposal of subsidiary  cash received 17 128 Cash disposed of through disposals 17 125 Cash paid to acquire noncontrolling interests  2087 Net cash utilised on investing activities 11757 20187 Financing activities Equity dividends paid 10 8652 15589 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 26 760 1520 Interest paid and bank charges 7 3824 3544 Proceeds from the issue of share capital and exercise of share options Drawdown of borrowings 219060 217788 Repayment of borrowings 220710 212800 Net cash outflow from financing activities 14882 15662 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 8856 1514 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 15508 17269 Effect of foreign exchange rates 1043 247 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 23321 15508 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
1 October
Foreign exchange
30 September Cash 15508 8856 1043 23321 Debt due after one year 74604 1650 44 72998 Net debt 59096 10506 1087 49677 The notes on pages 89 to 121 form an integral part of the consolidated financial statements.
Net Debt Reconciliation For the year ended 30 September 2017 1 General information ITE Group plc is a company incorporated in the UK.
The address of the registered office is given on page 134.
The nature of the Groups operations and its principal activities are set out in the Strategic Review on pages 1 to 35 and in note 3.
These financial statements are presented in British pounds Sterling.
Foreign operations are included in accordance with the accounting policies set out below.
Impact of new accounting standards The Group has not yet adopted certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards which have been published but are only effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 October 2017.
A list of these can be found below New amended and revised Standards Effective date Amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows 1 January 2017 Amendments to IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments 1 January 2018 Clarifications to IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 Amendments to IAS 12 Income Taxes 1 January 2019 IFRS 16 Leases 1 January 2019 The Directors anticipate that the adoption of these standards and interpretations in future periods will have no material impact on the financial statements of the Group with the exception of the adoption of IFRS 16 Leases which will replace the current leasing standard IAS 17 Leases.
IFRS 16 requires all leases to be treated in a consistent way to the current rules on finance leases.
This will result in all leases being disclosed in the Statement of Financial Position with the exception of shortterm leases where for lease terms of less than twelve months an election can be made to account for the expense in line with the payment terms.
This is expected to have a significant impact on both the Groups Statement of Financial Position as there will be an increase in lease assets and financial liabilities recognised and the Groups Income Statement through a changing of the expense profile and the financial statement lines in which the expenses are recognised.
The adoption of IFRS 16 will increase the expense charged at the beginning of our lease contracts due to the straightline operating lease expense charge being replaced by the finance cost approach which by its nature is frontloaded.
This is expected to reduce profit before tax in the first year of adoption.
Currently our operating lease rentals are recognised within administrative expenses but under IFRS 16 these will be classified as finance costs and therefore operating profit is expected to increase on adoption.
The financial impact of the changes have yet to be quantified by management.
The adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a material impact on the Groups Income Statement but may lead to a change in the Statement of Financial Position.
The Group has significant forward bookings which are currently recognised within trade debtors and deferred income at the point at which a contractual obligation to provide the service arises.
Under IFRS 15 the deferred income and corresponding debtor may not be recognised until the earlier of the service being provided and the payment falling due.
This may result in a material reduction to the deferred income and trade receivables on adoption of the standard.
Management is currently in the process of assessing the extent of the impact on adoption of the new standard and the financial impact of the changes have yet to be quantified.
2 Basis of accounting ITE Group plc the Company is a UK listed company and together with its subsidiary operations is hereafter referred to as the Group.
The
Company is required to prepare its consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs adopted by the European Union and therefore the Group financial statements comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
In addition the Group has complied with IFRS as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB.
The preparation of financial statements under IFRS requires the Directors to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and income and expenses.
These estimates and associated assumptions are based on past experience and other factors considered applicable at the time and are used to make judgements about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that cannot be readily determined from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
These estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Changes to estimates and assumptions are reflected in the financial statements in the period in which they are made.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis which assumes that the Company will continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future as disclosed in the Directors Report on page 45.
The statements are presented in pounds Sterling and have been prepared under IFRS using the historical cost convention except for the revaluation of financial instruments.
The principal accounting policies adopted are set out on the following pages.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Basis of consolidation The Group accounts consolidate the accounts of ITE Group plc and the subsidiary undertakings controlled by the Company drawn up to 30 September each year.
Control is achieved where the Company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an investee entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
On acquisition the assets and liabilities of a subsidiary are measured at their fair values at the date of acquisition.
Any excess of the cost of acquisition over the fair values of the identifiable net assets is recognised as goodwill.
The interest of noncontrolling shareholders is stated at the noncontrolling interests proportion of the fair values of assets and liabilities recognised.
The results of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are included in the Consolidated Income Statement from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as appropriate.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used in line with those used by the Group.
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Noncontrolling interest in the net assets of consolidated subsidiaries is identified separately from the Groups equity therein.
Non controlling interests consist of the amount of those interests as at the date of the original business combination and the noncontrolling interests share of changes in equity since the date of the combination.
Losses applicable to the noncontrolling interests in excess of their interest in the subsidiaries equity are allocated against noncontrolling interests even if this results in a deficit balance.
Business combinations The acquisition of subsidiaries is accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of the acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Any costs attributable to the business combination are expensed directly to the Consolidated Income
The acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities that meet the conditions for recognition under IFRS 3 are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date except for noncurrent assets or disposal groups that are classified as held for resale in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations which are recognised and measured at fair value less costs to sell.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is recognised as an asset and initially measured at cost being the excess of the cost of the business combination over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities recognised.
If the Groups interest in the net fair value of the acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities exceeds the cost of the business combination the excess is recognised immediately in the Income Statement.
Where applicable the consideration for the acquisition includes any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement measured at its acquisitiondate fair value.
Subsequent changes in such fair values are adjusted against the cost of acquisition where they qualify as measurement period adjustments.
All other subsequent changes in the fair value of contingent consideration classified as an asset or liability are accounted for in accordance with relevant IFRSs.
Changes in the fair value of contingent consideration classified as equity are not recognised.
The interest of minority shareholders in the acquiree is initially measured as the noncontrolling interests proportion of the net fair value of the assets liabilities and contingent liabilities recognised.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on consolidation represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities of a subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset and reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement and is not subsequently reversed.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to each of the Groups CGUs expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated are tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the unit may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than the carrying value of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to other assets of the unit pro rata based on the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
On disposal of a subsidiary the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Goodwill on acquisition of a foreign entity is treated as an asset of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
Intangible assets Computer software is initially measured at purchase cost.
Customer relationships trademarks and licences and visitor databases are initially measured at fair value.
Computer software customer relationships trademarks and licences and visitor databases have a definite useful life and are carried at cost or fair value less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost over their estimated useful life.
The estimated useful lives are typically between three and ten years for customer relationships for some trademarks up to 20 years and for visitor databases between five and eight years.
Computer software is amortised over five years.
Impairment of assets excluding goodwill At each balance sheet date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its tangible and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets are impaired.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment if any.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs.
An intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is tested for impairment annually and whenever there is an indication that the asset may be impaired.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or CGU is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset or CGU is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment is recognised immediately as an expense.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset CGU is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset cash generating unit in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement immediately unless the relevant asset is carried at a revalued amount in which case the reversal of the impairment loss is treated as a revaluation increase.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation is charged to write off the cost of assets over their estimated useful lives using the straightline method on the following bases Leasehold land and buildings term of lease Plant and equipment 4 to 10 years Assets held under finance leases are depreciated over their expected useful lives on the same basis as owned assets or where shorter over the term of the relevant lease.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying value amount of the asset and is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Associates and joint ventures An associate is an entity over which the Group is in a position to exercise significant influence.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control over those policies.
A joint venture is an entity over which the Group is in a position to exercise joint control.
Joint control exists when decisions about the activities of the entity require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control.
The results and assets and liabilities of associates and joint ventures are incorporated in these financial statements using the equity method of accounting.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are carried in the Statement of Financial Position at cost as adjusted by post acquisition changes in the Groups share of net assets of the associate or joint venture less any impairment in the value of individual investments.
Losses of an associate or joint venture in excess of Groups interest in that entity which includes any longterm interests that in substance form part of the Groups net investment in the associate or joint venture are recognised only to the extent that the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate or joint venture.
Where a Group company transacts with an associate or joint venture of the Group profits and losses are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the relevant associate or joint venture.
Losses may provide evidence of an impairment of the asset transferred in which case an appropriate provision is made for impairment.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Basis of accounting continued 2 Basis of accounting continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Venue advances Venue advances arise where the Group has advanced funds to venue owners that can be repaid by either offsetting against future venue hire or by cash repayment.
Where the advance can be settled in cash the loan balance is measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method where the impact of discounting is material.
Appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts are recognised in profit or loss when there is objective evidence that the asset is impaired.
Advances that are prepayments of future venue hire and do not permit the repayment of the principal in cash are recognised at cost as venue advances and prepayments.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Provisions are discounted to present value where the effect is material.
Financial Instruments Classes of financial instruments The Group aggregates its financial instruments into classes based on their nature and characteristics.
The details of financial instruments by class are disclosed in note 23 to the accounts.
Financial assets The Group classifies its financial assets into the following categories investments cash and cash equivalents loans and receivables and derivative assets at fair value through profit or loss.
The classification is determined by management upon initial recognition and is based on the purpose for which the financial assets were acquired.
Financial assets are recognised on the Groups balance sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
At each balance sheet date the Group assesses whether its financial assets are to be impaired.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement where there is objective evidence of impairment.
Financial assets are derecognised in full or partly when the Groups rights to cash flows from the respective assets have expired or have been transferred and the Group has neither exposure to the risks inherent in those assets nor entitlement to rewards from them.
Investments
Investments in unlisted shares that are not traded in an active market are classified as availableforsale financial assets and stated at fair value.
Fair value is determined in the manner described in note 23.
Gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the investments revaluation reserve with the exception of impairment losses interest calculated using the effective interest method and foreign exchange gain and losses on monetary assets which are recognised directly in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Where the investment is disposed of or is determined to be impaired the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in the investments revaluation reserve is reclassified to the Consolidated Income Statement.
Dividends on available for sale equity instruments are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement when the Groups right to receive the dividends is established.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and ondemand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Cash and cash equivalents are measured at initial recognition at fair value.
Subsequent to initial recognition cash and cash equivalents are stated at fair value with all realised gains or losses recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
This category includes the following classes of financial assets trade and other receivables and venue advances.
Loans and receivables are measured at initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement when there is objective evidence that the asset is impaired.
The estimates are based on specific credit circumstances and the Groups historical bad receivables experience.
No interest is charged on the loans and receivables due to either their shortterm nature or specific arrangements in place and hence the effective interest rate method is not applied.
Derivative assets A derivative is a financial instrument that changes its value in response to changes in underlying variable requires no or little net initial investment and is settled at a future date.
Derivative assets are classified as at Fair Value Through Profit or Loss FVTPL unless designated in hedged relationships.
Derivative assets are measured at initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each balance date with the resulting gains and losses recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
These derivatives are acquired in full compliance with the Groups treasury policies.
Financial liabilities The Group classifies its financial liabilities into the following categories written put options bank borrowings trade and other payables held at amortised cost and derivative liabilities through profit or loss.
Financial liabilities are recognised on the Groups Statement of Financial Position when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Written equity options Any contract with a single or multiple settlement option that contains an obligation for the Group to purchase equity in a subsidiary for cash gives rise to a financial liability for the present value of the repurchase price.
An amount equal to the liability is recorded in equity on initial recognition of a written equity option.
The liability is subsequently remeasured through the Consolidated Income Statement.
Where considered significant the Groups written equity options are discounted to their appropriate value.
The unwinding of the discount is charged through the Consolidated Income Statement over the period to exercise.
Bank borrowings Interestbearing bank loans and overdrafts are recorded at the proceeds received.
Finance charges are accounted for on an accruals basis in the Consolidated Income Statement and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Loan and overdraft interest and associated costs that are considered to be financing in nature are presented as financing activities in the cash flow statement.
Trade and other payables Trade payables are measured at initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost.
Trade payables are derecognised in full when the Group is discharged from its obligation it expires is cancelled or replaced by a new liability with substantially modified terms.
Trade and other payables are shortterm and there is no interest charged in connection with these hence the effective interest method is not applied.
Derivative liabilities A derivative is a financial instrument that changes its value in response to changes in an underlying variable requires no or little net initial investment and is settled at a future date.
Derivative liabilities are classified as FVTPL.
Derivative liabilities are measured at initial recognition at fair value and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at the end of each financial year with the resulting gains and losses recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
These derivatives are acquired in full compliance with the Groups treasury policies.
Hedge accounting The Groups activities expose it to the financial risks of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and changes in interest rates.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments such as foreign exchange forward contracts and interest rate swaps to hedge these exposures Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value at the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at the end of each financial year.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement immediately unless the derivative is designated and effective as a hedging instrument in which event the timing of the recognition in the Consolidated Income Statement depends on the nature of the hedge relationship.
The Group designates its derivative financial instruments as cash flow hedges. and it is not expected to be realised or settled within twelve months.
Other derivatives are presented as current assets or current liabilities.
At the inception of the hedge relationship the Group documents the relationship between the hedging instrument and the hedged item along with the risk management objectives and strategy for undertaking various hedging transactions.
At the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis the Group documents whether the hedging instrument that is used in a hedging relationship is highly effective in offsetting changes in the fair values of cash flows of the hedged item.
Derivative instruments are initially recognised at fair value at the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently measured to their fair value at the end of each financial year.
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges are deferred in equity.
The gain or loss relating to any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement as investment revenue or finance costs respectively.
Amounts deferred in equity are recycled in the Consolidated Income Statement in the periods when the hedged item is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in the same line of the Consolidated Income Statement as the recognised hedged item.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the Group revokes the hedging relationship the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
Any cumulative gain or loss deferred in equity at that time remains in equity and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in profit or loss.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was deferred in equity is recognised immediately in the Income Statement.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Basis of accounting continued 2 Basis of accounting continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The Groups use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups financial policies.
Fair values The fair value is defined as the amount at which a financial instrument could be exchanged in an arms length transaction between informed and willing parties and is calculated by reference to market rates discounted to current value.
The Group determines the fair value of its financial instruments using market prices for quoted instruments and widely accepted valuation techniques for other instruments.
Valuation techniques include discounted cash flows standard valuation models based on market parameters dealer quotes for similar instruments and use of comparable arms length transactions.
Revenue
Revenue represents the fair value of amounts receivable for goods and services provided in the ordinary course of business net of discounts VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Revenue is recognised on completion of an event.
Contractually committed revenues billings and cash received in advance and directly attributable costs relating to future events are deferred.
The amounts deferred are included in the Statement of Financial Position as deferred income and prepayments respectively until the event has completed.
If an event is anticipated to make a loss then the prepaid event costs in excess of the deferred income held in the Statement of Financial Position at the end of a financial year are written off in full.
Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and at the effective interest rate applicable.
Income from investments is recognised when the shareholders rights to receive payment have been established.
Barter transactions Where barter transactions occur between advertising and exhibition space and the revenue can be measured reliably revenues and costs are recognised in the Income Statement.
Taxation
The tax expense represents the sum of tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The current tax charge is based on the taxable profit for the year using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the Income Statement because it excludes items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from goodwill or from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that does not affect the tax profit or the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates and interests in joint ventures except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying value of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Income Statement except where it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Foreign currencies Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate of exchange at the date of the transaction or their contractual rate where applicable.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the end of each financial year are retranslated at the rates of exchange prevailing at that date.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities are translated at the rate prevailing at the date the fair value was determined.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
Gains and losses arising on the settlement of monetary items and on the retranslation of monetary items are included in income for the period.
Exchange differences arising on the retranslation of nonmonetary items carried at fair value are included in income for the period except for differences arising on the retranslation of nonmonetary items in respect of which gains or losses are recognised directly in equity.
For such nonmonetary items any exchange component of that gain or loss is also recognised directly in equity.
Details of the Groups accounting policies for forward contracts and options are included in the policy on derivative financial instruments.
On consolidation the monthly Income Statements of overseas operations are translated at the average rates of exchange for each month and each Statement of Financial Position at the rates ruling at the end of each financial year.
Exchange differences arising are classified as equity and transferred to the Groups translation reserve.
Such translation differences are recognised as income or as expense in the period in which the operation is disposed of.
Under the exemption permitted from IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates cumulative translation differences for all foreign operations prior to 1 October 2004 have been treated as zero.
Consequently any gain or loss on disposal will exclude translation differences that arose prior to 1 October 2004.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
Employee Share Ownership Trust The financial statements include the assets and liabilities of the Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT.
Shares in the Company held by the ESOT have been valued at cost and are held in equity.
The costs of administration of the ESOT are written off to profit or loss as incurred.
Where such shares are subsequently sold any net consideration received is included in equity attributable to the Companys equity holders.
Pension and other retirement benefits The Group operates defined contribution pension plans in multiple regions around the Group.
Contributions payable are charged to the Income Statement as they fall due as an operating expense.
Sharebased payments The Group has applied IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments.
IFRS 2 has been applied to all grants of equity instruments after 7 November 2002 that were unvested as of 1 January 2005.
The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees.
These are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
Fair value is measured using a BlackScholes model.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted for the effects of non transferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations based on managements best estimate.
Leases
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged on a straightline basis over the lease term even if the payments are not made on such a basis.
Benefits received as an incentive to enter into an operating lease are also spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Basis of accounting continued 2 Basis of accounting continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies a number of estimates have been made by management.
Those that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the financial statements or have the most risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets There are a number of estimates management considers when determining value in use most significantly the growth rates applied to future cash flows and the discount rates used to derive the present value of those cash flows.
Growth rates reflect managements view of the longterm forecast rates of growth using third party sources such as the International Monetary Fund where appropriate.
Discount rates are selected to reflect the risk adjusted cost of capital for the respective territories.
The most significant area of estimation uncertainty relates to forecast cash flows at each CGU.
Forecast cash flows are based on Boardapproved budgets and plans.
The carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets at 30 September 2017 is 92.6m 2016 97.9m and 61.9m 2016 70.8m respectively.
Taxation
The Group operates and derives profits from a range of international markets and as such it is subject to tax in a number of territories.
International and domestic tax rules are inherently complex frequently subject to change and are not always applied consistently by tax authorities in different jurisdictions.
The Group complies with all tax legislation in the local territories and does not have any significant tax authority challenges or investigations in any territory.
The Group actively monitors developments in international and domestic tax rules to which it is subject and continually assesses the potential impact of measures announced as part of the OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting.
The Group is also subject to withholding tax on remittances from overseas investments.
From time to time tax rules and treaties change and this can impact the amount of tax the Group has to withhold and pay on such remittances.
The Group takes a considered view of changes to tax legislation considers a range of potential outcomes and models the potential financial impact of those outcomes.
The Group holds tax provisions in respect of potential challenge to historical arrangements on which there are no current ongoing investigations.
However the inherent uncertainty regarding these items means that any eventual resolution could differ from the accounting estimates and therefore impact the Groups results and future cash flows.
Equity option liabilities The valuation of equity option liabilities held over own equity of 12.6m 2016 20.6m requires management to estimate the fair value of the liabilities to be settled in future years to acquire noncontrolling interests in subsidiary companies.
The liabilities are to be settled based on a multiple of future years EBITDA.
The EBITDA estimates are based on the latest budgeted information grown in line with projected GDP growth rates for the countries in which the subsidiaries operate.
The valuation of the equity option liabilities is highly sensitive to changes to forecast results given that the equity options are based on multiples of 7.5x12.5x EBITDA.
A 100000 movement in EBITDA in the relevant period could therefore result in up to a 1250000 movement in the equity option liability valuation.
3 Segmental information The Group has identified reportable segments based on financial information used by the Senior Operating Board in allocating resources and making strategic decisions.
The Senior Operating Board consisting of the Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Chief Operating Officer Strategy Director and HR Director is considered to be the Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker.
The Group evaluates performance on the basis of headline profit or loss before tax.
The Groups reportable segments are operational business units and groups of events that are managed separately either based on geographic location or as portfolios of events.
During the year the Group has made changes to the reportable segments adding a new Brands segment which includes our Africa Oil Week Breakbulk and Moda portfolios and is managed by the Brands Managing Director.
This replaces the Rest of the World segment reported in the prior year which also previously included central costs and other unallocated costs that are now presented separately as a reconciling segment.
The products and services offered by each business unit are identical across the Group.
The revenue and headline profit before tax are attributable to the Groups one principal activity the organisation of trade exhibitions conferences and related activities and can be analysed by operating segment as follows Year ended 30 September 2017
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Revenue 23777 18704 21736 17041 71365 152623 Segment headline profit before tax 6885 5374 6541 4766 26339 49905 Unallocated costs 18283 Headline profit before tax 31622 Adjusting items note 5 34785 Loss before tax 3163 Tax 3252 Loss after tax 6415 The revenue in the year of 152.6m includes 0.3m 2016 0.4m of barter sales.
No individual customer amounts to more than 10% of Group revenues.
Unallocated costs include other income head office costs unallocated TAG costs of 1.3m foreign exchange gains and losses on translation of monetary assets and liabilities held in Group subsidiary companies that are denominated in currencies other than the functional currency of the subsidiaries and net finance costs.
The Groups share of profits from associates and joint ventures capital expenditure and amortisation and depreciation can be analysed by operating segment as follows Year ended 30 September 2017
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Share of results of associates and joint ventures Share of results before tax 5095    1415 6510 Tax 1173    331 1504 Share of results after tax 3922    1084 5006 Capital expenditure Segment capital expenditure  1301 Unallocated capital expenditure 1835 Depreciation and amortisation Segment depreciation and amortisation 4567 5166 566 3815 959 15073 Unallocated depreciation and amortisation 1253 The impairment charges recognised in respect of goodwill intangible assets and investments in associates and joint ventures can be analysed by operating segment as follows Asia 8235 25273 Brands 3547 Eastern and Southern Europe 2494 Russia  1236 14276 26509 The Groups assets and liabilities can be analysed by operating segment as follows 30 September 2017
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Assets
Segment assets 116002 56156 13063 27373 68813 281407 Unallocated assets 17894
Segment liabilities 63022 9369 5359 9079 33300 120129 Unallocated liabilities 88820 Net assets 90322 Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Basis of accounting continued 3 Segmental information continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The comparative period segmental information has been restated to reflect the changes made to the operating segments in the current year.
Year ended 30 September 2016 restated
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Revenue 17102 24385 21980 19337 51618 134422 Segment headline profit before tax 5523 10987 6997 5593 19767 48867 Unallocated costs 12363 Headline profit before tax 36504 Adjusting items note 5 40599 Loss before tax 4095 Tax 3076 Loss after tax 7171 Year ended 30 September 2016 restated
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Share of results of associates and joint ventures Share of results before tax 4443   23 208 4628 Tax 1041   5 42 1078 Share of results after tax 3402   18 166 3550 Capital expenditure Segment capital expenditure  1147 Unallocated capital expenditure 1272 Depreciation and amortisation Segment depreciation and amortisation 3309 5050 611 4674 2458 16102 Unallocated depreciation and amortisation 1089 The Groups assets and liabilities can be analysed by operating segment as follows 30 September 2016 restated
Brands
Central
Asia
Eastern and
Europe
Russia
Total
Group
Assets
Segment assets 102219 73279 12021 43962 46921 278402 Unallocated assets 12662
Segment liabilities 59994 17483 4202 10084 25962 117725 Unallocated liabilities 76977 Net assets 96362 Geographical information Information about the Groups revenue by origin of sale and noncurrent assets by geographical location are detailed below Revenue Noncurrent assets Asia 26133 23619 89948 84995 Central Asia 13073 11946 4250 5012 Eastern and Southern Europe 15032 20185 22617 33628 Russia 52340 33647 28783 27219 Rest of the World 46045 45025 60636 68908 152623 134422 206234 219762 1 Noncurrent assets exclude deferred tax assets.
4 Operating profit Operating profit is stated after chargingcrediting Staff costs note 8 42410 31728 Depreciation of property plant and equipment note 15 1135 816 Amortisation of intangible assets included within administrative expenses note 14 15191 16375 Impairment of goodwill note 12 11204 24650 Impairment of acquired intangible assets note 14 1381 Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures note 18 1691 1859 Lossprofit on disposal of investments note 17 3712 1498 Operating lease rentals  land and buildings note 27 2128 2180 Net gain on derivative financial instruments  cash flow hedges notes 6 and 7  107 Gain on derivative financial instruments  equity options note 6 4839 6940 Foreign exchange gain on operating activities 337 1956 Auditors remuneration The analysis of the auditors remuneration is as follows Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 279 250 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 80 75 Total audit fees 359 325 Other services pursuant to legislation Interim review 47 45 Tax services  27 Treasury policy review  26 Total nonaudit fees Details on the Groups policy on the use of the auditor for nonaudit services the reasons why the auditors were used rather than another supplier and how the auditors independence and objectivity was safeguarded are set out in the Audit Committee Report on page 48.
No services were provided pursuant to contingent fee arrangements.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 3 Segmental information continued 3 Segmental information continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements 5 Adjusting items Operating items Amortisation of acquired intangible assets note 14 14069 15468 Impairment of goodwill note 12 11204 24650 Impairment of intangible assets note 14 1381 Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures note 18 1691 1859 Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions 406 330 Restructuring costs 4982 Lossprofit on disposal of investments note 17 3712 1498 Tax on income from associates and joint ventures 1504 1078 Total operating items 38949 41887 Financing items Revaluation of liabilities on completed acquisitions 4164 1288 Total adjusting items 34785 40599 The adjusting items are discussed in the Chief Financial Officers Statement on pages 19 to 20.
6 Investment revenue Interest receivable from bank deposits 688 385 Gain on revaluation of equity options 4839 6940 Gain on cash flow hedges  169 Gain on revaluation of deferred and contingent consideration 503 6030 7494 7 Finance costs Interest on bank loans 2512 2403 Bank charges 1312 1141 Loss on revaluation of deferred and contingent consideration  3094 Loss on cash flow hedges  62 Imputed interest charge on discounted equity option liabilities 1178 2558 5002 9258 8 Staff costs
Number
The average monthly number of employees including Directors was Administration 353 402 Technical and sales 1040 938 1393 1340 Their aggregate remuneration comprised Wages and salaries 35179 26422 Social security costs 5765 4257 Other staff benefits 440 446 Defined contribution pension contributions 808 213 Sharebased payments 218 390 42410 31728 The defined contribution pension contributions relate to the schemes in multiple regions around the Group.
Details of audited Directors remuneration are shown in the Annual Report on Remuneration on pages 62 to 72.
9 Tax on profit on ordinary activities Analysis of tax charge for the year Group taxation on current year result UK corporation tax chargecredit on result for the year 249 820 Adjustment to UK tax in respect of previous years 49 8 Overseas tax  current year 7402 5721 Overseas tax  previous years 675 39 8077 5682 Current tax 7779 6494 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences Current year 3457 3218 Prior year 1070 200 4527 3418 3252 3076 The tax charge for the year can be reconciled to the profit per the income statement as follows Loss on ordinary activities before tax 3163 4095 Profit on ordinary activities multiplied by standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.5% 2016 20.0% 617 819 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 407 247 Loss on sale of investments 724 Permanent differences 128 59 Increase in uncertain contingencies 920 303 Tax effect of equity options and deferredcontingent consideration 809 491 Impairment of goodwill 2678 5302 Tax effect of amortisation of intangibles 801 755 Deferred tax asset not recognised 1208 674 Withholding tax and other irrecoverable tax 231 533 Deferred tax provision on repatriation of overseas profits 829 49 Tax charge in respect of previous period 444 248 Reduction in DT rate from 19% to 17% 297 42 Effect of different tax rates of subsidiaries in other jurisdictions 524 1006 Associate tax 975 696 3252 3076 The Group operates and derives profits from a range of international markets and as such it is subject to tax in a number of territories.
The
Group actively monitors developments in international and domestic tax rules to which it is subject and is currently assessing the potential impact of measures announced as part of the OECDs Base Erosion and Profit Shifting.
It is possible that changes in tax rules will have an impact of the Groups effective tax rate in future periods.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Tax relating to components of comprehensive income Cash flow gains  current  262 Cash flow lossesgains  deferred 222 1407 222 1669 Tax relating to amounts chargedcredited to equity Share options  current  84 Share options  deferred 12 68 234 1653 10 Dividends 2017 2016
Settled in cash
Per share
Settled in scrip Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend in respect of the prior year 3.0 5350 2497 4.9 12436 Interim dividend in respect of the current year 1.5 3328 686 1.5 3158 720 4.5 8678 3183 6.4 15594 720 The Directors are proposing a final dividend for the year ended 30 September 2017 of 2.5p per ordinary share a distribution of approximately 6.7m.
A scrip dividend alternative is available allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
Under the terms of the trust deed dated 20 October 1998 the ITE Group Employees Share Trust which holds 2783585 2016 2869603 ordinary shares representing 1.0% of the Companys called up ordinary share capital has agreed to waive all dividends due to it each year.
11 Earnings per share The calculation of basic diluted headline basic and headline diluted earnings per share is based on the following numbers of shares and earnings
No. of shares Weighted average number of shares For basic earnings per share 263241 255598 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares 309 79 For diluted and headline diluted earnings per share 263550 255677 Basic and diluted earnings per share The calculations of basic and diluted earnings per share are based on the loss for the financial year attributable to equity holders of the Parent of 8.2m 2016 loss of 9.3m.
Basic and diluted earnings per share were 3.1p 2016 3.6p.
Headline diluted earnings per share Headline diluted earnings per share is intended to provide a consistent measure of Group earnings on a yearonyear basis and is 8.1p per share 2016 10.7p.
Headline basic earnings per share is 8.2p 2016 10.7p.
Loss for the financial year attributable to equity holders of the parent 8246 9327 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 14069 15468 Tax effect of amortisation of acquired intangible assets 3559 2905 Impairment of goodwill 11204 24650 Impairment of acquired intangible assets 1381 Impairment of investments in associates and joint ventures 1691 1859 Transaction costs on completed and pending acquisitions 406 330 Restructuring costs 4982 Lossprofit on disposal of investments 3712 1498 Revaluation of liabilities on completed acquisitions 4164 1288 Headline earnings attributable to owners of the Company for the financial year after tax 21476 27289 12 Goodwill
Cost
At 1 October 2015 77219 Additions through business combinations 35431 Foreign exchange 14999 At 30 September 2016 127649 Additions through business combinations note 13 9782 Disposal note 17 3307 Foreign exchange 1097 At 30 September 2017 133027 Accumulated impairment losses At 1 October 2015 4729 Impairment 24650 Foreign exchange 415 At 30 September 2016 29794 Impairment 11204 Foreign exchange 537 At 30 September 2017 40461 Net book value At 30 September 2017 92566 At 30 September 2016 97855 Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated to the reportable segments as follows restated Asia 28519 25506 Brands 23630 26411 Central Asia 3961 4181 Eastern and Southern Europe 13189 19823 Russia 23267 21934 92566 97855 Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 9 Tax on profit on ordinary activities continued 11 Earnings per share continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined from value in use calculations.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rates projected future cash flows and growth rates.
Management estimates discount rates that reflect the current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the
The pretax discount rates applied to the CGUs are between 10% and 28% 2016 10% and 31%.
The large variance in discount rates applied reflects the differences in risks inherent in the regions in which the CGUs operate.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts based upon the most recent oneyear financial plans approved by the Board and extrapolates the planned cash flows.
Central costs are allocated to the CGUs to the extent that they are considered to contribute to the cash inflow generation of the CGUs.
The allocation has increased in the year reflecting the shift to a more centralised operating model.
Growth rates beyond the detailed plans are based on IMF forecasts of GDP growth rates in the local markets with management judgements applied to the first three years.
These growth rates of between 1% and 8% 2016 between 1% and 8% do not exceed the longterm growth rates for the economies in which these business operate.
Individually significant CGUs
The India CGU has goodwill and intangible assets with a carrying value of 24.0m.
The intangible assets for the Indian business have a finite useful life and are amortised in accordance with the Groups amortisation policy disclosed in note 2.
The recoverable amount of the goodwill and intangible assets was determined using the value in use calculation using the following information Cash flow forecasts based on the 2018 financial plan approved by the Board which assumes exchange rates at September 2017 levels.
These forecasts are extrapolated based on assumed longterm growth rate for the Indian business of 7.9% based on IMF forecasts of GDP growth in India.
A pretax discount rate of 16.1%.
Using the above methodology the total carrying value exceeded the recoverable amount by 6.0m resulting in the need to recognise an impairment.
Recent trading has improved but refinements to our value in use calculations when coupled with existing low headroom has resulted in an impairment.
The refinements included an increase in the allocation of central costs to the CGU reflecting the shift to a more centralised operating model together with an update to the discount rate methodology.
Headroom was limited due to the impairment of the goodwill and intangible assets to their value in use in the prior period.
Breakbulk
The Breakbulk CGU has goodwill and intangible assets with a carrying value of 28.0m.
The intangible assets for the Breakbulk business have a finite useful life and are amortised in accordance with the Groups amortisation policy disclosed in note 2.
The recoverable amount of the goodwill and intangible assets was determined using the value in use calculation using the following information Cash flow forecasts based on the 2018 financial plan approved by the Board which assumes exchange rates at September 2017 levels.
These forecasts are extrapolated based on assumed longterm growth rate for the Breakbulk business of 1.7% based on IMF forecasts of GDP growth in Belgium and the US the markets in which the CGUs largest events are typically held each year.
A pretax discount rate of 10.2%.
Using the above methodology the recoverable amount exceeded the total carrying value by 5.3m.
Sensitivity analysis has been carried out considering reasonably possible changes to the discount rate and the forecast cash flows as outlined below.
A 2% increase in the discount rate would decrease the value in use of the Breakbulk CGU by 6.1m which would result in a potential impairment of 0.8m.
A reasonably possible change in the forecast cash flows would not result in the need to recognise an impairment charge.
Impairment of goodwill
As noted above an impairment loss of 6.0m has been recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in respect of goodwill in India within the Asia segment.
Turkey
An impairment loss of 2.5m has been recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in respect of goodwill in Turkey within the Eastern and Southern Europe segment.
Recent trading has improved in Turkey but refinements to our value in use calculations discussed above when coupled with existing low headroom have resulted in an impairment being recognised.
Prior to the refinements headroom at the Turkey CGU was lower as a result of the adverse macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions the country has faced in recent years.
Africa Oil Week AOW An impairment loss of 3.5m has been recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in respect of goodwill 2.4m and intangible assets 1.1m in AOW within the Brands segment.
The impairment loss in AOW is also as a result of the refinements made to our value in use calculations.
Headroom at the CGU was lower prior to the methodology changes following the significant downturn in the oil price in 2015 which adversely affected our AOW oil show in South Africa.
The event runs annually in October and the edition that ran last month exceeded managements expectations.
China
An impairment loss of 0.6m has been recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in respect of goodwill 0.3m and intangible assets 0.3m in China within the Asia segment.
This arose due to the cessation of trading at The Hub during the year resulting in the write off in full of the carrying value of the goodwill and intangible assets held.
The Groups annual impairment review identified no impairments at any other CGU.
Sensitivity to changes in assumptions The calculation of value in use is most sensitive to the discount rate and growth rates used.
The Group has conducted a sensitivity analysis taking into consideration the impact on these assumptions arising from a range of reasonably possible trading and economic scenarios.
The scenarios have been performed separately for each CGU with the sensitivities summarised as follows An increase in the discount rate by 2%.
A decrease of 10% on forecast cash flows over the term for all CGUs.
The sensitivity analysis shows that no further impairment would result from either an increase in the discount rates or a decrease in forecast cash flows in any CGU other than in those CGUs disclosed above which have had their headroom impaired to nil and at the Breakbulk CGU as discussed above.
13 Goodwill acquired through business combinations
On 9 December 2016 ITEs whollyowned subsidiary ITE Asia Exhibitions Limited acquired a 70% holding in ITE Gehua Exhibitions Co Ltd Gehua a company incorporated in Shanghai for consideration of 10.8m.
Gehua is a Shanghaibased business founded in 2001 that runs a portfolio of complementary exhibitions in China spanning Textile and Clothing Auto Parts and Accessories Mechanical Equipment Gifts and Food  attracting both domestic and international exhibitors and visitors.
During the period the Group incurred transaction costs on the Gehua acquisition of 0.1m which are included within administrative expenses.
Details of the fair values of the net assets acquired and the goodwill arising are presented as follows Fair value Assets acquired Intangible assets  customer relationships 4451 Intangible assets  trademarks 2983 Trade and other receivables 1811 Cash and cash equivalents 343 Current liabilities 2058 Deferred tax liabilities 1859 Noncontrolling interest 4636 Net assets acquired 1035 Goodwill arising on acquisition 9782 Total cost of acquisition 10817 Satisfied by Cash consideration 5951 Share consideration 3500 Contingent consideration 1366 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration paid 5951 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 343 Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 12 Goodwill continued 12 Goodwill continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The values used in accounting for the identifiable assets and liabilities of these acquisitions are provisional in nature at the balance sheet date.
If necessary adjustments will be made to these carrying values and the related goodwill within twelve months of the acquisition date.
Goodwill arising on acquisition of 9.8m reflects the strategic value in increasing the Groups presence in China and the expected synergies with the Groups existing industry sectors and Chinese operations.
None of the acquired goodwill and intangibles are expected to qualify for tax deductions in the UK.
The acquired business has contributed 3.0m to Group revenue and a profit of 1.0m since acquisition.
If the acquisition had occurred on 1 October 2016 it would have contributed 4.3m to revenue and 1.7m to profit.
14 Other intangible assets
Trademarks and licences
Computer software
Cost
At 1 October 2015 94560 24077 448 5714 124799 Additions through business combinations 6152 7982  9 14143 Additions    1156 1156 Disposals    60 60 Foreign exchange 11142 4138 85 145 15220 At 30 September 2016 111854 36197 533 6674 155258 Additions through business combinations note 13 4451 2983   7434 Additions    1396 1396 Disposals 36069 6  15 36090 Foreign exchange 1210 664 98 3 1969 At 30 September 2017 79026 38510 435 8058 126029
At 1 October 2015 45675 10225 232 3354 59486 Additions through business combinations    6 6 Charge for the year 11116 4291 61 907 16375 Disposals    58 58 Foreign exchange 6915 1835 51 168 8633 At 30 September 2016 63706 16351 344 4041 84442 Charge for the year 10042 3968 58 1123 15191 Impairments 91 1290   1381 Disposals 36069 6  6 36081 Foreign exchange 427 280 67 3 771 At 30 September 2017 37343 21323 335 5161 64162 Net book value At 30 September 2017 41683 17187 100 2897 61867 At 30 September 2016 48148 19846 189 2633 70816 The amortisation period for customer relationships is between three and ten years for trademarks is between three and ten years and for visitor databases between five and eight years.
Computer software is amortised over five years.
The additions to customer relationships and trademarks and licences through business combinations of 7.4m relate to the purchase of
The intangible assets acquired during the year are amortised in accordance with the Groups amortisation policy for intangible assets as detailed in note 2.
Included in disposals for the year are assets written off with nil net book value that are not expected to generate any future economic benefits.
All of these assets written off were acquired in 2010 or earlier.
15 Property plant and equipment Leasehold land and buildings Plant and equipment
Cost
At 1 October 2015 1347 4615 5962 Additions through business combinations 162 693 855 Additions 471 792 1263 Disposals 77 212 289 Foreign exchange 145 353 498 At 30 September 2016 2048 6241 8289 Additions 440 1300 1740 Disposals 80 184 264 Foreign exchange 5 112 107 At 30 September 2017 2413 7245 9658
At 1 October 2015 1031 3223 4254 Additions through business combinations 129 449 578 Charge for the year 141 675 816 Disposals 29 150 179 Foreign exchange 72 279 351 At 30 September 2016 1344 4476 5820 Charge for the year 257 878 1135 Disposals 7 28 35 Foreign exchange 4 41 45 At 30 September 2017 1590 5285 6875 Net book value At 30 September 2017 823 1960 2783 At 30 September 2016 704 1765 2469 16 Subsidiaries A list of all subsidiaries including the name country of incorporation and proportion of ownership interest is presented in note 5 to the Companys separate financial statements.
17 Disposal of subsidiaries On 1 April 2017 the Group disposed of its interest in ITE Germany GmbH GiMA.
The net assets of GiMA at the date of disposal were as follows Attributable goodwill 3307 Cash and cash equivalents 125 Other net assets 280 Loss on disposal 3712 Total consideration 128 Satisfied by Cash and cash equivalents Net cash inflow arising on disposal Consideration received in cash and cash equivalents 128 Less cash and cash equivalents disposed of 125 There were no disposals of subsidiaries made in 2016.
The loss on disposal is included in the profit for the year from continuing operations.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 13 Goodwill acquired through business combinations continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Events previously operated by ITE in Turkmenistan were licensed to a third party with effect from 1 March 2017 and from that date are no longer included in revenues or costs.
The license fee revenue arising from the arrangement will be recognised once the contractual requirements of the license agreement have been fulfilled.
These events have been included within disposed of events for the purposes of presenting likeforlike results as defined on page 1.
18 Interests in associates and joint ventures Associates and joint ventures Country of incorporation and operation Principal activity
Group interest %
Lentewenc Sp.
Z.
Poland Exhibition organiser Ordinary 40 Joint ventures Sinostar ITE Incorporated in Hong Kong with operations in China Exhibition organiser Ordinary 50 ECMI Trade Fairs S.
Sdn Bhd Malaysia Exhibition organiser Ordinary 50 Debindo Unggul Buana Makmur Indonesia Exhibition organiser Ordinary 50 ITE MF Russia Exhibition organiser Ordinary 50
At 1 October 2016 45677 Investments 220 Share of results of associates and joint ventures 5007 Dividends received 3831 Foreign exchange 88 Impairment 1691 At 30 September 2017 45470 The Groups investments in associates and joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method recognised initially at cost.
The carrying amount is increased or decreased to recognise ITEs share of the profit or loss of the associate or joint venture after the date of acquisition.
ITEs share of the profit or loss of the associate or joint venture is recognised in the income statement.
Distributions received from the associate or joint venture also reduce the carrying amount of the investment.
During the year the Group increased its investment in its joint venture ECMI by 0.2m.
The Group received dividends from Sinostar of approximately 3.5m from ITE MF of approximately 0.3m and from ECMI of approximately 0.1m.
The carrying value of interests in associates and joint ventures have been assessed for impairment at the year end.
The recoverable amounts of each investment were determined from value in use calculations using assumptions consistent with those applied in the goodwill and intangible assets impairment review detailed in note 12.
The review resulted in an impairment charge of 1.7m being recognised on the interest held in our Indonesian joint venture due to uncertainties regarding the future trading performance of the business.
Summarised financial information in respect of the Groups material associates and joint ventures is set out below.
The summarised financial information below represents amounts in the associates and joint ventures financial statements prepared in accordance with IFRS.
Results of joint ventures at 100% share Cash and cash equivalents 15753 12416 Current assets 2574 2656 Noncurrent assets 39 53 Total assets 18366 15125 Current liabilities 18818 15713 Noncurrent liabilities 42989 45598 Total liabilities 61807 61311 Revenue 13920 12098 Interest income 19 119 Depreciation and amortisation 108 16 Profit from continuing operations 9503 7445 Tax expense 2548 2148 Profit from continuing operations after tax 6955 5297 Total comprehensive income 6955 5297 The Groups nonmaterial joint ventures have an aggregate profit after tax from continuing operations and total comprehensive income of 2.8m 2016 1.2m at a 100% share.
The Groups nonmaterial associates have an aggregate profit after tax from continuing operations and total comprehensive income of nil 2016 0.1m at a 100% share.
19 Current assets and noncurrent assets Current assets Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 44133 32499 Other receivables 3917 3634 Venue advances and prepayments 2580 3322 Prepayments and accrued income 10795 11155 61425 50610 Taxation prepayments 2880 2115 Taxation prepayments relate to overseas subsidiaries and are available for offset against future tax liabilities.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash at bank and in hand 23321 15508 The cash at bank and in hand comprises cash held by the Group and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
The carrying value of these assets approximates their fair value.
The cash balance is represented by 1.0m of Sterling 2.2m of Euros 3.6m of US Dollars 2.0m of Russian Rubles 7.9m of Indian Rupees and 6.6m of other currencies.
Surplus funds are placed on shortterm deposit with floating interest rates.
Noncurrent assets Venue advances and prepayments  noncurrent Venue advances and prepayments  noncurrent 3548 2945 Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 17 Disposal of subsidiaries continued 18 Interests in associates and joint ventures continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Total venue advances and prepayments The venue advances and prepayments of 3.5m due after one year are all due within five years 2016 2.9m due within five years.
The venue advances repayable in cash are measured at fair value.
The venue prepayments are held at cost.
All venue advances are stated net of allowance for doubtful receivables.
The venue advances and prepayments are analysed as follows Venue advances Denominated in US Dollars 123 862 Venue prepayments Denominated in Russian Rubles 5351 4612 Denominated in US Dollars 275 Denominated in Euros 58 58 Denominated in other currencies 321 735 6005 5405 Total venue advances and prepayments 6128 6267 20 Bank borrowings During the year the Groups multicurrency revolving credit facility reduced to 86.0m 30 September 2016 93.0m committed through to 31 March 2019.
The facility amortises by 7.0m in June 2018.
The facility was secured by a guarantee between a number of Group companies.
The Groups borrowings were arranged at floating interest rates thus exposing the Group to interest rate risk.
Drawdowns under the facility bear interest at interbank rates of interest plus a margin of between 2.15% and 2.65%.
The Group took out interest rate swaps during the prior period totalling 40.0m which reduced the exposure to fluctuations in interest rates.
Refer to note 23 for further details.
During the year ended 30 September 2017 the average interest rate on the Groups borrowings approximated 3.0% 2016 2.8%.
The total drawdowns under the facility of 72.9m at 30 September 2017 were denominated in Sterling 71.0m 2016 73.0m and US Dollars 1.9m 2016 1.6m.
The Directors estimate that the carrying value of the borrowings approximates their fair value.
At
30 September 2017 the Group had 13.1m 2016 18.4m of undrawn committed facilities.
On 22 November 2017 a refinancing of the Groups external debt facility was completed.
Refer to note 30 for further details.
21 Trade and other payables Trade payables 2595 2699 Taxation and social security 6191 2776 Other payables 5715 3469 Accruals 9712 8075 Deferred consideration 953 1654 Contingent consideration  2171 25166 20844 Deferred income 82591 61918 Trade payables and accruals principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade payables approximates their fair value.
Included within Taxation and social security is a balance of 2.9m relating to provisions in respect of uncertain tax contingencies 2016 The movements in deferred and contingent consideration during the year are shown in the table below
At 1 October 2016 3825 Arising on acquisition 1366 Settlement 3722 Foreign exchange 12 Revaluation 504 At 30 September 2017 953
Insurance on share options
Other
Total
At 1 October 2016 2telCharged to profit or loss 32 467  499 Utilised in the year 11 117  128 At 30 September 2017 5telIncluded in current liabilities 527 Included in noncurrent liabilities 273 National Insurance on share options is calculated by reference to the employers National Insurance cost on the potential gain based on the difference between the exercise price and share price for those share options where the share price exceeds the exercise price at 30 September 2017.
The lease provision relates to the spreading of a reduced rent period over the full period of the lease and the recognition of onerous leases in respect of unused office space.
23 Financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities Details of the accounting policies and methods adopted including the criteria for recognition the basis of measurement and the basis on which income and expenses are recognised in respect of each class of financial asset and financial liability are disclosed in the accounting policies note on pages 89 to 96.
Categories and maturities of financial assets and liabilities Financial assets and liabilities are classified according to the following categories in the table below.
30 September 2017
Contractual cash flows Less than 1 year 12 years 25 years Greater than 5 years Nonderivative financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 23321 23321 23321 Loans and receivables Trade receivables 44133 44133 44133 Venue advances and prepayments 6128 6128 2580  3548 Other receivables 3917 3917 3917 77499 77499 73951  3548 Nonderivative financial liabilities Bank loan and overdrafts 72998 72998 57 72941 Amortised cost Trade payables 2595 2595 2595 Other payables 5715 5715 5715 Accruals 9712 9712 9712 Deferred consideration 953 953 953 Derivative financial liabilities Equity option liabilities 12575 17382 2278 14468 636 Interest rate swaps 40 40 33 7 Foreign currency forward contracts 2285 23407 15346 8061 106873 132802 36689 95447 636 The Group seeks to minimise the effects of foreign currency and interest rate risks by using derivative financial instruments to hedge the risk exposures.
The use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board.
Compliance with policies and exposure limits is reviewed by the Board on a continuous basis.
The Group does not enter into financial instruments including derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
The Fasteners and Scoop equity option liabilities have not been discounted as the effect is not material.
The options held in respect of ECMI and Debindo are valued at nil.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 19 Current assets and noncurrent assets continued 22 Provisions Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The Directors consider that the carrying amounts of financial assets and liabilities recorded at amortised cost in the financial statements approximate to their fair value due to the short maturity of the instruments.
30 September 2016
Contractual cash flows Less than 1 year 12 years 25 years Greater than 5 years Nonderivative financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 15508 15508 15508 Loans and receivables Trade receivables 32499 32499 32499 Venue advances and prepayments 6267 6267 3322  2945 Other receivables 3634 3634 3634 Derivative financial assets Equity option assets  27445 4620 2381 20444 57908 85353 59583 2381 23389 Nonderivative financial liabilities Bank loan 74604 74604   74604 Amortised cost Trade payables 2699 2699 2699 Other payables 3469 3469 3469 Accruals 8075 8075 8075 Deferred consideration 1654 1654 1654 Contingent consideration 2171 2171 2171 Derivative financial liabilities Equity option liabilities 20571 27445 4620 2381 20444 Interest rate swaps 40tel53 Foreign currency forward contracts 3260 45604 21573 14756 9275 116905 166123 44458 17289 104376 Fair value hierarchy The following table categorises the Groups financial instruments which are held at fair value into one of three levels to reflect the degree to which observable inputs are used in determining their fair values Level 1 Fair values measured using quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 Fair value measured using inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly.
Level 3 Fair values measured using inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data.
30 September 2017 Fair value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Liabilities measured at fair value Foreign currency forward contracts 2285  2285 Interest rate swaps 40  40 Equity options 12575   12575 Total 14900  2325 12575 30 September 2016 Fair value Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Liabilities measured at fair value Foreign currency forward contracts 3260  3260 Interest rate swaps 402  402 Equity options 20571   20571 Total 24233  3662 20571 Level 1 financial instruments are valued based on quoted bid prices in an active market.
Level 2 financial instruments are measured by discounted cash flow.
For interest rate swaps future cash flows are estimated based on forward interest rates from observable yield curves at the end of the reporting period and contract interest rates discounted at a rate that reflects the credit risk of the various counterparties.
For foreign exchange contracts future cash flows are estimated based on forward exchange rates from observable forward exchange rates at the end of the reporting period and contract forward rates discounted at a rate that reflects the credit risk of the various counterparties.
For equity instruments that are classified as Level 3 financial instruments the carrying value approximates to fair value.
For the Level 3 equity options these are valued based on a multiple as contractually agreed of forecast future EBITDA for each relevant option.
The key unobservable inputs relate to the EBITDA multiple ranging from 7.5x to 12.5x and the forecast future EBITDA for each entity.
Level 3 reconciliation of equity options At 1 October 2016 20571 Credit to Consolidated Income Statement within investment revenue and finance costs 3661 Foreign exchange 242 Settlement 4577 At 30 September 2017 12575 All Level 3 amounts credited to the Consolidated Income Statement in the year are attributable to the change in unrealised gains or losses relating to those liabilities held at the end of the reporting period.
The Level 3 inputs are highly sensitive to the EBITDA forecasts.
Given that the EBITDA multiples range from 7.5x to 12.5x a movement in the forecast EBITDA results for the relevant period could have a significant impact on the equity option valuation.
Financial risk management In the course of its business the Group is exposed to a number of financial risks market risk including foreign currency and interest rate credit risk liquidity risk and capital risk.
This note presents the Groups exposure to each of the above risks.
The Groups objectives policies and processes for measuring and managing risks can be found in the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 35.
The Board has overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Groups risk management framework.
The Board has established policies to identify and analyse risks faced by the Group to set appropriate risk limits and controls and to monitor risks and adherence to limits.
Market risk management Market risk is the risk that changes in foreign exchange rates and interest rates will affect the Groups income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments.
The objective of market risk management is to manage and control market risk exposures within acceptable parameters while optimising the return on risk.
The Groups activities expose it primarily to the financial risks of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.
The Group enters into derivative financial instruments to manage its exposure to both.
Market risk exposures are measured using sensitivity analysis.
Foreign currency risk management The Group undertakes certain transactions denominated in foreign currencies and therefore exposures to exchange rate fluctuations arise.
Exchange rate exposures are managed within approved policy parameters utilising foreign currency forward contracts.
Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 23 Financial instruments continued 23 Financial instruments continued Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The carrying amounts of the Groups foreign currency denominated monetary assets and monetary liabilities at the reporting date are as follows Financial assets EUR 10699 8193 GBP 3946 4734 USD 7498 5629 RUB 20173 14981 INR 16840 12378 Other 18342 11993 77498 57908 Financial liabilities EUR 2750 5776 GBP 79316 83448 USD 1405 2433 RUB 3087 327 INR 14673 14417 Other 5643 10504 106874 116905 Foreign currency sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis below details the impact of a 10% strengthening in the Groups significant currencies against Sterling applied to the net monetary assets or liabilities of the Group.
2017 000 USD EUR RUB INR OTHER Monetary assets 7498 10699 20173 16840 22288 Monetary liabilities 1405 2750 3087 14673 84959 Net monetary assets  liabilities 6093 7949 17086 2167 62671 Currency Impact Profit before tax gainloss 531 625 6 1389 53 Equity gain 78 170 1703 1tel 000 USD EUR RUB INR OTHER Monetary assets 5629 8193 14981 12378 16727 Monetary liabilities 2433 5776 327 14417 93952 Net monetary liabilities  assets 3196 2417 14654 2039 77225 Currency Impact Profit before tax loss  gain 322 312 16 1362 136 Equity gain  loss 3 70 1481 1320 121 The following significant exchange rates versus sterling applied during the year and in the prior year Average Reporting datetel 2016 Foreign currency forward contracts As at 30 September 2017 the notional amounts of outstanding foreign currency forward contracts that the Group has committed to amounted to 23.4m 2016 45.6m.
These arrangements are designed to address significant exchange exposures for the next 24 months and are renewed on a revolving basis as required subject to not committing the Group to less than six months or more than 36 months in the future.
At 30 September 2017 the fair value of these derivatives is estimated to be a net liability of approximately 2.3m 2016 net liability of These amounts are based on market valuations.
Interest rate risk management As the Group has no significant interestbearing assets other than cash the Groups income and operating cash flows are substantially independent of changes in market interest rates.
The Group is exposed to interest rate risk through its borrowings at floating interest rates.
This risk is managed by the Group by maintaining an appropriate level of floating interest rate borrowings and through the use of interest rate swap contracts.
Hedging activities are evaluated regularly to align with interest rate views and defined risk appetite ensuring the most costeffective hedging strategies are applied.
The Groups exposures to interest rates on financial assets and financial liabilities are detailed in the liquidity risk section of this note.
Interest structure of financial liabilities Financial liabilities at variable rates Bank loan and overdrafts 72998 74604 The following average interest rates applied on the Groups bank loan during the year and in the prior year % % GBP 3.0 2.8 USD 3.6 3.0 Average interest rate applicable to cash balances were 2.7% in 2017 and 1.8% in 2016.
Interest rate sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis below has been determined based on the exposure to interest rates for financial assets and financial liabilities at the balance sheet date.
With all other variables held constant the table below demonstrates the sensitivity to a 1% change in interest rates applied to the major currencies of net variable rate assetsliabilities.
1% is the sensitivity rate that represents managements assessment of the reasonably possible change in interest rates.
USDdenominated EURdenominated GBPdenominated RUBdenominated INRdenominated Otherteltelteltel Cash and cash equivalents 3596 2485 2240 1521 954 1087 2008 1319 7878 5612 6644 3485 Bank loan and overdrafts 1941 1526   71000 73000     58 78 Net variable rate assetsliabilities 1655 959 2240 1521 70046 71913 2008 1319 7878 5612 6586 3407 USDdenominated EURdenominated GBPdenominated RUBdenominated INRdenominated Other denominatedteltelteltel Profit before tax  gain loss 1% change in interest rates 700 719 20 13  1% change in interest 23 Financial instruments continued 23 Financial instruments continued Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Interest rate swap contracts With effect from 30 April 2016 the Group entered into two interest rate swap agreements to exchange the floating rate of interest paid on its bank borrowings for fixed rates on the first 40.0m of the Groups GBP debt calculated on agreed notional principal amounts of 20.0m each.
Under the agreements one month GBP LIBOR is exchanged for fixed rates of 0.66% with a maturity date of 31 March 2018 and 0.71% with a maturity date of 31 March 2019.
The interest rate swaps are designated as cash flow hedges to reduce the Groups cash flow exposure resulting from variable interest rates on borrowings.
The interest rate swaps and the interest payments on the loan occur simultaneously each month.
These arrangements were designed to address significant interest rate exposures over the next 18 months and were expected to affect the Consolidated Income Statement over that time period.
Subsequent to the year end on completion of the refinancing of the Groups external debt see note 30 the interest rate swaps have been terminated.
Credit risk management Credit risk arises because a counterparty may fail to perform its contractual obligations.
The Groups principal financial assets are cash and cash equivalents trade and other receivables venue advances and derivative financial instruments.
The Group considers its maximum exposure to credit risk to be as follows Cash and cash equivalents 23321 15508 Trade receivables net of bad debt provision 44133 32499 Venue advances and prepayments 6128 6267 Other receivables 3917 3634 77499 57908 The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade and other receivables.
The Group has adopted a policy of only dealing with creditworthy counterparties as a means of mitigating the risk of financial loss from defaults.
The Groups objective is to ensure all customers have paid before any service is provided to them.
The concentration of credit risk is limited due to the customer base being large and unrelated.
The ageing profile of the Groups trade receivables and the details of the Groups allowances for doubtful receivables can be seen below.
The credit risk on liquid funds arises due to where the liquid funds are held.
The territories in which ITE operates do not always have banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies such as Moodys and Fitch.
The Group aims to minimise the exposure to credit risk by minimising the level of cash held in such banks.
The Groups exposure and credit ratings of its counterparties are continuously monitored and the aggregate value of transactions concluded is spread amongst approved financial institutions.
Credit rating of financial assets excluding loans and receivables and derivative assets Investments grade A and above 37% 8559 8680 Investments grade B and above 50% 11598 4334 Investments grade C or below or not rated 13% 3164 2494 100% 23321 15508 The source of the credit ratings is Moodys and Fitch.
Ageing profile of trade receivables based on event date Not past due 43066 30428 Past due 130 days 574 870 Past due 3160 days 139 245 Past due 6190 days 77 174 Past due 91120 days 154 144 Past due more than 120 days 123 638 44133 32499 Management review debtors based on when an event has been held.
The Group invoices on receipt of signed contracts with payments typically due in stages in the lead up to events.
Any overdue amounts after the stage of payment due date are reviewed and chased.
Trade receivables not past due represent contracts with customers for future events.
It therefore includes receivables for events taking place in 2018.
Customers are typically due to settle the full contractual amount at least 30 days before an event.
The increase in trade receivables not yet due is a result of the increased focus on customer retention and early booking initiatives.
The trade receivables amounts presented in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position are net of allowances for doubtful receivables estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience specific credit issues and their assessment of the current economic environment.
Trade receivables consist of a large number of customers spread across diverse industries and geographical areas and the Groups exposure to credit risk is influenced mainly by the individual characteristics of each customer.
The demographics of the Groups customer base including default risk of the industry and country in which the customers operate has less of an influence on credit risk.
The Group establishes an allowance for doubtful debts that represents its estimate of incurred losses in respect of trade receivables when there is objective evidence that the debt will not be collected in full.
The allowance is recognised and measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of future cash flows.
Where material it is discounted at the effective interest rate computed at initial recognition.
The main component of this allowance is a specific loss component that relates to individually significant exposure on shows which have taken place but the debt has not been collected in full.
This allowance is determined by reference to the specific circumstances of each show and past experience.
The details of the movement in the allowance for doubtful receivables are shown below.
Allowance for doubtful receivables At 1 October 2434 785 Arising on acquisition  1181 Allowances made in the period 2095 1585 Amounts used and reversal of unused amounts 86 1117 4443 2434 Ageing of impaired receivables Past due 03 months 783 875 Past due 36 months 243 358 Past due more than 6 months 3417 1201 4443 2434 No allowance for doubtful receivables relating to venue loans was held in the current year 2016 nil.
Liquidity risk management Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its obligations as they fall due.
Such risk may result from inadequate market depth or disruption or refinancing problems.
Ultimate responsibility for liquidity risk management rests with the Board of Directors.
They have built an appropriate liquidity risk management framework for the management of the Groups short medium and longterm funding and liquidity management requirements.
The Group manages liquidity risk by ensuring continuity of funding for operational needs through cash deposits and debt facilities as appropriate.
Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that entities in the Group will be able to continue as going concerns while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of the debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and bank loan which are disclosed in note 19 and note 20 and equity attributable to equity holders of the Parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in note 25 and in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
23 Financial instruments continued 23 Financial instruments continued Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements
Intangibles
Tax losses
Hedges
Sharebased payments
Total
At 1 October 2015 232 7153 459 13 675 94 1363 8393 Credit  charge to profit or loss 316 2724 262 233  68 48 3419 Charge to OCI     1407   1407 Charge to equity      68  68 Acquisition of subsidiary  4665  174    4491 Foreign exchange  1587  28    1615 At 30 September 2016 548 10681 1411 9605 Credit  charge to profit or loss 149 2580 2059 670  9 829 4638 Charge to OCI     222   222 Charge to equity  1858   113 12  1983 Foreign exchange  190  101    89 At 30 September 2017 697 9769 22240 7083 Certain deferred tax assets and liabilities have been offset in the above table.
The following is the analysis of deferred tax balances for financial reporting purposes Deferred tax liabilities 12494 12675 Deferred tax assets 5411 3070 7083 9605 As at 30 September 2017 the Group has unused tax losses of 19.0m 2016 12.0m available for offset against future profits.
No deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of these losses in either year due to the unpredictability of future profit streams.
These losses may be carried forward indefinitely.
At the balance sheet date the aggregate amount of temporary differences associated with undistributed earnings of subsidiaries for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognised was 33.0m 2016 13.0m.
No liability has been recognised in respect of these differences because the Group is in a position to control the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that such differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets are recognised for the carry forward of unused tax losses accelerated capital allowances and other timing differences to the extent that based on a review of expected profits that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the unused losses and tax credits can be utilised.
The Finance No 2 Act 2015 which provides for reductions in the main rate of corporation tax from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
These rate reductions have been reflected in the calculation of deferred tax at the balance sheet date.
The Finance Act 2016 provides for reductions in the main rate of corporation tax to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 15 September 2016.
It has not had a material effect on the calculation of deferred tax at the balance sheet date.
25 Share capital
375000000 ordinary shares of 1 pence each 2016 375000000 3750 3750 Allotted and fullypaid 269280274 ordinary shares of 1 pence each 2016 262139673 2693 2621 During the year the Group issued 2299379 shares of 1p each as part of the consideration paid to acquire a 70% shareholding in Gehua note 13.
During the year the Group exercised its put option in respect of the acquisition of the final 25% shareholding in Africa Oil Week.
The consideration was settled through the allotment and issue of 2791120 ordinary shares of 1p each.
The Company announced a scrip dividend alternative for the year ended 30 September 2016 final dividend allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
As a result of this 1605813 new ordinary shares of 1p each were issued.
The Company also announced a scrip dividend alternative for the year ended 30 September 2017 interim dividend allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
As a result of this 444289 new ordinary shares of 1p each were issued.
The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
At the Extraordinary General Meeting held on 17 November 1998 shareholders approved the establishment of the ITE Group Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT.
The terms of the ESOT allow the trustees to transfer shares to employees who exercise options under the Companys Share Option Schemes to grant options to employees and to accumulate shares by buying in the market or subscribing for shares at market value.
The ESOT is capable of holding a maximum of 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
The ESOT reserve arises in connection with the Employee Share Ownership Trust.
The amount of the reserve represents the deduction in arriving at shareholders funds for the consideration paid for the Companys shares purchased by the Trust which had not vested unconditionally in employees at the end of each financial year.
The ESOT held 2783585 shares in ITE Group plc at 30 September 2017 2016 2869603 shares.
During the year 1908175 nominal share options under the Employees PSP were granted against ESOT held shares.
No shares 2016 none were purchased for the ESOT.
The market value of the ordinary shares held by the ESOT at 30 September 2017 was 5.0m 2016 4.7m.
The Company has agreed to make available to the ESOT an interestfree loan of up to 12.5m for the purpose of buying shares.
At
30 September 2017 the amount of the loan drawn down was 11.6m.
The ITE Group plc Company profit and loss account and balance sheet include the results of the ESOT for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The trustees have waived their current and future rights to all dividend entitlement on the shares held by the ESOT.
86018 options were exercised from ESOT during the year.
The total consideration for the options exercised from ESOT was 70000.
8249626 of outstanding options are to be settled by ESOT so all shares held by the ESOT are under option as at 30 September 2017.
Details of the options in issue and their exercise dates can be seen at note 28 to the accounts.
26 Noncontrolling interests At 1 October 25427 16361 Noncontrolling interest arising on acquisition note 13 4636 17084 Dividends payable to noncontrolling interests 1315 1520 Acquisition of noncontrolling interest 7800 8654 Disposal of noncontrolling interest 127 Profit on ordinary activities after taxation 1831 2156 At 30 September 22652 25427 Summarised financial information in respect of the Groups one subsidiary that has material noncontrolling interests ABEC is set out below.
The summarised financial information below represents amounts before intraGroup eliminations.
Equity attributable to owners of the Company 12781 12939 Noncontrolling interests 16206 16006 Net assets 3425 3067 Profit attributable to owners of the Company 1132 630 Profit attributable to the noncontrolling interests 755 785 Profit for the year 1887 1415 25 Share capital continued 24 Deferred tax Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements The Group has a number of operating leases for which it is a lessee.
Lease payments under operating leases recognised as an expense in the year Land and buildings 2128 2180 Venues 30068 26485 At 30 September 2017 the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows Land and buildings
Land and buildings
Within one year 1782 6182 1846 12941 Between two and five years 2773 5398 4285 2426 After five years 426  254 4981 11580 6385 15367 Operating lease payments for land and buildings represent rentals payable by the Group for its office properties.
Leases are negotiated for an average term of two years.
Payments for venues represent the noncancellable amount of contracted venue agreements for future events.
The Group also earned rental income of 0.3m during the year 2016 0.3m from subletting unused space in the London office.
28 Sharebased payments The Company operates two share option schemes.
Share option plans The Company operates a share option plan for certain employees of the Group.
Options are exercisable at a price equal to the average quoted market price of the Companys share on the date of grant.
The vesting period is typically three years and the options are exercisable up to ten years from granting.
The options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
Performance share plans The Company operates a Performance Share Plan PSP for executives and staff.
Awards under the PSP are at an exercise value of 1p.
Awards can be made to an employee over shares up to a maximum of 100% of base salary or 150% for the Chief Executive Officer and 120% for the Chief Financial Officer each year based on market value.
The vesting period is three years and awards are exercisable up to ten years from the date of grant.
For conditional awards the vesting is automatic on the satisfaction of performance targets.
The options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The awards are also subject to a performance target.
Further details of the performance targets can be found in the Report on Remuneration on pages 62 to 72.
Details of the share options outstanding as at 30 September 2017 are as follows Number of share options
Number of share options
Share option plans Outstanding at beginning of period 6884299 178.5 6234419 185.7 Granted during the period   1350000 145.9 Lapsed during the period 1320281 164.1 700120 179.9 Exercised during the period 49418 143.1 Performance share plans Outstanding at beginning of period 1773745 1.0 2745410 1.0 Granted during the period 1908175 1.0 460750 1.0 Lapsed during the period 861294 1.0 1130364 1.0 Exercised during the period 36600 1.0 302051 1.0 2784026 1.0 1773745 1.0 The total number of exercisable options in the share option plans is 50000 and in the performance share plans is 20230.
The weighted average share price at the date of exercise for share options exercised during the period was 177.4p.
The options outstanding at 30 September 2017 had a weighted average exercise price of 121.5p and a weighted average remaining contractual life of 332 days.
In
2017 PSP options were granted on 19 June.
The aggregate of the estimated fair value of these options is 689758.
The inputs into the BlackScholes model for the instruments issued during the year are as follows
Share option plans
Share option plans Weighted average share price 1p  1p 148p Weighted average exercise price 1p  1p 147p Expected volatility 33%  34% 34% Expected life 3 years  3 years 3 years Risk free rate 0.2%  0.7% 0.7% Dividend yield 2.9%  4.5% 4.5% The Group recognised a total expense of 0.2m 2016 0.4m related to equitysettled sharebased payment arrangements.
29 Related party transactions Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
Transactions between the Group and its associates where relevant are disclosed below.
Trading transactions During the year ended 30 September 2017 the Group charged management fees of 233000 2016 111000 to Sinostar ITE the Groups joint venture operation in Hong Kong and China.
Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of Directors and the Senior Management Board who are the key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories specified in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited part of the Report on Remuneration on pages 62 to 72.
Shortterm employee benefits 2330 2970 Sharebased payments  473 Other longterm benefits 73 87 2403 3530 30 Post balance sheet events A refinancing of the Groups external debt facility was completed on 22 November 2017 and gives the Group access to a new 100.0m facility from a syndicate of four banks HSBC Barclays Citibank and Commerzbank.
The facility amortises by 10.0m each year and expires in November 2021.
28 Sharebased payments continued 27 Operating lease arrangements Notes to the Consolidated Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Called up share capital note 9 Share premium account Merger reserve
ESOT reserve Profit and loss account
1 October 2015 2570 14875 2746 457 4825 120334 136157 Exercise of options     455 452 3 Net profit for the year      21107 21107 Dividends 5 5    15594 15594 Capital contribution      393 393 Sharebased payments      3 3 Issue of shares 46 5759    449 6254 30 September 2016 2621 20629 2746 457 4370 126234 148317 Exercise of share options     130 60 70 Net loss for the year      5502 5502 Dividends 21 21    8678 8678 Capital contribution      218 218 Issue of shares 23 3409     3432 Scrip dividend 28 4550     4578 30 September 2017 2693 28567 2746 457 4240 112212 142435 Company Statement of Changes in Equity For the year ended 30 September 2017
Fixed assets Investments in subsidiaries 5 7501 7283 Intangible assets 5 57 56 7558 7339 Current assets Debtors due within one year 6 151743 154317 Cash at bank and in hand 644 110 152387 154427 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 8 17509 13449 Net current assets 134877 140978 Net assets 142435 148317 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 9 2693 2621 Share premium account 28567 20629 Merger reserve 2746 2746 Capital redemption reserve 457 457 ESOT reserve 4240 4370 Profit and loss account 112212 126234 Shareholders funds 142435 148317 The accounts of the Company registered number  on pages 122 to 133 were approved by the Board of Directors and signed on their behalf on 27 November 2017 by Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer 27 November 2017 Company Statement of Financial Position 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements These separate financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with applicable United Kingdom accounting standards including Financial Reporting 102  The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland FRS 102 and with the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
As permitted by FRS 102 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under that standard in relation to sharebased payments and related party transactions.
The Directors Report Corporate Governance Statement and Directors Remuneration Report disclosures are on pages 43 41 and 55 respectively of this Report.
The Company has taken advantage of section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 and has not included its own profit and loss account in these financial statements.
The Company has also adopted the following disclosure exemptions the requirement to present a statement of cash flows and related notes and financial instrument disclosures including categories of financial instruments items of income expenses gains or losses relating to financial instruments and exposure to and management of financial risks.
The principal accounting policies are summarised below.
They have all been applied consistently throughout the year and the preceding year.
Going concern The Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company has adequate resources to continue in existence for the foreseeable future.
The Company therefore continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
Investments
Fixed asset investments including subsidiaries are shown at cost less provision for any impairment.
Intangible assets Trademarks are measured initially at purchase cost and have a definite useful life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straightline method to allocate the cost over their estimated useful life.
The estimated useful lives are up to 20 years.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Company has a present legal obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised on the Companys balance sheet when the Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Trade debtors and creditors Trade debtors and creditors are stated at their nominal value.
Trade debtors are reduced by appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts.
Bank borrowings Bank overdrafts are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Finance charges are accounted for on an accrual basis to profit or loss.
Equity instruments Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Taxation
Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all timing differences that have originated but not reversed at the balance sheet date where transactions or events that result in an obligation to pay more tax in the future or a right to pay less tax in the future have occurred at the balance sheet date.
Timing differences are differences between the Groups taxable profits and its results as stated in the financial statements that arise from the inclusion of gains and losses in tax assessments in periods different from those in which they are recognised in the financial statements.
A net deferred tax asset is regarded as recoverable and therefore recognised only to the extent that on the basis of all available evidence it can be regarded as more likely than not that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying timing differences can be deducted.
Deferred tax is not recognised when fixed assets are revalued unless by the balance sheet date there is a binding agreement to sell the revalued assets and the gain or loss expected to arise on sale has been recognised in the financial statements.
Neither is deferred tax recognised when fixed assets are sold and it is more likely than not that the taxable gain will be rolled over being charged to tax only if and when the replacement assets are sold.
Deferred tax is measured at the average tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the timing differences are expected to reverse based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Foreign currencies Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate of exchange at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are retranslated at the rates of exchange prevailing at that date.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities are translated at the rate prevailing at the date the fair value was determined.
Gains and losses arising on retranslation of monetary assets are included in profit or loss for the period.
Employee Share Ownership Trust The financial statements include the assets and liabilities of the Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT.
Shares in the Company held by the ESOT have been valued at cost and are held in equity.
The costs of administration of the ESOT are written off to profit or loss as incurred.
Where such shares are subsequently sold any net consideration received is included in equity attributable to the Companys equity holders.
Sharebased payments The Company issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees.
These are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Companys estimate of shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
Fair value is measured using a BlackScholes model.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted for the effects of non transferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations based on managements best estimate.
Details of the Companys equitysettled sharebased payments are included in note 28 to the Group accounts.
2 Profitloss for the year As permitted by FRS 102 the Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account for the period.
The loss after tax for the year ended 30 September 2017 was 5.5m 2016 profit of 21.1m.
The auditors remuneration for audit and other services is disclosed in note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
3 Staff costs a Number of employees The average number of persons including Directors employed by the Company during the year was as follows
No.
Directors 7 7 b Employee costs Their aggregate remuneration comprised Wages and salaries 2064 954 Social security costs 285 132 Sharebased payments  3 2349 1083 Highest paid Director 1035 497 1 Basis of preparation and accounting policies continued 1 Basis of preparation and accounting policies Notes to the Company Accounts For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements 2017 2016 Per share Settled in cash Settled in scrip Per share Settled in cash Settled in scrip Amounts recognised as distributions to equity holders in the year Final dividend in respect of the prior year 3.0 5350 2497 4.9 12436 Interim dividend in respect of the current year 1.5 3328 686 1.5 3158 720 4.5 8678 3183 6.4 15594 720 The Directors are proposing a final dividend for the year ended 30 September 2017 of 2.5p per ordinary share a distribution of approximately 6.7m.
A scrip dividend alternative is available allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
The proposed final dividend is subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
Under the terms of the trust deed dated 20 October 1998 the ITE Group Employees Share Trust which holds 2783585 2016 2869603 ordinary shares representing 1.0% of the Companys called up ordinary share capital has agreed to waive all dividends due to it each year.
5 Fixed assets Investments in subsidiaries The Company has investments in the following subsidiary undertakings.
The principal activity of all the companies listed is the organisation of exhibitions and conferences except RAS Publishing Limited which publishes trade magazines.
Subsidiary undertakings Address Effective Holding % ITE Holdings Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Enterprises Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 International Trade and Exhibitions JV Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Exhibitions and Conferences Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Finmark S.
Via del Cestello 4 40124 Bologna Italy Ordinary shares 100 ITE Eurasian Exhibitions FZ LLC Al Shatha Tower 26th Floor  Office 2613 Sheikh Zayed Road  Dubai UAE Ordinary shares 100 International Trade and Exhibitions ITE Worldwide B.
Business Center Demka Demkaweg 11 3555 HW Utrecht The Netherlands Ordinary shares 100 ITE Exhibitions BV Business Center Demka Demkaweg 11 3555 HW Utrecht The Netherlands Ordinary shares 100 ITE Expo LLC Verhniaia Krasnoselskaya st.
32 Moscow
Ordinary shares 100 OOO Primexpo 24 A Yakubovicha str.
St. etersburg
Ordinary shares 100 Primexpo North West LLC 24 A Yakubovicha str.
St. etersburg
Ordinary shares 100 ZAO Primexpo 24 A Yakubovicha str.
St. etersburg
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Siberia Novosibirsk ul.
Station 104 Russia Ordinary shares 100 Krasnodar Expo 1 Kongressnaya Str.
Krasnodar Russia Ordinary shares 100 ITECA LLP 42 Timiryazev str.
Almaty Kazakhstan Ordinary shares 100 Iteca Caspian LLC 15 Nobel ave.
Azure Business Center 7th floor Baku AZ1025  Azerbaijan Ordinary shares 100 ITE Uzbekistan 59A Mustakillik Ave.
Tashkent
Uzbekistan
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Moda Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 RAS Publishing Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Subsidiary undertakings Address Effective Holding % ITE Moda Footwear Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Jacket Required Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 E Uluslararasi Fuar Tantitim Hizmetleri A.
19 Mays Caddesi Golden Plaza Kat7 ili stanbul Turkey Ordinary shares 100 Yem Fuar 19 Mays Caddesi Golden Plaza Kat7 ili stanbul Turkey Ordinary shares 100 Platform Exhibitions Inc 19 Mays Caddesi Golden Plaza Kat7 ili stanbul Turkey Ordinary shares 100 Premier Expo Pimonenko 13 4a21 Ukraine Ordinary shares 100 Beautex Co LLC Pimonenko 13 4a21 Ukraine Ordinary shares 100 Airgate Holdings Limited 42 Dositheou Strovolos Nicosia 2028 Cyprus Ordinary shares 100 International Trade and Exhibitions India Private Ltd B10011014 Statesman House 29 Barakhamaba Road New Delhi India Ordinary shares 100 ITE Asia Pacific SDN BHD A1102A Empire Tower Office Empire Subang Jalan SS161 47500 Subang Jaya Malaysia Ordinary shares 100 Trade Link ITE SDN BHD A1102A Empire Tower Office Empire Subang Jalan SS161 47500 Subang Jaya Malaysia Ordinary shares 100 ITE Holdings Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Enterprises Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Premier ITE A1102A Empire Tower Office Empire Subang Jalan SS161 47500 Subang Jaya Malaysia Ordinary shares 100 ITE Asia Pte Ltd 78 Shenton Way 2602 Singapore  Ordinary shares 100 ITE Asia Exhibitions Ltd Suite 1004 10th Floor Bank of America Tower 12 Harcourt Road Central Hong Kong Ordinary shares 100 Cementone Properties Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 IEG International Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Events South Africa Pty Ltd StoneMill Office Park 1B Cornerstone House 1st Floor 300 Acacia Road Darrenwood 2194 South Africa Ordinary shares 100 ITE Russia Ltd The Old Town Hall Lewisham Road Slaithwaite Huddersfield HD7 5AL United Kingdom Ordinary shares 100 ITE US Exhibitions Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Europe Exhibitions Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE International Holdings BV Business Center Demka Demkaweg 11 3555 HW Utrecht The Netherlands Ordinary shares 100 RAS Holdings Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 WWB Magazines Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 MWB Magazines Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Asian Business Exhibition and Conferences Ltd 530 Laxmi Plaza Laxmi Industrial Estate New Link Road Andheri West Mumbai
Ordinary shares 60 Shanghai ITE Ebseek Exhibitions Co Ltd Room 1801 B1 Wanda SquareNo.2707 Kaichuang Avenue Huangpu District.
Guangzhou China Ordinary shares 70 ITE Ebseek Exhibitions Co Ltd 13F Connaught Harbourfront House Nos 35 36 Connaught West Hong Kong Ordinary shares 70 5 Fixed assets continued 4 Dividends Notes to the Company Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Subsidiary undertakings Address Effective Holding % ITE Gehua International Exhibition Hong Kong Company Ltd 13F Connaught Harbourfront House Nos 35 36 Connaught West Hong Kong Ordinary shares 70 ITE Asia Exhibitions Limited 13F Connaught Harbourfront House Nos 35 36 Connaught West Hong Kong Ordinary shares 100 The Hub Hong Kong Limited 1702 17F One Peking 1 Peking Road Hong
Ordinary shares 50.1 PT ITE Exhibitions Indonesia Ltd Jl.
Maritim Raya No.
4A Cilandak Barat Jakarta Selatan Dki Jakarta Indonesia Ordinary shares 51 ITE Footwear Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Expo UK Ltd The Old Town Hall Lewisham Road Slaithwaite Huddersfield HD7 5AL United Kingdom Ordinary shares 100 ITE International Trade and Exhibitions EURL 24 route du CAP 16412 Bordj El Kiffan Algeria Ordinary shares 100 ITECA ALATOO LLC 115 A str.
Iwbraimov Bishkek Kyrgyzstan Ordinary shares 100 ITE International Exhibitions and Conferences Service Beijing Co Ltd Room 705Building 40BPUSP No.1 Disheng North Road BDA Beijing P.
Ordinary shares 100 Azerexpomontage Baku Expo Centre AZ 1050 H.
Aliyev ave.
Surakhani District Baku Azerbaijan Ordinary shares 46 Too Kazexpomontag LLP Timiryazev Str.
42 2nd Floor Almaty
Ordinary shares 100 International Trade and Exhibitions Overseas
105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Intermedia Exhibitions and Conferences Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Overseas Holdings BV Business Center Demka Demkaweg 11 3555 HW Utrecht The Netherlands Ordinary shares 100 ITE Eurasian Exhibitions Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITECA Kavkasia Apt.54 7 Shavgulidze str.
Tbilisi Georgia Ordinary shares 100 ITE Russia LLC UK Ltd The Old Town Hall Lewisham Road Slaithwaite Huddersfield HD7 5AL United Kingdom Ordinary shares 100 Scoop International Fashion Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 95 Summit Trade Events Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Breakbulk UK Holdco Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Breakbulk US Holdco Inc One Gateway Centre Suite 2600 Newark New Jersey NJ07102 Ordinary shares 100 Breakbulk Ireland Ltd Friars Gate Kinsale Co Cork Ireland Ordinary shares 100 Breakbulk US Opco Inc One Gateway Centre Suite 2600 Newark New Jersey NJ07102 Ordinary shares 100 Breakbulk Events and Media China Ltd Room 1703 Soho Building No.
575 Wusong Rd Hongkou District Shanghai China Ordinary shares 100 Africa Oil Week Ltd 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 ITE Global LLC Verhniaia Krasnoselskaya st.
32 Moscow
Ordinary shares 100 International Trade and Exhibitions Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 Premier ITE A1102A Empire Tower Office Empire Subang Jalan SS161 47500 Subang Jaya Malaysia Ordinary shares 100 ITE Asia Pte Ltd 78 Shenton Way 2602 Singapore  Ordinary shares 100 ITE Asia Exhibitions Ltd Suite 1004 10th Floor Bank of America Tower 12 Harcourt Road Central Hong Kong Ordinary shares 100 Subsidiary undertakings Address Effective Holding % Cementone Properties Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 IEG International Limited 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG United
Ordinary shares 100 1 Held directly by ITE Group plc.
The Company has guaranteed the liabilities of the following subsidiary undertakings in order that they qualify for the exemption from audit granted by s479A of the Companies Act.
The Directors of the Company expect that the possibility of this guarantee being called upon is remote.
Subsidiary undertakings
Intermedia Exhibitions and Conferences Ltd ITE Eurasian Exhibitions Ltd IEG International Ltd ITE Enterprises Ltd International Trade and Exhibitions Overseas Ltd ITE Russia Ltd ITE Holdings Ltd ITE US Exhibitions Ltd ITE Europe Exhibitions Ltd ITE Russia LLC UK Ltd RAS Holdings Ltd Summit Trade Events Ltd Breakbulk UK Holdco Ltd Africa Oil Week Ltd International Trade and Exhibitions Limited ITE Moda Limited RAS Publishing Limited ITE Moda Footwear Ltd Jacket Required Limited Scoop International Fashion Limited 5 Fixed assets continued 5 Fixed assets continued Notes to the Company Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Subsidiary undertakings
Capital
Contribution
Loans
Total
Cost
1 October 2016 1429 6283 23574 31286 Capital contribution  218  218 30 September 2017 1429 6501 23574 31504 Provision for impairment 1 October 2016 and 30 September 2017 429  23574 24003 Net Book Value 30 September 2017 1000 6501  7501 30 September 2016 1000 6283  7283 Intangible assets
Cost
30 September 2016 94 Additions in the year 9 30 September 2017 103
30 September 2016 38 Charge in the year 8 30 September 2017 46 Net book value 30 September 2017 57 30 September 2016 56 6 Debtors due within one year Amounts owed by Group undertakings 150676 152716 Prepayments and accrued income 992 1576 Corporation tax  Group relief 60 Other debtors 15 25 Deferred tax note 7 151743 154317 The amounts owed by Group undertakings are payable on demand and bear no interest.
7 Deferred tax At the balance sheet date the Company has unused tax losses of 10.5m 2016 4.9m available for offset against future profits.
No deferred tax asset has been recognised in respect of these losses due to the unpredictability of future profit streams.
Bank overdraft 4063 3016 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 13058 9533 Accruals 260 202 Other creditors 128 698 17509 13449 The amounts owed to Group undertakings are payable on demand and bear no interest.
At a Group level the overdraft is offset by cash pooling arrangements with other Group companies.
9 Called up share capital and reserves
375000000 ordinary shares of 1 pence each 2016 375000000 3750 3750 Allotted and fullypaid 269280274 ordinary shares of 1 pence each 2016 262139673 2693 2621 During the year the Group exercised its put option in respect of the acquisition of an additional 25% shareholding in Africa Oil Week.
The consideration was settled through the allotment and issue of 2791120 ordinary shares of 1p each.
The Company announced a scrip dividend alternative for the year ended 30 September 2016 final dividend allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
As a result of this 1605813 new ordinary shares of 1p each were issued.
The
Company also announced a scrip dividend alternative for the year ended 30 September 2017 interim dividend allowing shareholders to elect to receive their dividend in the form of new ordinary shares.
As a result of this 444289 new ordinary shares of 1p each were issued.
No 2016 nil ordinary shares were issued in respect of Directors remuneration.
The total consideration for the shares issued was nil 2016 nil.
The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carry no right to fixed income.
At the Extraordinary General Meeting held on 17 November 1998 shareholders approved the establishment of the ITE Group Employee Share Ownership Trust ESOT.
The terms of the ESOT allow the trustees to transfer shares to employees who exercise options under the Companys Share Option Schemes to grant options to employees and to accumulate shares by buying in the market or subscribing for shares at market value.
The ESOT is capable of holding a maximum of 5% of the Companys issued ordinary share capital.
The ESOT reserve arises in connection with the Employee Share Ownership Trust.
The amount of the reserve represents the deduction in arriving at shareholders funds for the consideration paid for the Companys shares purchased by the Trust which had not vested unconditionally in employees at the end of each financial year.
The ESOT held 2783585 shares in ITE Group plc at 30 September 2017 2016 2869603 shares.
During the year no share options and 1908175 nominal share options under the Employees Performance Share Plan were granted against ESOT held shares.
No shares 2016 none were purchased for the ESOT.
The market value of the ordinary shares held by the ESOT at 30 September 2017 was 5.0m 2016 The Company has agreed to make available to the ESOT an interestfree loan of up to 12.5m for the purpose of buying shares.
At
30 September 2017 the amount of the loan drawn down was 11.6m.
The ITE Group plc Companyonly profit and loss account and balance sheet include the results of the ESOT for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The trustees have waived their current and future rights to all dividend entitlement on the shares held by the ESOT.
86018 options were exercised from ESOT during the year.
The total consideration for the options exercised from ESOT was 70000.
8249626 of outstanding options are to be settled by ESOT so all shares held by the ESOT are under option as at 30 September 2017.
Details of the options in issue and their exercise dates can be seen at note 28 to the consolidated accounts.
The Companys profit and loss reserve is 112.2m 2016 126.2m.
Part of this balance is nondistributable as it does not meet the requirements for recognition as distributable reserves therefore the distributable reserves of the Company and therefore the Group are 16.8m 2016 46.6m.
8 Trade and other creditors 5 Fixed assets continued Notes to the Company Accounts continued For the year ended 30 September 2017 Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Shareholder Information Shareholder profile as at 30 September 2017 Financial calendar Pre close announcement 2 October 2017 Preliminary results announcement 28 November 2017 Annual General Meeting 25 January 2018 Q1 IMS 25 January 2018 Interim results announcement 8 May 2018 Q3 IMS 10 July 2018 Range of holdings Number of shareholders
Ordinary
Percentage of issued share capital 1100 215 19.44 5822 0.00 100110000 372 33.63 1139609 0.42 10001100000 125 11.30 4335988 1.61 1000011000000 75 6.78 24994177 9.28 1000001highest 43 3.90 238662842 88.64 1106 100.00 269280274 100.00
Number of shareholders
Ordinary
Percentage of issued share capital Private individuals 756 68.35 3413770 1.27 Nominee companies 264 23.87 244273293 90.71 Limited and Public Limited Companies 56 5.06 19202492 7.13 Other organisations and banks 30 2.72 2390719 0.89 1106 100.00 269280274 100.00 Share price London Stock Exchange pence per 1 pence shares Highest 187.25p Lowest 133.00p Dividend calendar Final dividend 2017 Exdividend date 4 January 2018 Record date 5 January 2018 Payment date 5 February 2018 Interim dividend 2018 Exdividend date 21 June 2018 Record date 22 June 2018 Payment date 2 August 2018 Dividend mandates Shareholders who wish dividends to be paid directly into a bank or building society account should contact the Registrar for a dividend mandate form.
This method of payment removes the risk of delay or loss of dividend cheques in the post and ensures that your account is credited on the due date.
SCRIP dividend A SCRIP dividend allows the Company to issue a dividend to the appropriate shareholders while retaining the relevant capital within the
Rather than receiving a cash dividend the shareholder can elect to receive the equivalent value of shares as newly allotted shares reducing the amount of cash reserves paid out by the Company.
Share dealing services The Companys Registrar Equiniti Limited offers a telephone and internet dealing service Shareview which provides a simple and convenient way of buying and selling shares.
For telephone dealings call 0telbetween 8.00am and 4.30pm Monday to Friday and for internet dealings log onto sitedealing.
Electronic communications Shareholders can elect to receive shareholder documents electronically by registering with Shareview at site This will save on printing and distribution costs creating environmental benefits.
When you register you will be sent an email notification to say when shareholder documents are available on our website and you will be provided with a link to that information.
When registering you will need your shareholder reference number which can be found on your share certificate or proxy form.
Please contact Equiniti if you require any assistance or further information.
Financial statements Governance Strategic report ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Directors Advisers and Other Information Notes
Neil England Nonexecutive Chairman Mark Shashoua
Chief Executive Officer
Andrew Beach Chief Financial Officer Appointed 17 October 2016 Linda Jensen Senior Independent Director and Nonexecutive Director Sharon Baylay Nonexecutive Director Stephen Puckett Nonexecutive Director Marco Sodi Nonexecutive Chairman and Director Resigned as Chairman 13 July 2017 and as Nonexecutive Director 11 October 2017.
Company Secretary Anneka Kingan Registered office ITE Group plc 105 Salusbury Road London NW6 6RG Registration number
Deloitte LLP 2 New Street Square London EC4A 3BZ
CMS Cameron McKenna Nabarro Olswang LLP Cannon Place 78 Cannon Street London EC4N 6AF Principal bankers Barclays Bank plc 1 Churchill Place London E14 5HP
Canada Square London E14 5LB Commerzbank AG 30 Gresham Street London EC2V 7PG HSBC Bank plc 60 Queen Victoria Street London EC4N 4TR Company brokers Numis Securities Ltd The London Stock Exchange Building 10 Paternoster Square London EC4M 7LT
Equiniti Ltd Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA Public relations FTI Consulting Ltd 200 Aldersgate Aldersgate Street London EC1A 4HD
ITE Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes ITE Group plc 105 Salusbury Road
NW6 6RG
