ENGINEERING
INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR THE FUTURE RENEW HOLDINGS PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS YEAR ENDED 30 SEPTEMBER 2017 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We provide essential engineering services to maintain and renew UK infrastructure networks.
Our multidisciplinary engineering services are delivered through our independently branded UK subsidiary businesses that support the daytoday running of these infrastructure networks.
ENGINEERING
INFRASTRUCTURE
FOR THE FUTURE Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 1 STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGIC REPORT 1 Highlights 2 At a glance 4 Chairmans statement 6 Chief Executives review 10 Business model 11 Investment case 12 Markets 14 Strategy and KPIs 16 Operational review  Energy 18 Operational review  Environmental 20 Operational review  Infrastructure Operational review Specialist Building 24 Sustainability
Financial review
28 Risk management CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 29 Board of Directors 30 Corporate governance 32 Directors report 35 Directors remuneration report Statement of Directors responsibilities FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 40 Independent auditors report 45 Group income statement Group statement of comprehensive income Group statement of changes in equity 47 Group balance sheet 48 Group cashflow statement 49 Notes to the accounts 74 Company balance sheet Company statement of comprehensive income Company statement of changes in equity 76 Notes to the company accounts 87 Directorssite
RESULTS
FOR THE YEAR Revenue increased 7% to 560.8m 2016 525.7m including 2.2m from share in a joint venture Engineering Services order book increased 4% to 438m 2016 421m Dividend per share increased by 13% to 9.0p 2016 8.0p Acquisition of Giffen Holdings Limited Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2 STRATEGIC REPORT At a glance WHO WE ARE Renew is a holding company which gives autonomy to its operating subsidiaries enabling them to be competitive and effective in their individual markets whilst setting overall standards.
We seek to deliver value to shareholders through our established and proven strategy providing reliable capital growth alongside a progressive dividend policy.
Our independently branded subsidiary businesses have expert knowledge in their individual markets and directly deliver engineering services aligned to the needs of our clients many of whom are responsible for the longterm maintenance and renewal of national infrastructure networks.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 3 STRATEGIC REPORT
We work in the nuclear thermal renewable energy and gas infrastructure markets providing a range of engineering services.
We provide essential maintenance and renewals nationally including at nuclear facilities power stations and renewable energy sites as well as undertaking largescale gas mains replacements in the South.
Environmental
Working in the water sector we undertake a wide range of engineering support across the clean and wastewater infrastructure networks.
Tasks range from trunk mains cleaning and renewals to 247 repairs on the water network for our clients.
Our specialist land remediation activities in particular our sitebased remediation techniques have a range of applications.
We work for clients including local authorities and waste management groups.
Infrastructure
Working nationally for Network Rail as well as London Underground and Train Operating Companies we provide innovative and specialist engineering services across the rail network.
We deliver planned maintenance on thousands of infrastructure assets including bridges viaducts and culverts as well as specialist solutions for tunnels on some of the busiest routes on the rail network.
Our 247 emergency support services see us deliver some of the most technically challenging operations on the network to help keep trains running.
High Quality
We focus on providing specialist engineering expertise for major structural alteration works both above and below ground and specialist temporary works engineering for high value properties in London and the Home Counties.
WHAT WE OFFER Our range of multidisciplinary engineering services means we are ideally positioned to undertake the essential maintenance and renewal tasks associated with operating some of the countrys largest infrastructure networks.
We focus on the Energy Environmental and Infrastructure markets in the UK and support clients responsible for a range of assets including nuclear facilities clean and wastewater networks and rail and wireless telecoms networks.
Energy page 16
Infrastructure
Specialist Building page 22 SPECIALIST BUILDING ENGINEERING SERVICES Our subsidiary business brands Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 4 STRATEGIC REPORT
The Board is pleased to announce strong results for the year ended 30 September 2017.
These results reflect our position as a leading provider of engineering services to many of the UKs critical infrastructure assets and in particular our strength in the nuclear rail and water markets.
Group revenue including 2.2m from a joint venture increased by 6.7% to 560.8m 2016 525.7m with operating profit prior to impairment amortisation and exceptional items increasing by 16.4% to 25.6m 2016 22.0m an operating margin of 4.6% 2016 4.2%.
After accounting for impairment amortisation and exceptional items of 8.9m operating profit was 16.6m 2016 19.0m.
After finance costs and tax earnings per share prior to impairment amortisation and exceptional items increased by 21.6% to 33.36p 2016 27.43p.
After accounting for impairment amortisation and exceptional items basic earnings per share on continuing activities was 19.88p 2016 23.53p.
Exceptional Items At the end of April 2017 the Group decided to withdraw from its lossmaking low pressure small diameter gas pipe replacement activities and as a result reviewed the carrying value of its investment in that business.
The Board determined that a noncash impairment charge of 5.8m should be made which is included within exceptional items.
This was reported in the interim results.
Our gas operations are now completely focused on medium pressure activities.
This restructuring has resulted in 0.6m of exceptional charges relating to redundancy and other costs.
Dividend
The Board is proposing a final dividend of 6.0p per share increasing the full year dividend by 12.5% to 9.0p 2016 8.0p.
The dividend will be paid on 13 March 2018 to shareholders on the register as at 2 February 2018.
Order Book The Groups order book at 30 September 2017 was 511m 2016 516m with the Engineering Services order book up 4% to 438m 2016 421m.
Cash
The Board is pleased to record a net cash position of 3.9m 2016 4.8m.
This is after expending 7.2m on the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Limited Giffen in November 2016.
A LEADING PROVIDER OF ENGINEERING SERVICES Strong results for the year ended 30 September 2017 Engineering Services order book up 4% to 438m The Groups operations focus on delivering essential infrastructure maintenance tasks in targeted regulated markets within the UK
THE BOARD LOOKS FORWARD WITH CONFIDENCE TO THE GROUP CONTINUING TO DELIVER FURTHER STRONG FINANCIAL RESULTS.
Chairmans statement Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 5
Safety remains a top priority and the commitment of our employees and those who work with us continues to improve safe working practices across the Group.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank all our employees for their hard work and commitment which has contributed to another successful year for the Group.
Board Changes As previously reported John Samuel the Group Finance Director will resign from that position on 29 November 2017 and will be succeeded by Sean WyndhamQuin who joined the Group and was appointed to the Board on 8 November 2017.
In April the Board was pleased to welcome the appointment of David Brown as a nonexecutive Director.
Having served as a Director since November 2003 I have decided to retire at the next Annual General Meeting which will be held on 31 January 2018.
David Forbes who has served as a nonexecutive Director since June 2011 will assume the position of Chairman providing continuity of leadership and I wish David every success going forward.
Strategy
The Groups operations focus on delivering essential infrastructure maintenance tasks in targeted regulated markets within the UK.
As a result we have not experienced any adverse impact following the UKs announcement of its intention to withdraw from the European Union nor do we expect to.
We deliver our services through our clients nondiscretionary operational expenditure programmes which provide good visibility of future opportunities and sustainable earnings streams.
We continue to seek out appropriate earnings enhancing acquisitions in our Engineering Services markets.
In
November 2016 we acquired Giffen a specialist mechanical electrical and power services provider in the rail market.
Integration with our existing rail business has gone well and we believe that our enhanced rail offering strengthens our ability to address additional framework opportunities in Network Rails next funding period CP6.
In Specialist Building the Group focuses on the High Quality Residential market in London and the Home Counties where we have particular skills in major engineering structural works to extend or reconfigure high value properties.
Outlook
The Group is well positioned for the 201718 financial year.
Bank debt will have been completely repaid by 31 March 2018.
Following a year in which Specialist Building revenue has been particularly high we expect that it will reduce perhaps by as much as 35m in the 201718 financial year.
We remain confident that we will continue to deliver stable operating profits in that business.
In Engineering Services the order book provides a solid foundation for continued growth.
The Board looks forward with confidence to the Group continuing to deliver further strong financial results.
R J Harrison OBE
21 November 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 6 STRATEGIC REPORT
Chief Executives review
ESSENTIAL INFRASTRUCTURE
These strong results demonstrate that our focus on delivering essential maintenance services in regulated markets continues to provide robust longterm opportunities.
Operational Review Engineering Services Revenue has grown to 452.4m 2016 436.2m including 2.2m from a joint venture.
During the year activity levels in the Environmental market have been strong particularly on the current AMP6 investment programme which has seen clients programmes move from early planning and design phases into delivery.
In Energy revenue was lower than 2016 as we withdrew from the lossmaking small diameter lowpressure gas market and a major scheme we were involved with at Sellafield moved into the commissioning phase.
In Infrastructure revenue in both Rail and Wireless Telecoms increased.
Our integrated multidisciplinary services are essential to clients responsible for delivering maintenance and renewals programmes in regulated markets.
Our selectivity and direct delivery model has resulted in an operating profit prior to impairment amortisation and exceptional items of 25.1m 2016 21.5m an increase of 3.6m 16.7%.
The operating margin on this basis improved to 5.6% 2016 4.9%.
After accounting for impairment amortisation and exceptional items of 8.9m 2016 3.0m operating profit was 16.2m 2016 18.6m resulting in an operating margin of 3.6% 2016 4.3%.
Our Engineering Services order book grew 4% in the period to 438m 2016 421m.
The order book reflects our established position in markets which benefit from longterm nondiscretionary programmes supporting the maintenance and renewal of key infrastructure assets.
In the year we extended our range of services in Rail with the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Ltd Giffen.
The acquisition broadened our offering as a major engineering services provider to Network Rail as well as providing services to London Underground and Train Operating Companies.
The Group has extensive framework positions to deliver infrastructure maintenance and renewals across a range of regulated market sectors Engineering Services operating profit prior to impairment amortisation and exceptional items of 25.1m We extended our range of services in Rail with the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Ltd Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 7 STRATEGIC REPORT
We operate across the energy market for clients including Sellafield Ltd SSE Magnox E.
N and Low Level Waste Repository Limited.
We are well positioned on key frameworks associated with high hazard risk reduction operations at the Sellafield nuclear site in Cumbria.
We are strategically placed on all three lots of the tenyear Decommissioning Delivery Partnership Framework that has an estimated value of 500m with the headroom to increase to 1.5bn over the term to 2025.
Our
As previously reported our Gas business is now focused on the medium pressure market that will benefit from significant investment in the coming years to meet regulatory requirements for cast iron gas mains replacement.
Working for Southern Gas Networks we operate as exclusive provider on a regional medium pressure framework that runs to 2021.
Additionally we continue to work on large diameter mains replacements for tRIIO the vehicle used by National Grid for its mains replacement programmes in the South East.
Whilst the performance of our gas business has continued to be disappointing structural and commercial measures have been implemented to move the business back into growth and profitability in the second half of 2018.
Environmental
In Water we have seen increased activity in the current AMP6 investment period.
Major frameworks include the Sewerage Repairs and Maintenance Framework for Northumbrian Water and the Civils and EMI Capital Delivery Partners Framework for Wessex Water.
For Welsh Water we have been reappointed to the Pressurised Pipelines Framework.
This new sevenyear framework which has an advertised value of 329m covers all Welsh regions and incorporates the current Emergency Reactive Framework.
Additionally we continue to operate on the Major Civils Framework and the Capital Delivery Alliance Civils contracts.
In the period we were appointed as sole supplier on the national sevenyear MEICA Framework for Canal and River Trust which will see us support around 1000 water assets for this new client.
Work continues as sole provider for the Environment Agency on the Northern MEICA Framework and through four national Minor Works frameworks.
In Land Remediation we operate on frameworks to remediate the sites of former gasworks for clients including National Grid and SGN.
These positions are complemented by projects for repeat clients and 2017 has seen another major remediation contract successfully carried out for Glasgow City Council.
At the Palace of Westminster the cast iron roof restoration is progressing well and puts us in a good position for future opportunities at this World Heritage site.
During the year the Courtyards Conservation Framework was extended to 2025.
Infrastructure
We work as a leading provider of infrastructure services to Network Rail on the current investment period CP5 that runs to March 2019 delivering a high volume of asset maintenance and renewals tasks nationally.
During the year we worked on over 5000 individual remits with an average value of 11000 as well as approximately 300 larger projects.
We deliver planned and reactive works across the network as well as emergency support responding to some of the most challenging emergency events on the rail network.
We continue to develop our position in Scotland as the major structures renewals contractor.
The Government recently announced an increase in funding to 48bn for CP6 the next period of Network Rail expenditure which runs from 2019 to 2024.
CP6 will focus on both maintenance and renewals on the rail network as key priorities.
We believe that the Group is particularly strongly placed to benefit from this spending profile.
The acquisition of Giffen has increased our opportunities in the Rail market including London Underground.
Already schemes incorporating the joint skill sets of Giffen and Amco Rail have been secured and we expect this to represent an increasing proportion of our work in the Rail sector going forward.
In Wireless Telecoms we continue to see profitability improve in a market driven by increasing demand for capacity and better geographical coverage particularly on the 4G rollout programme.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 8 STRATEGIC REPORT Operational Review continued Specialist Building Revenue was 106.8m 2016 90.5m with an operating profit of 2.4m 2016 2.3m.
At the year end the order book stood at 73m 2016 95m.
In Specialist Building where we focus on the High Quality Residential market in London and the Home Counties the forward order book can vary from period to period dependent on the timing of client projects.
Renews focus remains on delivering stable operating profits whilst reducing risk through contract selectivity and management of contract terms.
Summary
The Group remains committed to the growth of its Engineering Services business where appropriate margins can be delivered.
Our established strategy focuses on Infrastructure markets with nondiscretionary longterm funding Operational expenditure budgets for renewal and maintenance operations Utilising our directly employed workforce to develop relationships built on responsiveness The UK is committed to longterm investment in its critical infrastructure networks.
The Group has extensive framework positions to deliver infrastructure maintenance and renewals across a range of regulated market sectors which provide good levels of opportunities.
The Board remains confident that our direct delivery model and ability to respond in markets where demand will continue to provide the opportunities for sustainable growth.
P Scott Chief Executive 21 November 2017 OUR INTEGRATED MULTIDISCIPLINARY SERVICES ARE ESSENTIAL TO CLIENTS RESPONSIBLE FOR DELIVERING MAINTENANCE AND RENEWALS PROGRAMMES IN REGULATED MARKETS.
Engineering Services revenue m teltel 44tel Engineering Services order book m 438mteltel 40telOperational review page 16 Chief Executives review continued Includes 2.2m from share in a joint venture.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 9 STRATEGIC REPORT THE UK IS COMMITTED TO LONGTERM INVESTMENT IN ITS CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORKS.
THE GROUP HAS EXTENSIVE FRAMEWORK POSITIONS TO DELIVER INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE AND RENEWALS ACROSS A RANGE OF REGULATED MARKET SECTORS WHICH PROVIDE GOOD LEVELS OF OPPORTUNITIES.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 10 STRATEGIC REPORT Business model HOW WE DELIVER VALUE Ensuring the consistent delivery of quality We are committed to ensuring we consistently deliver quality.
Our businesses focus on maintaining and improving standards across their operations including in logistics training technology sustainability and in the management of their supply chain.
We strive to continue to develop and improve our business processes.
By the effective management and control of our subsidiary businesses we deliver shareholder value through capital growth and a progressive dividend policy.
Safe delivery of our services is paramount Safety remains the Groups priority.
Our safe operations are managed by our subsidiary businesses alongside their safety advisors who have specific knowledge in the individual environments.
Safety advisors share knowledge and best practice assisting our businesses in maintaining their high safety standards.
We are pleased that our commitment to reducing unsafe working practices has resulted in a further improvement in the Groups accident incident rate in the year.
Development of longterm positions in target markets We support the daytoday operational requirements of some of the countrys key infrastructure and as such we build strong relationships with our clients many of which we have worked with for many years.
We provide both planned and responsive services where we fulfil a high volume of lowcost tasks on a range of assets through longterm framework agreements.
Our responsive engineering services combined with consistent delivery mean we are well positioned to work on some of the largest asset maintenance and renewal frameworks nationally which are largely delivered through our clients operational expenditure budgets.
Development and delivery of our growth strategy We focus on developing our engineering services both organically and by acquisition to broaden our service offering to existing and new clients.
Organic growth is achieved by aligning our operating subsidiaries with their clients daytoday service requirements on key infrastructure assets.
The Group also continues to look for complementary acquisition opportunities where businesses have strong relationships in regulated markets.
Ensuring thorough risk management Our subsidiary businesses are governed by a system of controls that includes our Group minimum standards.
These standards are monitored by an internal audit process to ensure compliance.
Minimum requirements ensure compliance in areas such as risk management control environment and activities information and communication and the evaluation of effectiveness to deliver robust commercial risk management.
Regular operational and financial reporting is supported by monthly management meetings attended by a Group Executive member Executive Management Committee meetings and monthly Main Board meetings.
Each subsidiary business is required to have a management system in place certified to at least ISO 9001.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 11 Investment case Complementary acquisitions The Group seeks to make earnings enhancing acquisitions in businesses that operate in mainly regulated markets and whose skills complement existing capabilities within the Group.
We focus on broadening our skills and market opportunities through selective acquisitions.
Working in markets with high barriers to entry Many of our businesses work in markets with high barriers to entry.
The nuclear rail and gas markets demand a highly skilled and experienced workforce and a proven track record of safe delivery.
Mainly regulated markets provide visibility Our target markets are mainly regulated and are driven by longterm programmes of spending on asset renewal and maintenance often lasting many years.
The asset management programmes in water and rail are examples of the longterm funding requirements associated with national infrastructure networks.
Developing longterm relationships Directly delivering an innovative and responsive service has proven to be a differentiator in our markets.
Positioned as a key supplier to our clients we assist them in maintaining their assets and providing continuity of service.
Cash generation The Group has consistently generated cash from operations enabling it to maximise shareholder return.
Cash generation assists the Group in the fulfilment of its acquisition strategy and is a strong indicator of the strength of the Groups operations.
Capital growth The Group has grown its market capitalisation more than ninefold since 30 September 2005 without recourse to new equity.
DELIVERING
GROWTH
The regulated markets in which we operate have high barriers to entry and alongside the Groups extensive expertise in delivering asset care and maintenance provide strong opportunities for growth.
Continued sustainable growth The Group continues to deliver organic growth whilst looking to build on its strengths through selective acquisitions in both existing and new markets.
Margin improvement and the development of our strong client relationships remain key features of our strategy moving forward.
Key growth drivers STRATEGIC REPORT Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 12 STRATEGIC REPORT
MARKETS DRIVEN BY REGULATION Our clients infrastructure networks are some of the largest and oldest in the country and comprise a range of complex and challenging assets.
Regulation exists to maintain operational standards on these critical networks with maintenance requirements delivered through longterm programmes of care with visible funding.
ENERGY
Nuclear
The UK governments commitment to dealing with the nuclear legacy continues.
The latest government forecast to manage the whole of the mission is 70bn discounted at todays prices with a programme lasting until 2120.
The Nuclear Decommissioning Authoritys mediumterm forecasts indicate a rate of expenditure of around 3bn per annum with around 70% of this commitment at Sellafield.
New nuclear power is an essential part of the governments objective of delivering a sustainable and lowcarbon energy future to meet increasing demand.
Thermal renewable and gas infrastructure There remain good opportunities in the renewable energy market as the UK responds to increasing energy demand whilst looking to deliver its targets for renewable power generation.
In gas the regulator Ofgem has mandated the replacement of the ageing gas distribution network over a thirty year period to 2032.
ENVIRONMENTAL
Water
UK water companies regulated by Ofwat undertake longterm investment programmes on their infrastructure networks.
In the current five year investment period AMP6 we estimate our clients Northumbrian Water Wessex Water and Dwr Cymru Welsh Water will spend around 3.2bn on maintaining their water infrastructure assets.
The UK government has also committed a record 2.3bn investment in coastal and river flood risk management to 2021.
Land remediation The Environment Agency estimates that in England and Wales approximately 300000 hectares of land could potentially be affected by historical contamination.
In the UK the focus on brownfield land as a potential solution to the UKs land shortage provides opportunities for our remediation services.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 13 STRATEGIC REPORT
Rail
Network Rail is investing around 41bn in the current control period CP5 to 2019 in running maintaining and improving Britains railway.
The government recently announced an increase in funding to 48bn for CP6 which runs from 2019 to 2024.
CP6 will focus on both maintenance and renewals on the rail network as key priorities.
Wireless telecoms The wireless telecoms infrastructure market remains attractive as demand for mobile internet access and communication continues to outstrip the capability and capacity of the current networks.
Licence obligations under the 4G programme continue to demand significant investment and our addressable market remains strong.
SPECIALIST BUILDING High quality residential The high quality residential market in London and the Home Counties remains robust.
We have particular specialist engineering expertise in major structural alteration works both above and below ground.
References
Nuclear Decommissioning Authority Nuclear provision explaining the cost of cleaning up Britains nuclear legacy February 2015.
Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs Reducing the risks of flooding and coastal erosion an investment plan December 2014.
Environment Agency Reporting the evidence.
Dealing with contaminated land in England and Wales January 2009.
Department for Transport  Railways Act 2005 Statement Statement of Funds Available October 2017.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 14 STRATEGIC REPORT Strategy and KPIs PROVEN LONGTERM
STRATEGIC PRIORITY To be a key provider of engineering services in our target markets STRATEGIC PRIORITY To focus on asset support maintenance and renewals programmes with nondiscretionary funding STRATEGIC PRIORITY To expand our direct delivery model through strong local brands PROGRESS IN 2017 We have made good progress in developing our position as a leading provider of engineering services achieving a number of key framework awards and extensions in the period including with Welsh Water and Network Rail.
Appointments to these longterm frameworks for essential maintenance services strengthen our existing relationships with clients responsible for critical UK networks.
PROGRESS IN 2017 We continued to work closely with our clients in the year providing essential maintenance services to their longterm asset management spending programmes.
These programmes which often last many years are driven by regulation with asset maintenance and renewals delivered through visible operational expenditure budgets rather than capital expenditure funding.
PROGRESS IN 2017 We continued to develop our subsidiary businesses as strong locally recognised brands within their markets.
FUTURE FOCUS Develop strategically important relationships with existing and new clients in our target markets.
Utilise skills and experience from across the Group to deliver marketleading innovation and cost efficiencies across our range of target markets.
FUTURE FOCUS Building on our reputation and responsive delivery with a focus on positioning our business to access additional essential maintenance spending programmes with our existing clients.
Use our market knowledge to align our business with potential opportunities with new clients.
FUTURE FOCUS Continue to build on our subsidiary businesses reputations for quality and responsive service within their individual markets.
Our longterm strategy concentrates on developing our range of engineering services capabilities both organically and through selective acquisitions.
The
Group targets acquisitions that bring complementary skills and allow us to deliver a wider range of services to our clients.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 15 STRATEGIC REPORT Key performance indicators The Group has certain key performance indicators KPIs which are used to measure and monitor its performance in a number of areas.
The operating profit KPIs are measured on a nonGAAP basis which reflect the most appropriate view of the underlying performance of the business.
These measures are set out in the charts below.
STRATEGIC PRIORITY To continue to deliver organic growth combined with selective complementary acquisitions PROGRESS IN 2017 Our direct delivery model and experience in a range of infrastructure markets means we have been able to respond quickly delivering innovative and costeffective solutions and ensuring continuity of service for our clients.
Our reactive services have positioned us well and have provided opportunities in our clients planned maintenance programmes.
PROGRESS IN 2017 During the year we acquired a specialist mechanical electrical and power contractor that operates in the rail market.
This acquisition was complementary to the Groups existing skills and broadens our offering as a major engineering services provider to the Rail market.
FUTURE FOCUS Develop our range of capabilities and utilise our market knowledge to align our business to our clients longterm objectives.
Continue to deliver a quality safe and costeffective service to our clients.
FUTURE FOCUS It remains the Boards longterm strategy to continue to grow its Engineering Services operations both organically and through selective complementary acquisitions.
Develop the market opportunities associated with Group acquisitions.
STRATEGIC PRIORITY To establish longterm relationships through responsiveness to clients needs Adjusted Engineering Services operating profit as a percentage of revenue % 5.6% 4.6 2013 2014 4.3 2015 4.6 2016 4.9 2017 5.6 Adjusted Group operating profit as a percentage of revenue % 4.6% 3.5 2013 2014 3.5 2015 3.9 2016 4.2 2017 4.6 Engineering Services order book m 438mtel 361tel 421 2017 438 Results are shown prior to impairment amortisation and exceptional items and exclude the results of discontinued operations.
ENERGY
NUCLEAR
Market
The UK governments commitment to dealing with the nuclear legacy continues.
The latest government forecast to manage the whole of the mission is 70bn discounted at todays prices with a programme lasting until 2120.
The Nuclear Decommissioning Authoritys NDA mediumterm forecasts indicate a rate of decommissioning expenditure of around 3bn per annum with around 70% of this commitment at Sellafield.
New nuclear power is an essential part of the governments objective of delivering a sustainable and lowcarbon energy future to meet increasing demand.
Capabilities
Our services are associated with high hazard risk reduction operations at nuclear facilities that include waste treatment reprocessing decommissioning decontamination and cleanup operations.
We deliver mechanical and electrical services specialist fabrication and machining as well as maintenance of operational plants.
Our integration of generation grid and decommissioning services proves a differentiator in this market.
Operational support and asset care Critical planned and reactive maintenance and renewals Civil mechanical and electrical engineering Nuclear decommissioning and decontamination Specialist fabrication and manufacturing
During the year we made good progress in embedding our position and securing opportunities on all three lots of the ten year Decommissioning Delivery Partnership framework at Sellafield estimated at 500m with headroom to increase expenditure to 1.5bn over the term to 2025.
At Sellafield we work on a number of longterm frameworks associated with high hazard risk reduction operations including on the Retrievals and Decommissioning Programme the Bulk Sludge Retrieval Programme the Bundling Spares Framework and the Vessels and Tanks Framework.
Our longterm engagement on high priority programmes at Sellafield provides good visibility of future opportunities and we remain strongly positioned for participation in future major project programmes at the site.
In the year we received good volumes of work associated with these major project programmes.
We have a reputation for safe delivery and in recognition Shepley Engineers Limited and subsidiary PPS Electrical Limited received an Outstanding Safety Performance award from Sellafield Limited in the year.
We remain the largest mechanical electrical and instrumentation employer at the nuclear site in Cumbria where we have recorded our eighth year of continuous operations since a reportable lost time accident.
Work continues on the Electrical Controls and Instrumentation Framework for Magnox and at Springfields for Westinghouse we continue to deliver a range of asset support services and decommissioning operations.
We have also secured additional mechanical and electrical works for LLW Repository Limited.
Future focus We continue to look for opportunities to develop our range of services in the nuclear market and have achieved strong growth in our nuclear services business over the last ten years.
It remains the Groups ambition to continue to broaden its skills in the nuclear market which has high barriers to entry and requires an exceptional safety record.
We are well positioned to provide a range of services across the Sellafield site and other UK nuclear facilities.
In the emerging new nuclear market we focus on the supply of high integrity fabrications as well as mechanical and electrical installation support to specialist equipment vendors.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 16 STRATEGIC REPORT Operational review THE GROUPS ENGINEERING SERVICES ARE FOCUSED ON SPECIFIC TARGET MARKETS NAMELY ENERGY ENVIRONMENTAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE.
THE OPERATIONAL REVIEW CONTAINS COMMENTARY AND BACKGROUND ON OUR ACTIVITIES IN EACH OF THESE THREE MARKETS.
THERMAL RENEWABLE ENERGY AND GAS INFRASTRUCTURE
There remain good opportunities in the renewable energy market as the UK responds to increasing energy demand whilst looking to deliver its targets for renewable power generation.
In gas the regulator Ofgem has mandated the replacement of the ageing gas distribution network over a thirty year period to 2032.
Capabilities
We provide longterm maintenance and asset renewal support at many of the UKs thermal power generation plants.
As a leading medium pressure gas infrastructure specialist in the UK we carry out replacement of large diameter medium pressure gas mains in London and the Home Counties.
Operational support and asset care Critical planned and reactive maintenance and renewals Civil mechanical and electrical engineering Gas distribution network asset maintenance replacement and installation Specialist flow stopping drilling and internal inspection
Through rolling framework agreements we undertake longterm asset renewal and maintenance at thermal fuel power stations for E.
N and a number of independent power station operators.
We were operational at renewable power generation sites for clients including SSE and E.
N.
We work for Southern Gas Networks on a Medium Pressure Major Works Framework in the South valued at 45m over the term to 2021.
We also continue to work on large diameter gas mains replacements for tRIIO the vehicle used by National Grid for its mains replacement programmes in the South East.
Future focus We continue to develop our existing relationships with clients responsible for assets in the thermal and renewable energy market.
Our range of capabilities and experience in maintenance and renewal nationally means we are well placed to meet the needs of a wide range of assets across this sector.
In gas we focus on the medium pressure work programmes in the South that attract a higher margin.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 17 IT REMAINS THE GROUPS AMBITION TO CONTINUE TO BROADEN ITS SKILLS IN THE NUCLEAR MARKET WHICH HAS HIGH BARRIERS TO ENTRY AND REQUIRES AN EXCEPTIONAL SAFETY RECORD.
STRATEGIC REPORT WATER
UK water companies regulated by Ofwat undertake longterm investment programmes on their infrastructure networks.
In the current five year investment period AMP6 we estimate our clients Northumbrian Water Wessex Water and Dwr Cymru Welsh Water will spend around 3.2bn on maintaining their water infrastructure assets.
The UK government has also committed a record 2.3bn investment in coastal and river flood risk management to 2021.
Capabilities
The Group has extensive expertise in delivering maintenance and renewals across water infrastructure networks.
We support our clients through asset maintenance flood alleviation and river and coastal defence schemes.
Our work includes mains replacement upgrades to the sewer network and storm water alleviation schemes.
Operational support and asset care Critical planned and reactive maintenance and renewals Civil mechanical and electrical engineering Emergency works including flood risk management programmes Maintaining strategic water mains and mains drainage Clean and wastewater rehabilitation infrastructure Port harbour and sea defences
The cyclic nature of the five year investment programme Asset Management 6 AMP6 sees many of the water companies investing at their highest rate around the middle of the programme.
For our clients Northumbrian Water Wessex Water and Dwr Cymru Welsh Water we have seen this reflected in increased spending during the period.
We continue to develop our relationship with Dwr Cymru Welsh Water increasing our direct work with this client for the third year running.
We have been reappointed to the Pressurised Pipelines Framework.
This new sevenyear framework which has an advertised value of 329m covers all Welsh regions and incorporates the current Emergency Reactive Framework.
Additionally we continue to operate on the Major Civils Framework and the Capital Delivery Alliance Civils contracts.
We work for Wessex Water on the AMP6 Civils and EMI Capital Delivery Partners Framework and Minor Civils Frameworks as well as projects including catchment schemes at FVRS and Burnham during the period.
We work for Northumbrian Water as one of two suppliers on the AMP6 Sewerage Repairs and Maintenance Framework as well as on a range of water related maintenance tasks in the period.
We were appointed as sole supplier on the seven year Mechanical Electrical Instrumentation Control and Automation MEICA Framework for the Canal and River Trust estimated at up to 3.5m per annum for the maintenance of around 1000 water assets throughout England and Wales.
Services include the maintenance renewal upgrade repair and emergency repair of mechanical hydraulic electrical telemetry instrumentation control and automation systems.
Work continues as sole provider for the Environment Agency on the Northern MEICA Framework and through four national Minor Works frameworks.
Future focus We will continue to develop the opportunities available through our existing framework agreements with our water clients supporting them in the daytoday running of their water infrastructure networks.
ENVIRONMENTAL
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 18 STRATEGIC REPORT Operational review continued LAND REMEDIATION
The Environment Agency estimates that in England and Wales approximately 300000 hectares of land could potentially be affected by historical contamination.
In the UK the focus on brownfield land as a potential solution to the UKs land shortage provides opportunities for our remediation services.
Capabilities
As an industry leader of bespoke and innovative remediation solutions we have over 30 years expertise in providing specialist remediation and associated earthworks nationwide.
Our inhouse capabilities include soil washing biophysical treatment and geotechnical improvements which can add value recovering up to 100% of soils and excavated materials on site.
Soil and groundwater remediation Soil washing biophysical treatment solidification and stabilisation enhanced segregation and geotechnical improvements Design of bespoke remediation and ground engineering solutions Inhouse technology and environmental engineering resources Remediation strategies combined with infrastructure delivery
In the year we were reappointed to the National Grid Remediation Frameworks associated with the cleanup of former gasworks sites nationally.
This appointment marks 25 years as a framework contractor for National Grid.
We continue to work for Scotia Gas Networks in Scotland and the South East as well as for Magnox nationally.
Our completed remediation schemes include the largest regeneration project in the UK outside London a major remediation project at Sighthill for Glasgow City Council.
Working alongside other Group businesses we provide land remediation services for schemes where our expertise provides both time and cost efficiencies for our clients.
Working for Harworth Estates we continued to develop our relationship through the award of a number of longterm opportunities during the year.
At the Palace of Westminster work on the cast iron roof repair projects is progressing well and we have secured the final two phases of work on this project.
The Courtyards Conservation Framework is also making good progress and was recently extended to 2025.
Our framework positions and reputation at the site position us well for further opportunities.
Future focus We continue to focus on development opportunities where the use of brownfield sites remains part of the UKs overall solution to address the housing shortfall.
We continue to maximise the potential of the specialist position we have developed in the UK restoration market.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 19 THE GROUP HAS EXTENSIVE EXPERTISE IN DELIVERING MAINTENANCE AND RENEWALS ACROSS WATER INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORKS.
STRATEGIC REPORT Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 20 STRATEGIC REPORT Operational review continued
Market
Network Rail is investing around 41bn in the current Control Period 5 CP5 to 2019 on running maintaining and improving Britains railway.
The government recently announced an increase in funding to 48bn for CP6 which runs from 2019 to 2024.
CP6 will focus on both maintenance and renewals on the rail network as key priorities.
Capabilities
As a major provider of engineering services to Network Rail as well as working for London Underground and Train Operating Companies our directly employed multiskilled local delivery teams carry out planned reactive and emergency asset maintenance and renewal works across the rail network.
We undertake a high volume of small value civils mechanical and electrical engineering and maintenance services tasks supporting a wide range of rail infrastructure assets.
Offtrack operational support and asset care Critical planned and reactive maintenance and renewals Civil mechanical and electrical engineering services Plant power and signalling renewals 247 emergency provision Asset renewal and refurbishment Tunnel and shaft refurbishment Moving structures Inhouse design capability
For our largest client Network Rail we operate on six Asset Management frameworks and as sole supplier on seven Rail Infrastructure Projects frameworks for the refurbishment and repair of a wide range of rail assets nationally.
During the period we undertook over 5000 individual work remits with an average value of 11000 and around 300 larger projects nationally on the network.
We continued to develop our position in Scotland as the major structures renewals and sole civils maintenance contractor for Network Rail.
In addition to ongoing planned maintenance and renewals our locally based delivery teams provided a 247 national emergency response service on the rail network during the period.
The acquisition of Giffen in the period broadened our offering to Network Rail London Underground and Train Operating Companies.
By utilising the joint capabilities of AMCO and Giffen we have secured AMCOs first civil engineering opportunities with London Underground.
Through Giffen the Group has five frameworks with London Underground for specialist electrical plant and power schemes as well as undertaking good volumes of work on the Station Improvement Programme.
Other rail clients include Historic Railways Estate for which we maintain historic assets associated with former railways and Abellio for which we completed a programme of station waiting shelters.
We successfully delivered a significant portion of specialised works in the Severn Tunnel for Network Rail.
Future focus We focus on developing the opportunities arising from our acquisitions where our expanded range of services provides opportunities in the wider rail market.
We continue to align our business with the requirements of our largest client Network Rail over the CP6 investment period.
INFRASTRUCTURE Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 21 WE FOCUS ON DEVELOPING THE OPPORTUNITIES ARISING FROM OUR ACQUISITIONS WHERE OUR EXPANDED RANGE OF SERVICES PROVIDES OPPORTUNITIES IN THE WIDER RAIL MARKET.
STRATEGIC REPORT WIRELESS TELECOMS
The wireless telecoms infrastructure market remains attractive as demand for mobile internet access and communication continues to outstrip the capability and capacity of the current networks.
Licence obligations under the 4G programme continue to demand significant investment and our addressable market remains strong.
Capabilities
In wireless telecoms we provide specialist infrastructure services to network operators and increasingly to multisite operators and vendors acting as managed services providers.
The work includes all aspects of site acquisition design installation commissioning and integration of stations onto the networks.
Operational support and asset care Critical planned and reactive maintenance and renewals Civil mechanical and electrical engineering Wireless telecoms installations Radio network planning including the installation of specialist indoor and outdoor coverage solutions Provision of 2G 3G 4G and WiFi technologies
The installation and expansion of 4G services continues to provide the majority of our work as the market is driven by consumer demand for faster more capable mobile connectivity.
We continue to support the wireless telecoms operators in the provision of new infrastructure the upgrade of existing networks and decommissioning of redundant assets delivering over 40000 individual tasks for our customers during 2017.
Future focus The upgrade and expansion of the 4G wireless telecoms network in the UK remains the focus of our business.
Our
HIGH QUALITY RESIDENTIAL
The high quality residential market in London and the Home Counties remains strong.
We are a market leader with particular specialist engineering expertise in major structural alteration works both above and below ground that proves a differentiator in this market.
Capabilities
Our subsidiary Walter Lilly is recognised as a marketleading luxury provider of prestigious private residential refurbishment projects in London and the Home Counties.
The schemes we undertake often require extensive structural engineering works which together with space restrictions in the South and the complex nature of the work we undertake means that this market has high barriers to entry.
Inhouse design and engineering capabilities are able to provide innovative solutions on projects that require extensive underground development.
Other services include design management planning traffic management and logistics support as well as expertise in specialist finishes.
Luxury provider of prestigious private residential alterations Specialist in extensive structural engineering works required to extend properties below ground
In the year we undertook a number of schemes for private clients many of which saw the initial scope and value increase during the period.
In addition to our work in central London we have undertaken two high value country residence projects in the period with schemes including one in Hampshire for a private client.
We secured and commenced over 24m of new projects during the period.
Walter Lilly won the Contractor of the Year award at the Building Awards 2016 in the up to 300m category.
Future focus We focus on delivering technically challenging high value projects in London and the Home Counties where our expertise and experience prove differentiators in this market with high barriers to entry.
SPECIALIST BUILDING Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 22 STRATEGIC REPORT Operational review continued OUR SUBSIDIARY WALTER LILLY IS RECOGNISED AS A MARKETLEADING LUXURY PROVIDER OF PRESTIGIOUS PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL REFURBISHMENT PROJECTS IN LONDON AND THE HOME COUNTIES.
Marek Sikora Photography STRATEGIC REPORT 23 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 24 STRATEGIC REPORT
Community engagement and charitable giving We work to encourage the next generation engage with our communities and support a wide range of charitable organisations.
We are committed to inspiring motivating and supporting young people and our businesses take part in a wide range of career and industry events with schools colleges and educational establishments.
Our businesses provide apprenticeships and training opportunities promoting local employment as well as volunteering their services for communitydriven projects.
One example of our businesses commitment to developing future talent is at Seymour Civil Engineering which has established a strong relationship with Hartlepool College providing a training academy and handson experience of plant and machinery.
Seymour also has strong links with High Tunstall College of Science and St Hilds School Hartlepool as well as participating in a number of Science technology engineering and mathematics STEM events across the North East.
Our businesses understand their responsibilities to their wider communities and carefully consider the impact of their activities throughout the planning process.
Initiatives
Local community projects provide an opportunity for our businesses to use their skills and time and provide financial support.
Many of our businesses are involved with local sporting clubs for young people providing kit and equipment through sponsorship.
Our businesses support many charities and local causes throughout the year.
Shepley Engineers assists its chosen charities through fundraising events in Cumbria as well as providing time and expertise alongside direct funding in support of its local community.
Seymour supported Alice House Hospice in Hartlepool with events including the coast to castle cycle.
Seymour also sponsored the sixth annual Its a Knockout tournament contributing to the running of the event and providing a team to participate.
Walter Lilly hosted the second annual High Quality Residential Ball an industry event raising over 100000 for charity.
Staff from Walter Lilly also visited Swaziland in Africa to help with community projects which this year included building neighbourhood care points and facilities for orphaned children.
Other charities supported in the year include Children in Need Macmillan Cancer Support Cancer Research UK British Heart Foundation Guide Dogs for the Blind Association Save the Children Fund Yorkshire Air Ambulance and Bradford Toy Library and Resource Centre.
Environment and sustainability We work to leave a lasting positive impact through the work we undertake minimise our use of natural resources and protect the environment.
Our integrated business management systems and procedures ensure the Groups compliance with all relevant legislation relating to the environment as well as managing the implementation of environmental policies.
Our control procedures are maintained to ensure the highest standards of compliance and are accredited to industry standards.
Our businesses work to identify areas of environmental impact and use sitespecific health safety and environmental plans and programmes designed to focus on areas of concern such as waste and carbon emissions.
Programmes to raise awareness of environmental compliance obligations help promote sustainable developments.
Employment and training We work to invest in skills for the future and support employees through programmes of formal and vocational training.
Our businesses recognise the importance of continuing to invest in skills for the future providing work placement opportunities day release placements and apprenticeship schemes as well as training in skill enhancements and crafts.
OUR CORPORATE
Renew and its subsidiary businesses strive to deliver wider social environmental and economic benefits as well as delivering benefits to our employees clients supply chain and other stakeholders.
We understand the responsibility of our operational activities and work hard to ensure the safety of our employees and those who work with us whilst striving to leave a positive lasting impact on the communities in which we operate.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 25 STRATEGIC REPORT Lewis Civil Engineering enrolled a number of employees onto an apprenticeship scheme during the year and Walter Lilly continues its 20 year association with Loughborough University sponsoring students studying construction management design management and quantity surveying as well as sponsoring three degree courses at the university.
AMCO and Clarke Telecom have developed bespoke management and leadership programmes.
Shepley Engineers provides work and job experience opportunities and currently has a number of apprenticeships covering pipe fitting welding plating erecting and electrical disciplines.
Shepley participates in its local business cluster which coordinates business engagement with education providers in the local community.
Britannia continued its partnership with Gloucester College to deliver its civil engineering apprenticeship scheme and AMCO continued its craft apprenticeship training programme during the year.
Walter Lilly is a licensed training provider to the Construction Industry Training Board for supervisory management training and development programmes.
Safety
We work to ensure a safe working environment for our employees and those who work with us and promote equal opportunities.
Our priority is to ensure the safety of all our employees and those who work alongside us.
The Groups businesses develop a range of safety schemes designed to reflect the individual markets in which they operate.
Safety is managed within our subsidiary businesses by our team of locally based construction managers and safety advisors and is supported centrally by the Safety and Environmental Management Group which coordinates safety activities and promotes best practice and knowledge sharing.
The type of work the Group undertakes has seen a shift in recent years from larger single projects to a high volume of smaller value tasks.
The Group has identified unexpected changes in the working environment on sites as a factor in some reported incidents and near misses.
To mitigate these contributory factors we have introduced a Groupwide initiative Change  STOP to empower employees to take responsibility for their working environment.
The initiative is supported within the subsidiary businesses as part of their individual safety programmes.
Our businesses undertake continual safety training to ensure the highest levels of safe working.
Behavioural based safety training has again been a key area of focus in the year alongside traditional courses such as harness awareness manual handling and working in confined spaces.
As part of the continuous drive to improve safety performance our businesses undertake a range of initiatives including crossbusiness improvement safety checks standdown days safety conferences near miss reporting You Said We Did schemes and internal safety awards to enforce the safety message and culture.
Many of our businesses continue to be accredited and approved with various health and safety schemes including the Contractors Health and Safety Assessment Scheme Constructionline and SafeContractor.
We are pleased to have achieved a further improvement in our accident incident rate upon the previous year.
Many of our businesses were recognised for their commitment to safe working practices during the year including PPS Electrical which received Sellafield Limiteds Contractors Safety Award for the third consecutive year and Seymour Civil Engineering which was awarded Health and Safety Company of the Year 2016 by the Civil Engineering Contractors Association North East.
Awards
Shepley Engineers Limited received The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents RoSPA Order of Distinction PPS Electrical Limited received a RoSPA Order of Distinction West Cumberland Engineering Limited received a RoSPA Gold Medal Award Lewis Civil Engineering Limited received a third consecutive RoSPA Gold Award VHE received a RoSPA Order of Distinction Britannia received a RoSPA Gold Medal Award PPS Electrical Limited received a Contractors Safety Award from Sellafield Limited for the third year Seymour Civil Engineering won the Institute of Civil Engineerings ICE Robert Stephenson Award for Hartlepool Town Wall medium category 0.5m4.0m Walter Lillys Newport Street Gallery project won the Royal Institute of British Architects RIBA 2016 Stirling Prize Seymour Civil Engineering won the ICE North East Mike Gardiner Cup Company Award in recognition of outstanding support for ICE education and inspiration initiatives in the North East Walter Lilly was awarded a Considerate Constructors Scheme National Silver Award for a private High Quality Residential project in London VHE was awarded Considerate Constructors Scheme National Silver and Bronze Awards Walter Lilly won Contractor of the Year at the Building Awards 2016 up to 300m category Seymour Civil Engineerings scheme at Brunton Park won Sustainable Drainage and Flood Management Initiative of the Year 2017 at the Water Industry Achievement Awards Seymour Civil Engineering won CECA North East Training Company of the Year 2016 and Health and Safety Company of the Year 2016 This Strategic report was approved by the Board on 21 November 2017 and is signed on its behalf by P Scott Chief Executive 21 November 2017 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 STRATEGIC REPORT
Financial review
Results
Group revenue from continuing activities was 558.6m 2016 525.7m with an operating profit before tax from continuing activities prior to amortisation impairment and exceptional items of 25.6m 2016 22.0m.
A tax charge of 4.4m 2016 5.3m resulted in a profit after tax prior to amortisation and related deferred taxation for the year of 20.9m 2016 17.1m an increase of 22%.
After deducting 8.4m 2016 2.4m of amortisation impairment and exceptional costs the profit for the year from continuing activities was 12.4m 2016 14.6m.
Impairment amortisation and exceptional items The 5.8m impairment to the carrying value of goodwill arises from the withdrawal from loss making low pressure small diameter gas pipe replacement activities of Forefront Utilities Limited.
No tax relief is available in respect of this item.
The consequent reduction in Forefronts activities has resulted in a charge of 0.6m for redundancy and restructuring costs.
Following 2.3m of amortisation charges in the year the remaining 2.7m of other intangible assets related to contractual rights and customer relationships are solely associated with Giffen Holdings Limited.
The remaining 0.2m of exceptional costs represent professional fees in connection with the acquisition of Giffen.
A tax credit of 0.5m arises in connection with these items.
Restatement of 2016 Balance Sheet In previous years the Group has provided for deferred tax on its pension scheme surplus at the rate of corporation tax expected to be prevailing in the future provided that the relevant legislation had been enacted.
In the year ended 30 September 2016 a rate of 18% was used.
It has now become clear to the Board that in line with tax legislation which applies in the event of a refund of a surplus on the winding up of the pension scheme that a tax rate of 35% should be applied.
Consequently the Board has restated the opening Balance Sheet as at 1 October 2015 to reflect the above.
As at that date the effect of the correction of this prior period error is to increase deferred tax liabilities associated with the Retirement Benefit Asset by 2576000 with a corresponding reduction in net assets of the Group.
As at 30 September 2016 the deferred tax liability has been increased by 1309000 compared to that previously reported.
During the preparation of these financial statements the Directors also became aware of inaccuracies in the corporation tax creditor at 30 September 2016.
Correcting these resulted in an 833000 reduction in the corporation tax creditor at that date.
The net impact of these adjustments is to reduce net assets by 476000 at 30 September 2016.
The amendments related to the pension scheme tax primarily relate to movements in Other Comprehensive Income OCI.
As such adjustments have been made to OCI in 2016 and the total comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2016 is now 1335000 compared to the previously recorded loss of 765000.
GROUP RETURNS TO NET CASH POSITION
Revenue increased by 6.3% All bank debt will be repaid by 31 March 2018 Dividend increased by 12.5% GROUP REVENUE FROM CONTINUING ACTIVITIES WAS 558.6M 2016 525.7M WITH AN OPERATING PROFIT BEFORE TAX FROM CONTINUING ACTIVITIES PRIOR TO AMORTISATION IMPAIRMENT AND EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS OF 25.6M 2016 22.0M.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 27 STRATEGIC REPORT
The Groups financial position shows a cash balance of 7.0m 2016 14.1m at the year end.
Consequently the Groups net cash position as at 30 September 2017 was 3.9m 2016 4.8m.
This position has been achieved after acquiring Giffen Holdings Ltd for a total cash cost of 7.2m including fees during the year.
The repayment schedule on the Groups outstanding term loan means that it will be fully repaid by 31 March 2018.
The Group has complied with the covenants associated with the term loan throughout the year.
Taxation
The tax charge on profit for the year is 3.9m 2016 4.7m a rate of 24%.
This rate is higher than the headline rate of 19% as the impairment charge of 5.8m is not a taxable item.
Excluding this item the tax rate falls to 18% which is slightly lower than the headline rate.
The Group has been able to utilise some brought forward losses which had not previously been recognised as deferred tax assets.
Due to the tax deductibility of pension scheme contributions which are not charged to the Income Statement the rate of corporation tax payable in each of the next few years is expected to remain below the headline rate.
After accounting for deferred tax on those pension contributions the Board expects the Groups future rate of taxation to approximate to the headline rate of corporation tax in effect for the relevant accounting period.
Pension schemes At 30 September 2017 the IAS 19 valuation of the Lovell Pension Scheme which was closed to new members in 2000 resulted in an accounting surplus of 6.3m after accounting for deferred taxation.
The net surplus has increased by 1.3m during the year due to both an increase in the discount rate as a result of improving gilt yields and updated mortality assumptions.
The actuarial movement is accounted for through the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income.
During the year the Board has continued to work with the Trustees of the Lovell Scheme to reduce the risks associated with the schemes liabilities by regularly reviewing the schemes investment strategy which includes a liability driven model featuring interest rate hedging techniques.
At the year end 56% 2016 55% of the schemes total liabilities were matched by annuities.
In accordance with the scheme specific funding requirements of the Pensions Act 2005 the Board reached an agreement with the Trustees of the scheme on the level of future contributions at 4.3m per annum.
This recovery plan is projected to eliminate the deficit under the Statutory Funding Objective of the Pensions Act 2004 by 31 July 2018.
The next triennial valuation is due as at 31 March 2018.
The IAS 19 valuation of the Amco Pension Scheme shows a deficit of 0.6m 2016 1.7m after accounting for deferred taxation.
Liabilities have reduced primarily due to an increase in the discount rate as a result of improving gilt yields.
Similar to the Lovell Scheme the Board has worked closely with the Trustees of the Amco Scheme to reduce the risks associated with the liabilities of the scheme.
This has included agreeing to make 0.6m of additional contributions to provide liquidity so that the Trustees could fund transfer values requested by a number of members without disturbing the investment portfolio of the scheme.
It is likely that further contributions will be made in 201718 for the same purpose.
At the year end 44% 2016 44% of the schemes total liabilities were matched by annuities.
In the triennial valuation of the scheme which was carried out as at 31 December 2013 the scheme actuary measured the deficit in the scheme at 2.1m.
In accordance with the scheme specific funding requirements of the Pensions Act 2005 the Board agreed the level of future contributions with the Trustees of the scheme at 0.3m per annum.
This recovery plan is projected to eliminate the deficit under the Statutory Funding Objective of the Pensions Act 2004 by 31 October 2020.
The next triennial valuation is in the process of being carried out as at 31 December 2016.
Acquisitions
On 1 November 2016 the Group acquired Giffen Holdings Limited Giffen a specialist mechanical electrical and power services business within the rail environment.
The acquisition cost was 7.2m in total including fees.
The acquisition was funded from the Groups own cash resources.
IFRS 15 and 16 These two new international financial reporting standards will be applicable to the Groups results for the years ending 30 September 2019 and 2020 respectively.
Following a thorough review of the Groups current major contracts the Board has determined that there will be no material impact from the adoption of IFRS 15 on the reported revenue of the Group and no changes to the Groups accounting procedures are required.
Regarding IFRS 16 the Board assesses that the net impact to the Income Statement will be immaterial.
Both assets and liabilities on the Balance Sheet are expected to increase by corresponding amounts which as at 30 September 2017 would have been approximately 10m.
Distributable profits The distributable profits of Renew Holdings plc are 50.9m 2016 46.6m.
The Board is recommending a final dividend of 6.0p 2016 5.35p per share bringing the total for the year to 9.0p 2016 8.0p an increase of 12.5%.
J Samuel FCA Group Finance Director 21 November 2017 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28 STRATEGIC REPORT
Risk management
PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Actual results may differ to those expressed in such statements depending on a variety of factors.
These factors include customer acceptance of the Groups services levels of demand in the market restrictions to market access competitive pressure on pricing or additional costs failure to retain or recruit key personnel and overall economic conditions.
This Annual Report contains certain forwardlooking statements.
These statements are made by the Directors in good faith based on the information available to them up to the time of approval of this report.
RISK MITIGATION AND RESPONSIBILITY Contractual conditions which exist at the time of contract procurement.
Should initial estimates and judgments be incorrect the actual financial outcomes may ultimately differ from that which is indicated.
The Group has a system of precontract and pretender risk assessment whereby senior management including the Executive Directors where appropriate review and advise on specific issues arising in the contract procurement process.
In contracting management is required to estimate the total expected costs on a contract and the stage of contract completion in order to determine both the revenue and profit to be recognised in an accounting period.
The Group has control and review procedures in place to monitor and evaluate regularly the estimates being made to ensure that they are consistent and appropriate.
This includes reviewing the independent certification of the value of work done the progress of work against contracted timescales and the costs incurred against plan.
The
Group also seeks to limit its risks by specialising in certain markets where it has extensive experience and a particular skills base.
Reliance on a relatively small number of major customers.
If the Group was to lose its position as a supplier to some of these customers then its financial position could be materially affected.
As the Group has moved progressively into engineering services markets it has fewer but larger clients.
Key clients are Network Rail Sellafield Ltd National Grid Environment Agency CTIL Northumbrian Water Wessex Water and Welsh Water.
Loss of any of the above could potentially affect shareholder value.
We mitigate this risk by maintaining strong relationships with our clients and by being seen as responsive innovative and proactive.
The Group could be required to make substantial payments into two closed final salary pension schemes in accordance with the requirements of the Pensions Act 1995.
The Group has taken steps to mitigate this risk by working with the schemes Trustees to develop liability matching investment strategies.
These have included both schemes entering into annuity policies which match the liabilities in respect of certain of the schemes beneficiaries.
At 30 September 2017 these policies are equivalent to 55% of the combined schemes liabilities.
The impact of accidents on our employees and the consequential impact on contract performance and reputational damage.
Safety is managed across Renew by the Safety and Environmental Management Group which coordinates activities and liaises with our team of locally based safety advisors.
Working as part of an overall safety team our advisors are encouraged to share specialist knowledge and best practice from their individual working environments.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 29 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Board of Directors David Brown Nonexecutive Director David Brown 56 was appointed to the Board on 3 April 2017.
He is currently Group Chief Executive of The GoAhead Group Plc a position he has held since 2011.
Prior to that he was Managing Director of Surface Transport for Transport for London and Chief Executive of GoAheads London Bus business.
He is also a director of the Rail Delivery Group Limited.
Sean WyndhamQuin CA
Sean WyndhamQuin 37 was appointed to the Board on 8 November 2017.
Previously he served as a partner at SPARK Advisory Partners a business he cofounded in early 2012.
Prior to that he worked for Brewin Dolphin and Ernst and Young where he qualified as a Chartered
He will take responsibility as Group Finance Director on 29 November 2017.
Andries Liebenberg
Andries Liebenberg 49 was appointed to the Board on 31 March 2016.
Andries is the Managing Director of Renews largest business Amalgamated Construction Limited Amco and has been with the Group for over ten years.
Roy Harrison OBE
Roy Harrison 70 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in November 2003.
Subsequently he was appointed Executive Chairman in March 2004 reverting to nonexecutive Chairman with effect from 1 October 2005.
He is a nonexecutive director of Fox Marble Holdings plc.
He is a Trustee of Thomas Telford Multi Academy Trust.
He will retire from the Board following the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
David Forbes Nonexecutive Director David Forbes 57 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in June 2011.
He qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1984 and has over 20 years experience in corporate advisory services with N M Rothschild and Son Limited.
Adare Sec Holdings Limited.
He will succeed Roy Harrison OBE as Chairman after the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Paul Scott Chief Executive Paul Scott 53 was appointed to the Board as Engineering Services Director on 21 July 2014 and as Chief Executive on 1 October 2016.
Paul has been with the Group for 18 years serving as Managing Director of Shepley Engineers Limited the Groups nuclear services business prior to assuming the Groupwide Engineering Services role.
John Bishop FCA Nonexecutive Director John Bishop 72 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in October 2006.
He is a Chartered Accountant with over 20 years PLC experience at main board level.
Before retiring in 2005 John spent twelve years at Morgan Sindall Plc as Development Director and latterly as Finance Director.
EXPERIENCED MANAGEMENT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE John Samuel FCA Group Finance Director John Samuel 61 has served on the Board since May 2006 as Group Finance Director.
He will be succeeded on 29 November 2017 by Sean WyndhamQuin.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 30 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Corporate governance As an AIM listed company Renew is not required to follow the provisions of the 2014 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
The Directors however recognise the importance of and accordingly support the principles of good corporate governance as contained within the Code.
The Directors normally seek to follow the Code to the extent considered relevant for an AIM listed company but are unable to achieve compliance with the Code in a number of areas this year primarily because of the lack of independent nonexecutive Directors.
These matters are explained in further detail in the sections below.
The Board of Directors The Board currently comprises the Chief Executive Officer the nonexecutive Chairman three Executive Directors and three independent nonexecutive Directors.
Brief biographies of the Directors are given on pages 33 and 34.
The Company is not compliant with the requirement of the Code that more than half of the Board should be comprised of independent nonexecutive Directors.
Although the Board believes that R J Harrison acts as an independent director he is not regarded as such by the Code due to the period in 20042005 when he acted as Executive Chairman.
D A Brown was appointed as a nonexecutive Director on 3 April 2017 and S WyndhamQuin as an Executive Director on 8 November 2017.
J Samuel will resign as a Director on 29 November 2017 and be succeeded in the roles of Group Finance Director and Company Secretary by S WyndhamQuin.
R J Harrison will retire as a Director after the 2018 Annual General Meeting and be succeeded in the role of Chairman by D M Forbes.
The Board will then comprise three independent nonexecutive Directors and three executive Directors.
The composition of the Board is reviewed regularly.
Appropriate training briefings and induction are available to all Directors on appointment and subsequently as necessary taking into account existing qualifications and experience.
New Directors are subject to election by shareholders at the first AGM after their appointment.
The Board met formally nine times in the year with all Directors in attendance other than on two occasions when J Bishop was unable to attend.
Committee meetings dealing with the daily business of the Company were held as necessary.
The Board receives written and oral reports from the Executive Directors ensuring matters are considered fully and enabling Directors to discharge their duties properly.
There is a formal schedule of matters reserved for the Boards decision ensuring the maintenance of control over strategic financial and operational matters.
In addition procedures are in place for the Directors to seek independent professional advice if necessary at the Companys expense.
Board Committees The Board operates with a number of Board Committees.
J Bishop the senior independent nonexecutive Director acts as Chairman of the Audit Committee and D M Forbes an independent nonexecutive Director acts as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
The Nominations Committee is chaired by R J Harrison.
D M Forbes will take over that role following R J Harrisons retirement.
The Board delegates clearly defined powers to its Remuneration Nominations and Audit Committees.
Each of the Boards Committees has carefully drafted terms of reference.
The Remuneration Committee which comprises all of the nonexecutive Directors determines and agrees with the Board the framework and policy of executive remuneration packages including bonuses incentive payments share options or awards and pension arrangements.
Further information concerning the Remuneration Committee is set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
The Nominations Committee which comprises all of the nonexecutive Directors and P Scott monitors the composition of the Board and recommends the appointment of new Directors.
The Nominations Committee with all Directors present has held three meetings during the year to discuss nomination matters including the appointments of D A Brown and S WyndhamQuin.
The Nominations Committee terms of reference include to review the structure size and composition of the Board to consider succession planning for Directors and senior executives to identify and nominate for approval by the Board suitable candidates to fill Board vacancies and to make recommendations to the Board on the contents of letters of appointment Directors duties reappointment or reelection of Directors upon conclusion of a specified term or retirement by rotation.
The Audit Committee has held two meetings to consider Audit Committee business.
The Audit Committee consists of all four nonexecutive Directors.
The Executive Directors are invited to attend Audit Committee meetings but at least two meetings are held each year with the external Auditor at which the Executive Directors are not present.
The Audit Committee considers the adequacy and effectiveness of the risk management and control systems of the Group and reports the results to the Board.
It reviews the scope and results of the external audit its cost effectiveness and the objectivity of the Auditor.
The Audit Committee monitors the nonaudit work performed by the Auditor to help ensure that the independence of the Auditor is maintained.
All fees paid to the Auditor whether for audit or nonaudit work are approved by the Audit Committee in advance.
The Audit Committee also reviews the Interim statement the preliminary announcement the Annual Report and Accounts and accounting policies.
The Board forms a General Purposes Committee from time to time as it deems necessary.
This Committee comprises any two of the Executive Directors as determined by the Board to consider individual business matters which have been specifically delegated to it by the Board.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 31 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Internal controls Throughout the financial year ended 30 September 2017 and up to the date of approval of the Annual Report and Accounts the Group has fully complied with the relevant provisions of the Code other than as disclosed.
The Directors acknowledge that they have overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing and monitoring its effectiveness.
The system of internal control is designed to manage and mitigate rather than eliminate the risks to which the Group is exposed and therefore provides a reasonable but not absolute assurance against a company failing to meet its business objectives or against material misstatement or loss.
Consequently the Board confirms that there is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing significant risks faced by the Group and that it is regularly reviewed by the Board.
The Group operates a risk management process which is embedded in normal management and governance processes.
There is a system of selfexamination of risk areas and controls by subsidiaries and departments within the
Where significant risks are identified the probability of those risks occurring their potential impact and the plans for managing and mitigating each of those risks is reported.
The Group operates a series of controls which include the annual strategic planning and budgeting process shortterm cash monitoring achieved by means of weekly forecasts which are compared against budget and previous forecasts clearly defined capital investment guidelines and levels of authority and a clear organisational structure within which individuals responsibilities are identified and monitored.
These results and processes are monitored updated reviewed and considered by the Board.
The Group has established a series of minimum standards in a number of financial and operational areas with which each business within the Group must comply.
Group management monitors and reviews compliance with these requirements on a periodic basis.
Due to the size and nature of the Group the Board does not consider that a separate internal audit function is necessary.
For the last ten years and including 2017 the Group has carried out a programme of internal audit conducted by the Group Commercial Director and by members of the various subsidiaries finance teams.
This system of peer review promotes best practice as well as ensuring that Group minimum requirements as to procedures and internal controls are being complied with.
The reports from these internal audits are made available both to the Board and to the external Auditor.
Going concern The Directors have reviewed the budgets and forecasts prepared by the Group and its trading subsidiaries and consider that at the time of approving the financial statements there is a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Directors remuneration The Companys policy on the remuneration of Executive Directors and information relating to the Directors remuneration and their interests in share options is included in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Directors and officers indemnity The Articles of Association provide that each Director or other officer or Auditor of the Company shall be indemnified by the Company against losses costs and expenses he may sustain or incur in connection with the performance of his duties of office to the fullest extent permitted by law.
Shareholder relationships Members of the Board have dialogue with individual shareholders during the year.
In addition to the Annual and Interim Report and Accounts the Chairman addresses shareholders at the AGM and invites questions to any members of the Board.
The AGM is normally attended by all Directors and provides an opportunity for communication with those shareholders attending.
Notice of the AGM is given to shareholders at least 21 days in advance and separate resolutions are proposed on each substantially separate issue.
Where resolutions at the AGM are dealt with by show of hands the results of proxy votes for and against are still announced.
Financial and other information about the Group is available on the Companys website site from which shareholders can also access their shareholding details via a link to the website of Link Market Services Limited.
Annual General Meeting The next AGM will be held on 31 January 2018 the Notice for which accompanies this Report and Accounts.
The Notice contains special business relating to the renewal of the Boards power to allot equity shares.
Brief details of the purpose and effect of the proposed resolutions are enclosed with the Notice of AGM.
Shareholders should complete the proxy form accompanying this document in accordance with the notes contained in the Notice of AGM.
Approval
The Board approved the Corporate Governance Report on 21 November 2017.
By Order of the Board J Samuel FCA Company Secretary 21 November 2017 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 32 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors report The Directors present their report and the audited accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017.
Principal activities For the year ended 30 September 2017 the principal activity of the Group continued to be as contractors in Engineering Services and Specialist Building.
The main activities are carried out in the United Kingdom with some development activities in the USA.
More details of these activities the years trading and future developments are contained in the Chairmans Statement the Chief Executives Review the Strategic Report and the Financial Review.
A list of the Groups subsidiaries as at 30 September 2017 is listed in Note T to the Companys financial statements.
Results and dividends The Group profit for the year after accounting for discontinued operations was 12427000 2016 10612000.
The Directors recommend the payment of a final dividend on the Ordinary Shares of 6.0p 2016 5.35p giving a total for the year of 9.0p 2016 8.0p.
Business review
Information that fulfils the business review requirements applicable to the Group can be found in this report the Chief Executives Review and the Strategic Report.
Derivatives and other financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans cash and shortterm deposits and obligations under finance leases.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to provide finance for the Groups operations.
The Group has various other financial instruments such as trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
It is and has been throughout the period under review the Groups policy that no trading in financial instruments shall be undertaken.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are interest rate risk liquidity risk credit risk and foreign currency risk.
Interest rate risk Interest bearing assets comprise cash and bank deposits and earn interest at floating rates.
The Groups bank loan and overdraft facility bear interest at floating rates.
Liquidity risk The Groups policy is to ensure availability of operating funds by maintaining an appropriate cash balance in both current and deposit accounts and when necessary to establish appropriate levels of borrowing facilities to provide shortterm flexibility.
Foreign currency risk As a result of the investment in operations in the United States movements in the US dollarsterling exchange rate could materially affect the Groups and the Companys balance sheet.
As at 30 September 2017 4856000 2016 4363000 of the Groups net assets are denominated in US dollars.
The Group does not use derivative financial instruments in its management of foreign currency risk.
Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are bank balances cash amounts recoverable on contracts and trade receivables which represent the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk in relation to financial assets.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its amounts recoverable on contracts and trade receivables.
Credit risk is managed by monitoring the aggregate amount and duration of exposure to any one customer depending upon their credit rating.
The amounts presented in the balance sheet are net of allowances for doubtful debts estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience and their assessment of the current economic environment.
Payment of creditors The Group recognises the importance of good relationships with its suppliers and subcontractors and has established the following payment policy agree payment terms in advance of any commitment being entered into ensure suppliers are made aware of these terms by inclusion of the terms of payment on the order or contract and ensure that payments are made in accordance with the terms of the contract or order providing that the presented documentation is complete and accurate.
Employees
The Directors recognise the need for communication with employees at every level.
All employees have access to a copy of the Annual Report and Accounts which together with staff briefings internal noticeboard statements and newsletters keeps them informed of the Groups progress.
The Group produces an inhouse publication Renews which provides information to its employees about the activities and performance of the Group.
The Group continues to be committed to the health safety and welfare of its employees and to observe the terms of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and all other relevant regulatory and legislative requirements.
It is the policy of the Group that there shall be no discrimination or less favourable treatment of employees workers or job applicants in respect of race colour ethnic or national origins religious beliefs sex sexual orientation disability political beliefs age or marital status.
Full consideration will be given to suitable applications for employment from disabled persons where they have the necessary abilities and skills for that position and wherever possible to retrain employees who become disabled so that they can continue their employment in another position.
The Group engages promotes and trains staff on the basis of their capabilities qualifications and experience without discrimination giving all employees an equal opportunity to progress.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 33 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Health and safety management P Scott the Chief Executive was the designated Board Director of Health and Safety with Group responsibility for safety and environmental management throughout the year.
Health safety and environmental management issues and reports are reviewed at every Group Board meeting with the Head of Department in attendance when necessary.
The Executive Management Committee chaired by the Chief Executive discusses and progresses policy legislative changes best practice training needs inspections audits internal and external performance measurement and statistical information.
All topics are discussed with a specific focus on improvement.
Control at business level remains with subsidiary Managing Directors who are required to appoint a Director who is responsible for safety and environmental matters.
Health safety and environmental issues are discussed as the first agenda item at monthly Board meetings.
Each business safety and environmental meeting encourages open communication between all employees and is a key part of the Groups efforts to gather and disseminate good practice for inclusion in businessbased management systems.
Our
Systems.
This system is based on Group activities and provides specific standards procedures information forms and advice which accommodate changes in legislation expected during the coming financial year.
Management advice is provided by the Group Health Safety and Environmental Director.
Certain Group companies employ their own specialist advisors who liaise directly with the Group HSE Director on common issues.
The Group maintains its membership with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents and locally based construction safety groups.
All safety and environmental department personnel hold membership with the Institution of Occupational Safety and Health.
Attendance on the five day Construction Industry Training Board Site Safety Management Training Scheme continues to be a requirement for all construction management personnel with a two day refresher required every five years.
A one day Directors and Senior Managers course is available internally and is used to introduce new systems and detail changes to construction legislation.
Short duration tool box talks and safety briefings are used to enhance the knowledge and competence of supervisory management.
Group policy requires each business to report and record all injuries diseases and dangerous occurrences regardless of severity.
An incident database is maintained to collate this information and provide statistical data allowing performance to be measured and determine system amendments and future training requirements.
A system of Safety and Environmental Alerts ensures lessons learnt and changes to working practices are rapidly transmitted to our workforce businesses and their contractors.
The Accident Incidence Rate AIR for the year measured on the standard base line of 100000 persons at work is a key area where the Group measures its performance.
Sustainability
The Groups Sustainability Report which includes its report on corporate social responsibility is on pages 24 to 25.
Directors
The Directors of the Company who served throughout the year and their brief biographical details are set out below.
Nonexecutive Directors John Bishop  Director 72 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in October 2006.
He is a Chartered Accountant with over 20 years PLC experience at main board level.
Before retiring in 2005 John spent twelve years at Morgan Sindall Plc as Development Director and latterly as Finance Director.
David Brown  Director 56 was appointed to the Board on 3 April.
He is currently Group Chief Executive of The GoAhead Group Plc a position he has held since 2011.
Prior to that he was Managing Director of Surface Transport for Transport for London and Chief Executive of GoAheads London Bus business.
He is also a director of the Rail Delivery Group Limited.
David Forbes  Director 57 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in June 2011.
He qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1984 and has over 20 years experience in corporate advisory services with N M Rothschild and Son Limited. ite plc and Adare Sec Holdings Limited.
He will succeed Roy Harrison OBE as Chairman after the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Roy Harrison OBE  Director 70 was appointed to the Board as a nonexecutive Director in November 2003.
Subsequently he was appointed Executive Chairman in March 2004 reverting to nonexecutive Chairman with effect from 1 October 2005.
He is a nonexecutive director of Fox Marble Holdings plc.
He is a Trustee of Thomas Telford Multi Academy Trust.
He will retire from the Board following the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
Executive Directors Paul Scott  Director 53 was appointed to the Board as Engineering Services Director on 21 July 2014 and as Chief Executive on 1 October 2016.
Paul has been with the Group for eighteen years serving as Managing Director of Shepley Engineers Limited the Groups nuclear services business prior to assuming the Groupwide Engineering Services role.
Andries Liebenberg  Director 49 was appointed to the Board on 31 March 2016.
Andries is the Managing Director of Renews largest business Amalgamated Construction Limited Amco and has been with the Group over ten years.
John Samuel  Director 61 was appointed to the Board in May 2006 as Group Finance Director.
He was previously Group Finance Director at Filtronic plc from 1991 until 2004 and subsequently Chief Financial Officer of Zetex plc from July 2004 until February 2006.
He qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 1981 and served as a partner with Baker Tilly from 1987 until 1991.
John is a director and trustee of Yorkshire Air Ambulance Limited.
He will resign from the Board on 29 November 2017.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 34 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Executive Directors continued Sean WyndhamQuin  Director 37 was appointed to the Board on 8 November 2017.
Previously he served as a partner at SPARK Advisory Partners a business he cofounded in early 2012.
Prior to that he worked for Brewin Dolphin and Ernst and Young where he qualified as a chartered accountant.
He will take responsibility as Group Finance Director on the 29 November 2017.
Paul Scott retires by rotation at the 2018 Annual General Meeting AGM and offers himself for reappointment.
Additionally David Brown and Sean WyndhamQuin who were appointed during the year will offer themselves for reappointment.
The Board recommends their reappointment as it considers that they continue to perform their roles well and bring considerable strategic financial and management experience to the Groups business.
The Articles of Association provide that each Director shall be indemnified by the Company against losses costs and expenses he may sustain or incur in connection with the performance of his duties of office to the fullest extent permitted by law.
The Company has purchased and maintained throughout the year directors and officers liability insurance in respect of its Directors.
Directors interests The beneficial interests of the Directors and their immediate family members in the shares of the Company and options for shares are set out on pages 37 and 38.
No Director has any interest in any other Group company.
Details of the Directors remuneration and service contracts appear on pages 36 and 37.
Disclosable interests As at 17 November 2017 the Company has been notified of the following disclosable interests in the voting rights of the Company Number Percentage of ordinary of issued shares share capital Octopus Investments Nominees Limited 10647018 17.01% Canaccord Genuity Group Inc.
8090037 12.93% Investec Wealth and Investment Limited 3773606 6.03% Charles Stanley Group PLC 3121495 4.99% Miton Group PLC 2922658 4.67% Share capital As at the date of this report the total number of shares in issue being ordinary shares of 10p each is 62591451.
During the year the Company has not bought back any of its own shares.
273503 new ordinary shares of 10p each were issued at 434p during the year to satisfy the exercise of share options.
Disclosure of information to the auditor The Directors who held office at the date of approval of this Directors Report confirm the following so far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups Auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups Auditor is aware of that information.
Auditor
Resolutions will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM to reappoint KPMG LLP as Auditor to the Group and to authorise the Directors to determine their remuneration.
Approval
The Board approved the Report of the Directors on 21 November 2017.
By Order of the Board J Samuel FCA Company Secretary 21 November 2017 Company number Directors report continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 35 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors remuneration report The Directors present the Directors remuneration report the Remuneration Report for the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
As an AIM listed company Renew is not required to prepare this Remuneration Report in accordance with the Directors Remuneration Report Regulations 2002 or the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 together the Regulations.
However the Directors recognise the importance and support the principles of the Regulations and seek to follow them to the extent considered relevant for an AIM listed company.
The
Remuneration Committee will continue to monitor market practice to ensure that in future this report will include disclosures at least as good as market practice for AIM companies.
The Auditor is not required to report to the shareholders on the Directors Remuneration Report.
The Board consults with major shareholders when any significant change in the structure or scale of directors remuneration is being considered and will continue to do so.
No material matters have been raised by shareholders relating to directors remuneration during the year.
D A Brown was appointed to the Board and to the Remuneration Committee on 2 April 2017.
On 6 February 2017 the Company announced that J Samuel had given 12 months notice of his intention to leave the Company after 11 years service.
As subsequently announced S WyndhamQuin will assume the role of Group Finance Director on 29 November 2017.
At the last general meeting votes on the advisory resolution relating to the Remuneration Report were cast as follows In favour 6038854 98.1 per cent
1 16186 1.9 per cent Total votes cast 6155040 100 per cent Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is chaired by D M Forbes and also comprises R J Harrison D A Brown and J Bishop.
The
Committee held three meetings during the financial year to discuss remuneration arrangements.
The Remuneration Committees terms of reference include to determine and agree with the Board the framework and policy for the remuneration packages including bonuses incentive payments and share options or share awards of the Executive Directors and members of the Executive Management to review and approve the design of all share incentive plans and performance related pay schemes for approval by the Board and shareholders as applicable to determine targets and awards made under share incentive plans and performance related pay schemes to determine the policy for and scope of pension arrangements for each Executive Director and other senior executives and to ensure contractual terms and payments made on termination are fair to the individual and the Company and that failure is not rewarded.
Nonexecutive Directors do not have any personal interest in the matters to be decided by the Committee other than as shareholders nor any potential conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships and no daytoday involvement in the running of the Company.
The Executive Directors and other senior personnel may be invited to attend meetings when appropriate to provide advice.
However no Director is present or takes part in discussions concerning his own remuneration.
Remuneration policy The Companys remuneration policy is that the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors should be sufficiently competitive to attract retain and motivate those Directors to achieve the Companys objectives without making excessive payments.
The remuneration and employment terms of the Executive Directors are determined by the Committee by comparison with salaries paid to and terms agreed with directors in similar companies in the same sector and of a similar size and after a review of the performance of the individual.
It is the aim of the Committee to reward Executive Directors competitively and on the broad principle that they should be in the range of median to upper quartile of remuneration paid to senior management of comparable public companies.
For guidance the Committee refers to published survey data.
The Board determines the terms and conditions of nonexecutive Directors.
There are four main elements to the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors and other senior executives basic salary and benefits annual bonus awards longterm equity incentive plans and pension arrangements.
Basic salary and benefits Basic salaries are reviewed annually by the Remuneration Committee and adjusted where the Committee believes that adjustments are appropriate to reflect performance changed responsibilities andor market conditions.
Other benefits for Executive Directors include car allowances and certain medical cover for Directors and their immediate family.
The Company also has a permanent health insurance policy to provide cover for the Executive Directors.
Annual bonus awards It is the Companys policy to provide a bonus incentive scheme for Directors and senior executives of the operating companies linked directly to the performance of the businesses for which they are responsible.
In the case of the Executive Directors other than A. the performance of the Group as a whole.
A. iebenbergs bonus criteria relate to the performance of the businesses for which he is directly responsible.
All performance criteria are subject to approval by the Remuneration Committee at the beginning of a year and all payments are made only when approved by the Remuneration Committee.
Details of the annual bonus scheme for the year under review and the following year are set out below.
Longterm equity incentive plans The Remuneration Committee implemented a new long term incentive plan LTIP which was approved at an Extraordinary General Meeting EGM held on 25 January 2012.
The LTIP has been designed so as to comply with ABI guidelines in all material respects and to align a material part of a Directors remuneration more closely with shareholders.
The performance criteria to be achieved by the Company in respect of the LTIP are as follows Vesting of one half of the options is dependent on absolute growth in the Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR and the other half dependent on the Companys TSR performance as compared to the TSR achieved by other companies in a comparator group of companies selected by the Remuneration Committee.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 36 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors remuneration report continued Remuneration policy continued Longterm equity incentive plans continued The constituents of the comparator group are reconsidered by the Remuneration Committee each year.
All TSR calculations are based on the average of the opening and closing share price over a 30 day period prior to the commencement and end of the performance period.
The absolute TSR growth target requires the Companys TSR over the three year performance period to have grown by more than 25 per cent.
For TSR growth between 25 per cent and 100 per cent the half of the option which is subject to the absolute TSR growth target vests on a straightline basis from nil vesting at 25 per cent growth to 100 per cent vesting at 100 per cent growth.
There is no vesting if TSR growth is 25 per cent or less.
The
Remuneration Committee consider this mechanism important to ensure that it meets the overall objectives of the LTIP.
In the event of a material correction of any accounts of the Company used to assess satisfaction of any performance conditions or in the event of a participants gross misconduct options may be reduced adjusted or cancelled as determined by the Remuneration Committee.
To the extent that options have already been exercised the Remuneration Committee may having considered all the circumstances require the participant to return any shares received or the amounts of any proceeds of the sale of such shares net of tax.
The Renew Holdings plc Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS and the Renew Holdings plc Savings Related Share Option Scheme were approved at an EGM held on 11 March 2004.
There are 31467 options outstanding under the ESOS.
The Remuneration Committee does not currently intend to grant any further options under the Renew Holdings plc Savings Related Share Option Scheme.
The Companys policy to grant options or awards under the above schemes is at the Remuneration Committees discretion as and when considered appropriate.
The Remuneration Committee is empowered to grant a maximum number of LTIP options over 10p Ordinary Shares equivalent in value to 150 per cent of basic salary per financial year.
The options may be granted with an exercise price equal to their nominal value or as nil cost options.
The Company also has the ability but not the obligation to provide a cash alternative to participants equal to the net benefit of their LTIP option.
This simplifies the settlement process reducing complexity and cost to both the Company and the participant and reducing dilution to the shareholders all whilst preserving the overall economic effect of the LTIP award.
Remuneration for the year ending 30 September 2017 Service contracts and letters of appointment The Companys policy is for all of the Executive Directors to have rolling service contracts that provide for a twelve month notice period.
The fees of nonexecutive Directors are determined by the full Board within the limits set out in the Articles of Association.
The nonexecutive Directors are not eligible for bonuses pension benefits share options or other benefits.
The
Directors are indemnified to the full extent permitted by statute under the Articles of Association.
All nonexecutive Directors are subject to reelection every 3 years.
The service contracts of the Directors who served during the year ended 30 September 2017 and were in post on that date include the following terms Directors ExecutiveNonexecutive Date of contract Unexpired term Notice period months R J Harrison Nonexecutive 1 February 2009 Rolling one month 1 J Bishop Nonexecutive 1 September 2008 Rolling one month 1 D M Forbes Nonexecutive 1 June 2011 Rolling one month 1 D A Brown Nonexecutive 2 April 2017 Rolling one month 1 P Scott Executive 1 July 2014 Rolling one year 12 A Liebenberg Executive 31 March 2016 Rolling one year 12 J Samuel Executive 17 May 2006 Four months 12 Notwithstanding the unexpired term above it has been agreed that J Samuel will resign from the Board on 29 November 2017 and will cease employment with the Group at 31 December 2017.
S WyndhamQuin who was appointed to the Board on 8 November 2017 also has a rolling one year contract with a twelve month notice period.
Directors remuneration Information is provided below for Directors who served during the financial year and as at 30 September 2017 Total emoluments T otal emoluments Salaryfees Bonuses LTIP Pension Benefits 2017 2016 Executive Directors A Liebenberg 2457 203 204   48 455 213 J Samuel 1234tel 58 946 1121 B W May 1       1476 1874 3184 Nonexecutive Directors R J Harrison 63     63 62 J Bishop 34     34 34 D M Forbes 34     34 34 D A Brown 6 17     17 2022 3314 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 37 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors remuneration continued
The highest paid Director for 2017 was J Samuel who received emoluments of 946000.
In 2016 the highest paid Director was B W May who received emoluments of 1476000 that year.
He retired on 30 September 2016.
Bonuses were earned by P Scott A Liebenberg and J Samuel during the current financial year and will be paid in the year ending 30 September 2018.
During the year J Samuel exercised 112518 LTIPs and received a bonus based on notional dividends relating to those LTIPs.
The gain of 486000 and the bonus of 19000 totalling 505000 is included in the table above.
Benefits include car allowances and certain medical cover for the Director and immediate family.
P Scott A Liebenberg and J Samuel received payments amounting to 15 per cent of their basic salary in lieu of Company pension contributions.
These were paid through payroll and taxed as salary and are included in Benefits above.
D A Brown was appointed as a Director with effect from 2 April 2017 and so the emoluments shown above represent the six month period ended 30 September 2017.
All of A Liebenbergs emoluments were borne by a subsidiary undertaking.
A Liebenberg was appointed to the Board on 31 March 2016 and so the comparative figures represent a six month period only.
Annual bonus awards The Company provides a bonus incentive scheme for Executive Directors other than A Liebenberg linked to the performance of the Group.
At the beginning of each year the Remuneration Committee agrees a target for operating profit before exceptional items for the Group.
If the Group meets that target then the Executive Directors receive an annual bonus equal to 50 per cent of their salary.
The level of over and under performance causes the level of annual bonus to vary on a straightline basis with the maximum bonus of 100 per cent of salary being paid if the performance exceeds the target by 30 per cent with no bonus being payable if performance is 50 per cent or more below target.
The Remuneration Committee makes such adjustments to the target andor results to remove distortions such as acquisitions and disposals during the year and other items as they believe are necessary.
At the beginning of the year ended 30 September 2017 the Remuneration Committee agreed a target for operating profit before exceptional items for the Group based on the structure of the Group on that date.
The target was increased in November 2016 to 25318000 following the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Limited.
The operating profit before exceptional items for the Group exceeded this target by approximately 1 per cent.
Accordingly under the terms of the scheme the Executive Directors are entitled to receive an annual bonus equal to 51.5 per cent of salary.
A Liebenbergs annual bonus arrangements were set in relation to the business unit over which he has direct responsibility.
That business units performance was such that A Liebenberg is entitled to receive a bonus of 100% of his salary.
Longterm equity incentive plans The market price of the Companys shares at 30 September 2017 was 414p and the range of market prices during the year was between 366p and 487p.
Information is provided below for Directors who served during the financial year and as at 30 September 2017.
Directors share options Pursuant to the LTIP and the ESOS the Board has granted options to the Executive Directors as set out in the following table.
The LTIP options are exercisable at a nominal cost but are only exercisable to the extent that certain performance criteria are achieved by the Company over a three year performance period.
The ESOS options which have an exercise price of 286p per share are used solely to enable beneficiaries to take advantage of the approved nature of the ESOS for a limited proportion of the LTIP award.
The same performance criteria apply to the ESOS options which cannot be exercised until the same date as the related LTIP options.
To the extent that there is a gain arising on the ESOS options at the date of exercise the option holder will forfeit LTIP options to the same value immediately.
Exercisable between Exercisable between Exercisable between Number of Ordinary Shares under option 08 Jan 2018 and 7 Jan 2022 28 Jan 2019 and 27 Jan 2023 25 Nov 2019 and 24 Nov 2026 LTIP Options P Scott 60000 67700 91400 A Liebenberg 40000 58000 67700 J Samuel 84000 53333 28000 ESOS Options P Scott 10489 A Liebenberg 10489 J Samuel 10489 Performance criteria for the vesting of the share options under the LTIP are set out in the Remuneration policy above and in Note 23 to the Accounts.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 38 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Directors remuneration report continued Directors share options continued During the year options awarded on 3 January 2014 and 27 January 2016 amounting to 273503 shares in aggregate vested in accordance with their vesting conditions.
These options were subsequently exercised on 13 January 2017 and 160985 shares were issued to B W May and 112518 shares to J Samuel at 434p per share prior to dealing costs.
Additionally following his retirement from the Board B W May was entitled to exercise a proportion of LTIP and CSOP options which had been awarded on 7 January 2015.
He exercised these options on 17 March 2017 which resulted in his acquiring a further 42158 shares at 458p.
All of B W Mays option entitlements have now been exercised.
The level of vesting reflects the substantial rise in earnings per share share price and total shareholder return during the vesting period.
In addition and in accordance with the rules of the LTIP payments of 30000 and 19000 were made to B W May and J Samuel respectively representing dividends accrued during the vesting period on the shares vested as detailed above.
Following the notice of resignation of J Samuel the number of options granted to him on 27 January 2016 and on 24 November 2016 has been prorated to reflect the reduced vesting period in accordance with the rules of the LTIP.
The reduced entitlements have been reflected in the table above and show the maximum number of options to which J Samuel is entitled.
They remain subject to performance criteria.
All of J Samuels outstanding options must be exercised by 30 June 2018.
Directors pension information No Director has pension entitlements under the Groups defined benefit pension scheme arrangements.
The Group has established individual stakeholder plans for each employee who elects to join into which the Group makes contributions P Scott A Liebenberg and J Samuel receive a sum equivalent to 15 per cent of their basic salary in lieu of pension contributions from the Company.
Following the adoption of new Articles of Association at the AGM on 28 January 2009 the restriction on the retirement age of the Executive Directors was removed.
Directors share interests Those Directors serving at the end of the year and their immediate families had interests in the share capital of the Company at 30 September 2017 as follows Ordinary Shares of 10p each 30 September 30 September 2017 2016 R J Harrison OBE 150000 150000 J Bishop 9390 11890 D M Forbes 20000 20000 D A Brown P Scott 5000 5000 A Liebenberg J Samuel 262548 240548 Remuneration for the year ending 30th September 2018 Basic salary and benefits The basic salaries of P Scott A Liebenberg and J Samuel have increased by 3% to 283250 210120 and 260786 respectively with effect from 1 October 2017.
The increases for the executive Directors are very closely aligned to the average annual pay award across the Group as a whole excluding rises for promotions or other changes in responsibility.
There have been no material changes in the benefits which the Directors are entitled to receive.
Annual bonus awards The annual bonus scheme for the year ending 30 September 2018 is close to agreement.
The structure of the scheme is similar to the scheme for the previous year as set out above in all material respects except for the targets.
Executive
Directors will therefore be entitled to receive a bonus of 50 per cent of their basic salary if the Group achieves target operating profit and a maximum of 100 per cent of their basic salary if the Group achieves 130 per cent of target operating profit.
No bonus will be paid if the Group achieves 50 per cent or less of target operating profit.
Targets for A Liebenberg will relate to the business units over which he has direct management responsibility as was the case last year.
Longterm equity incentive plan The Remuneration Committee have made annual awards under the LTIP since it was set up in 2012 and will do so again this year.
Each award has been made shortly after the publication of the Companys annual results or in circumstances where the rules are being amended at the companys AGM then shortly after that meeting.
It is expected that the next award will be announced shortly after the publication of the Companys annual results.
Awards for each participant in the Scheme are limited in amount to 150 per cent of that participants basic salary.
The fourth tranche of options granted under the LTIP granted on 8 January 2015 as detailed above will vest during the coming year subject to the performance criteria contained therein.
Approval
The Directors Remuneration Report was approved by the Board on 21 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by D M Forbes Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 21 November 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 39 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE Statement of Directors responsibilities in respect of the Strategic report the Annual Report and financial statements The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare Group and parent Company financial statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent Company financial statements in accordance with UK accounting standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent company financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant reliable and prudent for the Group financial statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU for the parent Company financial statements state whether applicable UK accounting standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements assess the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that complies with that law and those regulations.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Independent auditors report to the members of Renew Holdings plc Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the financial statements of Renew Holdings plc the Company for the year ended 30 September 2017 which comprise the Group Income Statement Group Statement of Comprehensive Income Group Statement of Changes in Equity Group Balance Sheet Group Cashflow Statement Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Comprehensive Income Company Statement of Changes in Equity and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 1.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards including FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Materiality group financial statements as a whole 0.8 million 2016 1.0 million 4.9% 2016 5.2% of Group profit before income tax
96.0% 2016 96.8% of Group profit before income tax Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Carrying value of contract balances Revenue and profit recognition in relation to contracts Carrying value of parent Companys investments in subsidiary undertakings  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 41 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows The risk Our response Carrying value of contract balances 111.9 million 2016 87.4 million Refer to page 49 accounting policy and page 62 financial disclosures Subjective Estimate The Groups operating activities are primarily longterm contracts.
The carrying value of the contract balance is based on estimates of costs to complete and the level of contract variations.
Estimated contract costs are impacted by a variety of uncertainties that depend on the outcome of future events that could result in revisions throughout the contract period.
Our procedures included Test of detail Identifying a sample of contracts with risk indicators including low margin or lossmaking contracts high values of variations and large carrying value of amounts receivable on contracts.
For these contracts where possible we agreed the yearend contract balance to the cash recovered post period end andor the third party work certified to date Test of detail Where cash has not been received or work has not been certified post year end challenging the directors in respect of contract balances in the sample identified by obtaining the detailed project review papers from the Group to support the estimates made and challenged the judgements underlying those papers with senior operational commercial and financial management compared to our knowledge of the business Test of detail Assessing the forecasted cost to complete in the sample identified by considering contract performance and costs incurred post yearend along with discussions and challenge of the judgements underlying the positions taken with senior operational commercial and financial management compared to our knowledge of the business H i s t or i ca l c om p a r i s on s  Assessing the forecasting accuracy of contract margins by evaluating initial forecasted margins for a sample of contracts across the portfolio against actual margins achieved and Assessing transparency Assessing the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the accounting policies on longterm contracts and judgements and estimates set out in notes 1 and 1a.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 42 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Independent auditors report continued to the members of Renew Holdings plc The risk Our response Revenue and profit recognition in relation to contracts 558.6 million 2016 525.7 million Refer to page 50 accounting policy and pages 53 and 54 financial disclosures.
Subjective Estimate Group revenue and profit recognition involves judgement in interpreting margin expectation and final account conclusions.
The application of longterm contract accounting results in the need for regularly assessing the forecast costs to complete over the life of a contract.
The subjectivity involved in such decisions results in a significant risk of misstatement of the forecast costs to complete such that recognised revenue and profit could be incorrectly accounted for.
Our procedures included Test of detail For a sample of contracts we agreed the yearend contract balance to the cash recovered post period end andor the third party work certified to date in order to determine whether the revenue was recognised accurately and in the correct period Test of detail Challenging the directors in respect of revenue recognised in the sample identified where cash has not been received or work has not been certified post yearend by obtaining the detailed project review papers from the Group to support the estimates made and challenged the judgements underlying those papers with senior operational commercial and financial management compared to our knowledge of the business H i s t or i ca l c om p a r i s on s  Performing a retrospective review for contracts completed during the current year by comparing the final outcome of the contracts with previous estimates made for those contracts to assess the reliability of the directors forecasting process Test of detail Inspecting a sample of contract agreements with customers to identify key terms and conditions including contracting parties the contract period contract sum the scope of work and evaluating whether these key terms and conditions had been appropriately reflected in the total estimated revenue and costs to complete in the forecast of the outcome of the contract and Assessing transparency assessing the adequacy of the Groups disclosures in respect of the accounting policies on revenue recognition set out in note 1iii.
Carrying value of Companys investments in subsidiary undertakings 100.8 million 2016 102.0 million Refer to page 76 accounting policy and page 79 financial disclosures.
Forecastbased subjective valuation parent Company key audit matter The recoverable amount of company investments is subjective due to the inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting their future cash flows.
The discounted expected future cashflows are based on assumptions of forecast future financial performance which inherently contain an element of judgement and uncertainty.
Significant assumptions in the forecast future financial performance include sales growth rates operating margins and the discount rate applied to future cash flows.
Our procedures included Our sector experience Evaluating the assumptions used in particular those relating to forecast revenue growth and profit margins to our knowledge of the business and external benchmarks where appropriate B e n c h ma r k i n g a s s u m p ti o ns Comparing the assumptions to externally derived data in relation to key inputs such as projected economic growth cost inflation and discount rates Sen si t i v i t y a n a l y si s Performing breakeven analysis on the assumptions noted above and C om p a r i n g v a lu a t i on s  Comparing the carrying value of the companys investments to the market capitalisation to assess the reasonableness of those valuations.
Key audit matters our assessment of risks of material misstatement continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 43 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our application of materiality and an overview of the scope of our audit Materiality for the group financial statements as a whole was set at 0.8 million 2016 1.0 million determined with reference to a benchmark of Group Profit Before Income Tax of which it represents 4.9% 2016 5.2%.
Materiality for the parent company financial statements as a whole was set at 0.75 million 2016 0.95 million determined with a reference to a benchmark of company net assets of which it represents 1.0% 2016 1.4%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 0.04 million 2016 0.05 million in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 28 2016 28 reporting components we subjected 26 2016 27 to full scope audits for group purposes.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the percentages illustrated opposite.
The work on 26 of the 28 components 2016 27 of the 28 components including the audit of the parent company was performed by the Group team.
Full scope for group audit purposes 2017 Full scope for group audit purposes 2016 Residual components 2017 Residual components 2016 96 4I 100 I 100 I 96 4I 97 3I 94 6I 93 7I 97 3I 97 3I Group Profit Before Income Tax 16.3 million 2016 19.4 million Group Profit Before Income Tax Group materiality Group materiality 0.8 million 2016 1.0 million 100% 2016 100% 96% 2016 97% 94% 2016 93% 97% 2016 97% Group revenue Group profit before tax Group total assets Group profit before exceptional items and tax 0.04 million Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 0.05 million 0.75 million Range of materiality at 26 components 0.75 million1 2016 0.95 million to 1 0.8 million Whole financial statements materiality 2016 1.0 million Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 44 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS We have nothing to report on going concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to report on the other information in the Annual Report The directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
We have nothing to report on the other matters on which we are required to report by exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respectiv e responsibilities Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 39 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
The purpose of our audit work and to whom we owe our responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Mick Thompson Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 1 Sovereign Square Sovereign Street
LS1 4DA 21 November 2017 Independent auditors report continued to the members of Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 45 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Group income statement for the year ended 30 September Before Exceptional exceptional items and items and amortisation Before Amortisation amortisation of intangible amortisation of intangible of intangible assets of intangible assets assets see Note 3 Total assets see Note 3 T otalteltel Revenue Group including share of joint venture 2 560838  560838 525737  525737 Less share of joint ventures revenue 2 2239  2239 Group revenue from continuing activities 2 558599  558599 525737  525737 Cost of sales 496098  496098 469180  469180 Gross profit 62501  62501 56557  56557 Administrative expenses 37112 8946 46058 34603 2954 37557 Share of posttax result of joint venture 14 166  166 Operating profit 3 25555 8946 16609 21954 2954 19000 Finance income 5 30  30 373  373 Finance costs 5 534  534 624  624 Other finance income defined benefit pension Profit before income tax 25248 8946 16302 22328 2954 19374 Income tax expense 7 4391 516 3875 5268 532 4736 Profit for the year from continuing activities 20857 8430 12427 17060 2422 14638 Loss for the year from discontinued operation 4  4026 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company 12427 10612 Basic earnings per share from continuing activities 9 19.88p 23.53p Diluted earnings per share from continuing activities 9 19.75p 23.33p Basic earnings per share 9 19.88p 17.06p Diluted earnings per share 9 19.75p 16.91p Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 46 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Group statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2017 Restated Note 000 000 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company 12427 10612 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Movement in actuarial valuation of the defined benefit pension schemes 27 2089 14229 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension schemes 806 4661 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 1283 9568 Items that are or may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange movement in reserves 42 291 Total items that are or may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss 42 291 Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company 11102 1335 Details of the restatement are set out in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
Share
Called up Share Capital Cumulative based Retained T otal share premium redemption translation payments earnings equity capital account reserve adjustment reserve Restated Restated At 1 October 2015 6192 6989 3896 1056 327 3933 22393 Transfer from income statement for the year 10612 10612 Dividends paid 4611 4611 New shares issued 40 1492 1532 Recognition of share based payments 244 244 Exchange differences 291 291 Actuarial movement recognised in pension schemes 14229 14229 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension schemes 4661 4661 At 30 September 2016 6232 8481 3896 1347 571 366 20893 Transfer from income statement for the year 12427 12427 Dividends paid 5226 5226 New shares issued 27 1154 1181 Recognition of share based payments 109 109 Exchange differences 42 42 Actuarial movement recognised in pension schemes 2089 2089 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension schemes At 30 September 2017 6259 9635 3896 1305 680 6284 28059 Details of the restatement are set out in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
Group statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 September Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 47 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Group balance sheet at 30 September 2017 Restated Note 000 000 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  goodwill 10 57982 56259 other 10 2679 1280 Property plant and equipment 11 13497 13673 Investment in joint venture 14 237 Retirement benefit assets 27 9692 7704 Deferred tax assets 7 2057 1581 86144 80497 Current assets Inventories 12 3900 5362 Assets held for resale 13 1500 1500 Trade and other receivables 15 115598 93520 Current tax assets 220 Cash and cash equivalents 17 6967 14084 128186 114466 Total assets 214329 194963 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19  3100 Obligations under finance leases 20 2376 3030 Retirement benefit obligations 27 760 2110 Deferred tax liabilities 7 3892 2973 Provisions 21 314 312 7342 11525 Current liabilities Borrowings 19 3100 6200 Trade and other payables 18 173245 153472 Obligations under finance leases 20 2547 2623 Current tax liabilities  30 Provisions 21 36 220 178928 162545 Total liabilities 186270 174070 Net assets 28059 20893 Share capital 23 6259 6232 Share premium account 24 9635 8481 Capital redemption reserve 24 3896 3896 Cumulative translation adjustment 24 1305 1347 Share based payments reserve 24 680 571 Retained earnings 24 6284 366 Total equity 28059 20893 Details of the restated balance sheet are set out in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by R J Harrison OBE
21 November 2017 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 48 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Group cashflow statement for the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 Profit for the year from continuing operating activities 12427 14638 Share of posttax trading result of joint venture 166 Impairment and amortisation of intangible assets 8080 2954 Depreciation 4092 4036 Profit on sale of property plant and equipment 666 569 Expense in respect of share option exercise 1181 1532 Decrease in inventories 1324 60 Increase in receivables 19358 63 Increase in payables 13859 2609 Current and past service cost in respect of defined benefit pension scheme 60 47 Cash contribution to defined benefit pension schemes 5291 4701 Expense in respect of share options 109 244 Finance income 30 373 Finance expenseother income 337 1 Interest paid 534 624 Income taxes paid 2145 863 Income tax expense 3875 4736 Net cash inflow from continuing operating activities 17154 23662 Net cash outflow from discontinued operating activities 2116 6109 Net cash inflow from operating activities 15038 17553 Investing activities Interest received 30 373 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment 973 1020 Purchases of property plant and equipment 2150 1304 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 7024 208 Net cash outflow from investing activities 8171 119 Financing activities Dividends paid 5226 4611 Loan repayments 6200 6200 Repayments of obligations under finance leases 2542 3225 Net cash outflow from financing activities 13968 14036 Net decreaseincrease in continuing cash and cash equivalents 4985 9507 Net decrease in discontinued cash and cash equivalents 2116 6109 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 7101 3398 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 14084 10662 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 16 24 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 6967 14084 Bank balances and cash 6967 14084 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 49 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts 1 Accounting policies Presentation of consolidated financial statements The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU adopted IFRSs.
The financial statements are presented in sterling since this is the currency in which the majority of the Groups transactions are denominated.
Accounting estimates and judgements In the preparation of these financial statements the Board has made certain judgements and estimates which impact the measurement of various assets and liabilities in the Group balance sheet the value of transactions recorded in the Group income statement and the movements in equity as shown in the Group statement of changes in equity.
The actual financial outcomes may ultimately differ from that which is indicated by these judgements and estimates.
Estimates and judgements are reviewed by management and the Board on an ongoing basis and changes which may arise in them are reflected in the financial statements for the period in which such changes are made.
The Board has determined that the following areas are those in which estimates and judgements have been made and where material impacts could arise in the financial statements were such estimates and judgements to be varied.
IAS 11 requires management to estimate the total expected costs on a contract and the stage of contract completion in order to determine both the revenue and profit to be recognised in an accounting period.
The Group has control and review procedures in place to monitor and evaluate regularly the estimates being made to ensure that they are consistent and appropriate.
This includes reviewing the independent certification of the value of work done the progress of work against contracted timescales and the costs incurred against plan.
In accordance with IAS 36 goodwill is tested annually for impairment by comparing the carrying value of goodwill with the recoverable amount which is determined by an estimation of the value in use of the related cash generating unit to which the goodwill is attributed.
The calculation of the value in use requires estimates to be made of the future cash flows of the cash generating unit and the timescale over which they will arise.
Estimated growth rates and discount factors are also used in the calculation to estimate the net present value of the cash flows.
More information is given in Note 10 to these financial statements.
Independent actuaries calculate the Groups assetliability in respect of the defined benefit pension schemes.
The actuaries make assumptions as to discount rates salary escalations net interest on scheme assetsliabilities future pension increases mortality rates applicable to members and future rates of inflation.
These assumptions are made under the Boards direction.
The Board determines the appropriateness of these assumptions by benchmarking them against those used by other schemes and by taking advice from the independent actuaries.
If the actual experience of the schemes is different from the assumptions used then the pension assetliability may differ from that shown in these financial statements.
More information is given in Note 27 to these financial statements.
The Group makes provisions where the Board determines that liabilities exist but where judgements have to be made as to the quantification of such liabilities.
A provision has been made for onerous lease contracts in respect of property leases where the Board has determined that the expected economic benefits to be derived from the leases are less than the unavoidable cost of meeting the Groups obligations under the lease contract.
This arises where the Group is the head lessee for a property lease contract where the property is not used by the Group and where the Group has not been able to sublet the property or has only been able to do so on terms which are less favourable than those of the head lease.
The Group provides for deferred taxation using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax assets are recognised in respect of tax losses where the Directors believe that it is probable that future profits will be relieved by the benefit of tax losses brought forward.
The Board considers the likely utilisation of such losses by reviewing budgets and medium term plans for each taxable entity within the Group.
If the actual profits earned by the Groups taxable entities are different from the budgets and forecasts used then the value of such deferred tax assets may differ from that shown in these financial statements.
A noncurrent asset or a group of assets containing a noncurrent asset a disposal group is classified as held for sale if its carrying amount will be recovered principally through sale rather than through continuing use it is available for immediate sale and sale is highly probable within one year.
On initial classification as held for sale noncurrent assets and disposal groups are measured at the lower of previous carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell with any adjustments taken to profit or loss.
The same applies to gains and losses on subsequent remeasurement although gains are not recognised in excess of any cumulative impairment loss.
Any impairment loss on a disposal group first is allocated to goodwill and then to remaining assets and liabilities on pro rata basis except that no loss is allocated to inventories financial assets deferred tax assets employee benefit assets and investment property which continue to be measured in accordance with the Groups accounting policies.
Intangible assets and property plant and equipment once classified as held for sale or distribution are not amortised or depreciated.
In accordance with IFRS 5 the above policy is effective from the start of the accounting period in which the operation meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 50 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 1 Accounting policies continued f Accounting for discontinued operations in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent assets held for sale and discontinued operations continued A discontinued operation is a component of the Groups business that represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations that has been disposed of or is held for sale or is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Classification as a discontinued operation occurs upon disposal or when the operation meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale if earlier.
When an operation is classified as a discontinued operation the comparative income statement is restated as if the operation has been discontinued from the start of the comparative period.
The accounts have been prepared on the going concern basis and in accordance with applicable accounting standards under the historical cost convention.
In determining that the going concern basis is appropriate the Directors have reviewed budgets including cashflow forecasts and concluded that the Group has adequate cash resources to continue trading for the foreseeable future.
Prior Year Adjustment In previous years the Group has provided for deferred tax on its pension scheme surplus at the rate of corporation tax expected to be prevailing in the future provided that the relevant legislation had been enacted.
In the year ended 30 September 2016 a rate of 18% was used.
It has now become clear to the Board that in line with tax legislation which applies in the event of a refund of a surplus on the winding up of the pension scheme that a tax rate of 35% should be applied.
Consequently the Board has restated the opening Balance Sheet as at 1 October 2015 to reflect the above.
As at that date the effect of the correction of this prior period error is to increase deferred tax liabilities associated with the Retirement Benefit Asset by 2576000 with a corresponding reduction in net assets of the Group.
As at 30 September 2016 for the same reason the deferred tax liability has been increased by 1309000 compared to that previously reported.
During the preparation of these financial statements the Directors also became aware of inaccuracies in the corporation tax creditor at that date.
Correcting these resulted in an 833000 reduction in the corporation tax creditor at that date.
The net impact of these adjustments is to reduce net assets by 476000 at 30 September 2016.
The amendments related to the pension scheme tax primarily relate to movements in Other Comprehensive Income.
As such adjustments have been made to Other Comprehensive Income in 2016 and the total comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2016 is now 1335000 compared to the previously recorded loss of 765000.
Following the adjustments made in respect of this matter there has been no change in income tax expense for the year ended 30 September 2016 and as a result there has been no change to either the Income Statement or the Cash Flow Statement for 2016.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted for use in the EU.
The Group has applied all accounting standards and interpretations issued by the IASB and the International Financial Reporting Committee relevant to its operations and which are effective in respect of these financial statements.
The following new or revised International Financial Reporting Standards and IFRIC interpretations will be adopted where applicable for the purpose of preparing future financial statements.
The Group has carried out a systematic review to ensure that the impact and effects of IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 are fully understood and any necessary changes to current accounting procedures can be implemented in time.
In respect of IFRS 15 the Group has reviewed all of its existing major contracts and does not consider that any material adjustments to recorded revenue or to its accounting policies are required.
In respect of IFRS 16 no material net impact from the adoption of this new standard is expected although assets and liabilities will increase correspondingly.
IFRS 9 is not expected to have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group.
The Group has chosen not to adopt any of the standards and interpretations noted below earlier than required.
International Financial Reporting Standards Applies to periods beginning after IFRS 9 Financial Instruments January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with customers January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases January 2019 ii Basis of consolidation The Group accounts consolidate the accounts of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings.
The results and net assets of undertakings acquired are included in the Group income statement and balance sheet using the acquisition method of accounting.
The results of undertakings acquireddisposed of are included from the date the Group obtainsloses control as defined in IFRS 10.
The Groups interests in joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method.
Under this method the Groups share of the profits less losses of joint ventures is included in the consolidated income statement and its interest in their net assets is included in Investment in joint venture in the consolidated balance sheet.
Where the share of losses exceeds the Groups interest in the entity and there is no obligation to fund these losses the carrying value is reduced to nil following which no further losses are recognised.
Revenue which excludes intragroup revenue and Value Added Tax comprises value of work executed during the year on construction contracts based on monthly valuations and sales of land which are recorded upon legal completion.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 51 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1 Accounting policies continued iv Construction contracts Contract revenue includes the initial amount agreed in the contract plus any variations in contract work and claims to the extent that it is probable that they will result in revenue and can be measured reliably.
Contract revenue and expenses are recognised in accordance with the stage of completion of the contract.
The stage of completion is determined by surveys of work performed.
Contract costs incurred that relate to future activities are deferred and recognised as amounts recoverable on contracts.
When it is probable that the total contract costs will exceed contract revenue the expected loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
To the extent that progress billings exceed costs incurred plus recognised profits less recognised losses they are recognised as amounts due to construction contract customers.
The operating segments are based on the components that the Board the Groups principal decisionmaking body the Chief Operating Decision Maker monitors in making decisions about operating matters.
Such components are identified on the basis of information that is provided internally in the form of monthly management account reporting budgets and forecasts to formulate allocation of resources to segments and to assess performance.
Revenue from reportable segments is measured on a basis consistent with the income statement.
Revenue is principally generated from within the UK the Groups country of domicile.
Segment results show the contribution directly attributable to each segment in arriving at the Groups operating profit.
Segment assets and liabilities comprise those assets and liabilities directly attributable to each segment.
Group eliminations represent such consolidation adjustments that are necessary to determine the Groups assets and liabilities.
Goodwill arising on consolidation represents the excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups interest in the fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of a subsidiary associate or jointlycontrolled entity at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset and is tested for impairment annually or on such other occasions that events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired.
On disposal of a subsidiary undertaking the attributable amount of unamortised goodwill which has not been subject to impairment is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
Other intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
The cost of intangible assets is amortised over their expected useful lives.
These intangibles relate to customer relationships and contractual rights and are amortised over the period over which the Board has determined that future cash flows are likely to arise from these relationships and rights.
Property plant and equipment is recorded at cost less provision for impairment if required.
Depreciation is provided on all property plant and equipment other than freehold land.
Provision is made at rates calculated to write off the cost of each asset less estimated residual value evenly over its expected useful life as follows Freehold land no depreciation charge Freehold buildings  fifty years Plant vehicles and equipment  three to ten years viii Impairments Goodwill arising on acquisitions and other assets that has an indefinite useful life and is therefore not subject to amortisation is reviewed at least annually for impairment.
Other intangible assets and property plant and equipment are reviewed for impairment whenever there is any indication that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable.
If the recoverable amount of any asset is less than its carrying amount a loss on impairment is recognised.
Recoverable amount is the higher of the fair value of the asset less any costs which would be incurred in selling the asset and its value in use.
Value in use is assessed by discounting the estimated future cash flows that the asset is expected to generate.
For this purpose assets are grouped into cash generating units which represent the lowest level for which there are separately identifiable cash flows.
Impairment losses in respect of goodwill are not reversed in future accounting periods.
Reversals of other impairment losses are recognised in income when they arise.
Inventories comprise land and raw materials and are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes appropriate attributable overheads and excludes interest.
Where necessary provision is made for obsolete slow moving and defective inventories.
Trade receivables do not carry any interest and are initially recognised at their fair value and then at amortised cost.
Trade payables on normal terms are not interest bearing and are initially recognised at their fair value and then at amortised cost.
Cash and cash equivalents in the cash flow statement comprise cash at bank and in hand including bank deposits with original maturities of less than three months net of bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are included within borrowings within current liabilities in the balance sheet.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 52 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 1 Accounting policies continued xiii Provisions Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event and where it is probable that an outflow will be required to settle that obligation and where the amount can be reliably estimated.
Assets held under finance leases where substantially all the benefits and risks of ownership of an asset have been transferred to the Group are capitalised and are depreciated in accordance with the depreciation policy for the relevant class of asset.
The interest element of the rental obligation is charged to the income statement and represents a constant proportion of the balance of capital repayments outstanding.
Rentals under operating leases are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis the term of the lease.
Pension scheme assets are measured using market values.
Pension scheme liabilities are measured using the projected unit actuarial method and are discounted at the current rate of return on a high quality corporate bond of equivalent term and currency to the liability.
Any increase in the present value of liabilities within the Groups defined benefit pension schemes expected to arise from employee service in the period is charged to the income statement.
The Group determines the net interest incomeexpense on the net defined benefit assetliability for the period by applying the discount rate as determined at the beginning of the annual period to the net defined benefit assetliability taking account of changes arising as a result of contributions and benefit payments.
This is recognised in the income statement.
Movements in actuarial measurement of the net defined benefit assetliability is recognised in other comprehensive income in the period in which it occurs.
Pension scheme surpluses to the extent they are considered recoverable or deficits are recognised in full and presented on the face of the Group balance sheet.
Contributions to defined contribution pension plans are charged to the income statement as incurred.
The tax charge is composed of current tax and deferred tax calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Current tax and deferred tax are charged or credited to the income statement except when they relate to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the relevant tax is also dealt with in equity.
Current tax is based on the profit for the year.
Deferred tax is provided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements.
Deferred tax on such assets and liabilities is not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition other than in a business combination of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
The income statements of overseas subsidiary undertakings are translated at the average rate of exchange ruling throughout the financial year.
The balance sheets of overseas subsidiary undertakings are translated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences arising from this policy and arising on the retranslation of the opening net assets are taken directly to reserves.
All other exchange differences are taken to the income statement.
Financial assets are divided into the following categories trade receivables and financial assets at fair value.
The Board assigns financial assets to each category on initial recognition dependant on the purpose for which the asset was acquired.
The categorisation of these assets is reconsidered at each reporting date at which a choice of categorisation or accounting treatment is available.
All financial assets are recognised whenever the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the financial instrument.
All such assets are initially recognised at fair value.
Derecognition of such assets occurs when the Groups right to receive cash flows from the asset ceases or the rights and rewards of ownership have been transferred.
All such assets are reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Interest and other cash flows which arise from holding a financial asset are recognised in the income statement in accordance with IAS39.
Financial assets at fair value include assets classified as held for trading and changes in fair value are recognised through the income statement.
Trade receivables are non derivative financial assets with expected receipts which are not quoted in an active market and they arise when the Group provides goods or services.
A financial asset is assessed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any objective evidence that it is impaired.
A financial asset is considered to be impaired if objective evidence indicates that one or more events have had a negative effect on the estimated future cash flows of that asset.
An impairment loss in respect of a financial asset measured at amortised cost is calculated as the difference between its carrying value amount and the present value of the estimated cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
All impairment losses are recognised in the income statement.
Financial liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the financial instrument.
All interest related charges are recognised as an expense in the income statement.
Bank loans and hire purchase liabilities are entered into to provide financing for the Groups operations and are recognised as funds are received.
Financial liabilities are measured at amortised cost.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 53 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1 Accounting policies continued xx Share based payments IFRS 2 Share Based Payment requires a fair value to be established for any equity settled share based payments.
Fair value has been independently measured using a Monte Carlo valuation model.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equity settled share based payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Directors estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
The Group presents basic and diluted earnings per share EPS data for its ordinary shares.
Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding in the period.
Diluted EPS is determined by adjusting the profit or loss attributable to ordinary shareholders and the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the effects of all dilutive potential ordinary shares which comprise share options granted to employees.
Rental income from property is recognised in the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Lease incentives granted are recognised as an integral part of the total rental income over the term of the lease.
Finance income comprises interest income on funds invested and gains on hedging instruments that are recognised in income or expense.
Interest income is recognised as it accrues in income or expense using the effective interest method.
Finance expense comprises interest expense on borrowings unwinding of the discount on provisions and losses on hedging instruments that are recognised in income or expense.
All borrowing costs are recognised in income or expense using the effective interest method.
2 Segmental analysis The Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM is responsible for the overall resource allocation and performance assessment of the Group.
The Board approves major capital expenditure and assesses the performance of the Group and its progress against the strategic plan through monitoring key performance indicators.
The Board also determines key financing decisions such as raising equity all loan or bank borrowing arrangements and the granting of security over the Groups assets.
As such the Group considers that the Board is the CODM.
Operating segments have been identified based on the internal reporting information provided to the CODM.
From such information Engineering Services and Specialist Building have been determined to represent operating segments.
Following the identification of the operating segments the Group has assessed the similarity of the characteristics of the operating segments.
Given the different performance targets and markets operated within each operating segment it is not appropriate to aggregate the operating segments for reporting purposes and therefore both of the identified operating segments are disclosed as reportable segments.
The information received by the CODM shows results both pre and post exceptional items.
The Group had one customer within the Engineering Services sector which represented 34.3% 2016 38.2% of Group revenue.
No other customer represented more than 10% of the Groups revenue.
The segments are Engineering Services which comprises the Groups engineering activities which are characterised by the use of the Groups skilled engineering workforce supplemented by specialist subcontractors where appropriate in a range of civil mechanical and electrical engineering applications and Specialist Building which comprises the Groups building activities which are characterised by the use of a supply chain of subcontractors to carry out building works under the control of the Group as principal contractor and Central activities which include the sale of land the leasing and subleasing of some UK properties and the provision of central services to the operating subsidiaries.
On 31 October 2014 the Group entered into a contract to dispose of part of its Specialist Building segment.
The results of that business are shown as a discontinued operation.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 54 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 2 Segmental analysis continued a Business analysis Revenue is analysed as follows Group including Less share Group revenue Group revenue share of joint of joint from continuing from continuing venture venture activities activitiestel 2016 Engineering Services 452423 2239 450184 436213 Specialist Building 106834  106834 90503 Inter segment revenue 921  921 983 Segment revenue 558336 2239 556097 525733 Central activities 2502  2502 4 560838 2239 558599 525737 Analysis of profit on ordinary activities before taxation from continuing activities
Engineering Services 25142 8946 16196 21541 2954 18587 Specialist Building 2418  2418 2334  2334 Segment operating profit 27560 8946 18614 23875 2954 20921 Central activities 2005  2005 1921  1921 Operating profit 25555 8946 16609 21954 2954 19000 Net financing costsincome 307  307 374  374 Profit on ordinary activities before income tax 25248 8946 16302 22328 2954 19374 Balance sheet analysis of business segments 2017 2016 Assets Liabilities Net assets Assets Liabilities Net assets Engineering Services 205909 182683 23226 176484 151171 25313 Specialist Building 83894 79002 4892 62107 71527 9420 Central activities 123858 112754 11105 143565 127401 16164 Discontinued operation 31514 42678 11164 32790 43954 11164 Group eliminations 230846 230846  219983 219983 Group net assets 214329 186270 28059 194963 174070 20893 Other information 2017 2016 Capital Capital additions Depreciation Amortisation additions Depreciation Amortisation Engineering Services 2947 3358 2280 4867 3905 2954 Specialist Building 56 125  188 113 Central activities 946 609  4 18 3949 4092 2280 5059 4036 2954 b Geographical analysis The whole of the Groups revenue for both financial years is derived from continuing activities in the UK.
All of the Groups noncurrent assets are deployed in the UK.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 55 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 3 Operating profit 2017 2016 Operating profit is arrived at after chargingcrediting Auditors remuneration  audit services 288 255 Depreciation of owned assets 1760 1614 Depreciation of assets held under finance leases 2332 2422 Operating lease rentals  plant and machinery 1070 993 Operating lease rentals  motor vehicles 1145 983 Operating lease rentals  other 2544 2769 Rental income 185 281 Profit on sale of property plant and equipment 666 569 During the year the following services were provided by the Group auditor 2017 2016 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the financial statements 34 31 Fees payable to the Companys auditor and its associates for other services Audit of the financial statements of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 254 224 Tax compliance services 16 3 Tax advisory services 13 Other assurance services telExceptional items and amortisation of intangible assets 2017 2016 Acquisition costs in respect of Giffen Holdings Ltd 209 Impairment of goodwill 5800 Redundancy and restructuring costs 657 Total losses arising from exceptional items 6666 Amortisation of intangible assets see Note 10 2280 2954 8946 2954 Following the decision in April 2017 to withdraw from the lossmaking low pressure small diameter gas pipe replacement activities of Forefront Utilities Ltd the Board has carried out a review of the carrying value of goodwill attributable to that cash generating unit which has resulted in an impairment charge of 5800000.
The Board has separately identified the charge of 2280000 2016 2954000 for the amortisation of the fair value ascribed to certain intangible assets other than goodwill arising from the acquisitions of Amco Group Holdings Ltd Lewis Civil Engineering Ltd Clarke Telecom Ltd Forefront Group Ltd and Giffen Holdings Ltd.
Further details are given in Note 10.
4 Discontinued operation analysis 2017 2016 Revenue 126 7500 Expenses 126 11493 Loss before income tax Income tax credit  benefit of tax losses  785 Income tax charge  adjustment in respect of previous period  818 Loss for the year from discontinued operation  4026 On 31 October 2014 the Board reached an agreement to sell Allenbuild Ltd to Places for People Group Ltd PFP for a total consideration of 2.75m payable in cash.
PFP paid the initial 50% of the consideration on 31 October 2014 and the balance on 31 January 2016.
The trading result for this business in so far as it impacts the Group is shown in the table above.
As a term of the disposal Renew Holdings plc retains both the benefits and the obligations associated with a number of Allenbuild contracts.
The last of these contracts completed on site in the 201617 financial year.
As at 30 September 2017 certain of these contracts remain in their contractual defects period of twelve months.
A number of these contracts are in the process of being finally settled with the client.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 56 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 5 Finance income and costs Finance income Finance income of 30000 2016 373000 has been earned during the year on bank deposits and translation of loans denominated in foreign currencies.
2017 2016 Finance costs On bank loans and overdrafts 405 384 Other interest payable 129 240 Other finance income  defined benefit pension schemes Interest on scheme assets 4849 6577 Interest on scheme obligations 4652 5952 Net pension interest 197 625 Further information on the defined benefit pension schemes is set out in Note 27 to the accounts.
6 Employee numbers and remuneration 2017 2016 Number Number The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors employed in continuing activities during the year was 2864 2969 At 30 September 2868 3073 Production 1942 2112 Administrative 922 857 2864 2969 Cost of staff including Executive Directors during the year amounted to 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 127240 130643 Social security costs 12918 13257 Other pension costs 4515 4611 Share based payments 1290 1776 145963 150287 Directors emoluments 2017 2016 Aggregate emoluments 2022 3314 Highest paid director aggregate emoluments 946 1476 Total T otal emoluments emoluments Salaryfees Bonuses LTIP Benefits 2017 2016 Executive Directors A Liebenberg 203 204  48 455 213 J Samuel  1121 B W May      1476 1874 3184 Nonexecutive Directors R J Harrison 63    63 62 J Bishop 34    34 34 D M Forbes 34    34 34 D Brown 17    17 2022 3314 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 57 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 6 Employee numbers and remuneration continued Directors share options Pursuant to the long term incentive plan LTIP and Executive Share Option Scheme ESOS the Board has granted options to the Executive Directors as set out in the following table.
The LTIP options are exercisable at a nominal cost but are only exercisable to the extent that certain performance criteria are achieved by the Company over a three year performance period.
The ESOS options which have an exercise price of 286p per share are used solely to enable beneficiaries to take advantage of the approved nature of the ESOS for a limited proportion of the LTIP award.
The same performance criteria apply to the ESOS options which cannot be exercised until the same date as the related LTIP options.
To the extent that there is a gain arising on the ESOS options at the date of exercise the option holder will forfeit LTIP options to the same value immediately.
Number of Ordinary Shares under option Exercisable Exercisable Exercisable between between between 8 Jan 2018 28 Jan 2019 25 Nov 2019 and 7 Jan 2022 and 27 Jan 2023 and 24 Nov 2026 LTIP Options P Scott 60000 67700 91400 A Liebenberg 40000 58000 67700 J Samuel 84000 53333 28000 ESOS Options P Scott 10489 A Liebenberg 10489 J Samuel 10489 During the year J Samuel exercised 112518 LTIPs and received a bonus based on notional dividends relating to those LTIPs.
The gain of 486000 and bonus of 19000 totalling 505000 is included in the remuneration table above.
During the year 109000 2016 244000 was charged to the income statement with a corresponding credit to the share based payments reserve in accordance with IFRS 2.
7 Income tax expense a Analysis of expense in year 2017 Restated Current tax UK corporation tax on profits of the year 2719 2909 Adjustments in respect of previous period 825 171 Total current tax 1894 3080 Deferred tax  defined benefit pension schemes 1753 1782 Deferred tax  other timing differences 228 126 Total deferred tax 1981 1656 Income tax expense in respect of continuing activities 3875 4736 b Factors affecting income tax expense for the year 2017 2016 Profit before income tax 16302 19374 Profit multiplied by standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.5% 2016 20.0% 3179 3875 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 1347 1225 Timing differences not provided in deferred tax 43 651 Change in tax rate 48 58 Adjustment in respect of tax losses 265 174 Adjustments in respect of previous period 825 171 3875 4736 Timing differences not provided for in deferred tax arise principally from the utilisation of tax losses not previously recognised.
Finance No 2 Bill 2017 includes legislation effective from 1 April 2017 that limits the use of brought forward losses in any year.
The bill was substantively enacted on 31 October 2017.
Had the bill been enacted on 30 September 2017 or earlier the effect of the legislation would have been to increase the Groups current tax charge and liability at 30 September 2017 which has been calculated without reference to the annual restriction on the use of brought forward losses by 0.2m.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 58 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 7 Income tax expense continued b Factors affecting income tax expense for the year continued Deferred tax has been provided at a rate of 17% 2016 18% which will be the effective corporation tax rate from 1 April 2020.
The Group has available further unused UK tax losses of 36m 2016 39m to carry forward against future taxable profits.
The Group also has unused USA tax losses of 20m 14.9m 2016 18m 14.2m to carry forward against future taxable profits in the USA.
A substantial element of these losses relates to activities which are not forecast to generate the level of profits needed to utilise these losses.
A deferred tax asset has been provided to the extent considered reasonable by the Directors where recovery is expected to be recognisable within the foreseeable future.
The unrecognised deferred tax asset in respect of these losses amounts to 8.6m 2016 9.9m.
Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
2017 2016 Defined benefit pension schemes 129 380 Accelerated capital allowances 712 547 Other timing differences  113 Future tax losses 1216 541 2057 1581 d Deferred tax liabilities 2017 Restated Defined benefit pension schemes 3392 2696 Fair value adjustments 500 277 3892 2973 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
2017 2016 As at 1 October 1581 1718 Origination of timing differences 554 409 Change of deferred tax rate 77 Acquisition of Giffen Holdings Ltd 1358 Defined benefit pension schemes  income statement 180 72 Defined benefit pension schemes  SOCI 71 344 At 30 September 2057 1581 f Reconciliation of deferred tax liability 2017 Restated As at 1 October 2973 6113 Acquisition of Giffen Holdings Ltd 625 Arising on fair value adjustments 388 532 Change of deferred tax rate 14 Defined benefit pension schemes  income statement 1573 1715 Defined benefit pension schemes  SOCI 877 4323 At 30 September 3892 2973 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 59 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 8 Dividends 2017 2016 Penceshare Penceshare Interim related to the year ended 30 September 2017 3.00 2.65 Final related to the year ended 30 September 2016 5.35 4.75 Total dividend paid 8.35 7.40 Interim related to the year ended 30 September 2017 1877 1651 Final related to the year ended 30 September 2016 3349 2960 Total dividend paid 5226 4611 Dividends are recorded only when authorised and are shown as a movement in equity rather than as a charge in the income statement.
The Directors are proposing that a final dividend of 6p per Ordinary Share be paid in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017.
This will be accounted for in the 201718 financial year.
9 Earnings per share 2017 2016 Earnings EPS DEPS Earnings EPS DEPS 000 Pence Pence 000 Pence Pence Earnings before amortisation 20857 33.36 33.15 17060 27.43 27.19 Exceptional items and amortisation 8430 13.48 13.40 2422 3.90 3.86 Basic earnings per share continuing activities 12427 19.88 19.75 14638 23.53 23.33 Loss for the year from discontinued operation    4026 6.47 6.42 Basic earnings per share 12427 19.88 19.75 10612 17.06 16.91 Weighted average number of shares 62514 62917 62201 62739 The dilutive effect of share options is to increase the number of shares by 403000 2016 538000 and reduce basic earnings per share by 0.13p 2016 0.15p.
10 Intangible assets
Goodwill relationships
At 1 October 2015 56868 12323 Addition 199 At 1 October 2016 57067 12323 Addition 7523 3679 At 30 September 2017 64590 16002 Impairment lossesamortisation At 1 October 2015 808 8089 Charge for year  2954 At 1 October 2016 808 11043 Charge for year  2280 Impairment 5800 At 30 September 2017 6608 13323 Carrying amount At 30 September 2017 57982 2679 At 30 September 2016 56259 1280 At 30 September 2015 56060 4234 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 60 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 10 Intangible assets continued The carrying amounts of goodwill classified as cash generating units CGUs are as follows 2017 2016 Britannia Construction Ltd 1253 1253
Construction PLC 1796 1796
Electrical Ltd 227 227 Seymour C.
Holdings Ltd and its subsidiary 4017 4017 West Cumberland Engineering Ltd and its subsidiary 207 207 Amco Group Holdings Ltd and its subsidiaries 18168 18168 Lewis Civil Engineering Ltd and its subsidiaries 6556 6556 Clarke Telecom Ltd 11143 11143 Forefront Group Ltd and its subsidiaries 6893 12693 Nuclear Decontamination Services Ltd 199 199 Giffen Holdings Ltd and its subsidiaries 7523 57982 56259 Giffen Holdings Goodwill of 7523000 was acquired on the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Ltd and was reviewed for impairment one year after the acquisition and then will be on an ongoing basis as required by IFRS 3.
No impairment was identified.
Further details are given in Note 29.
Goodwill impairment Following the decision in April 2017 to withdraw from the lossmaking low pressure small diameter gas pipe replacement activities of Forefront Utilities Ltd the Board has carried out a review of the carrying value of goodwill attributable to that cash generating unit which has resulted in an impairment charge of 5800000.
Forefront Utilities Ltd forms part of the Engineering Services segment.
Amortisation charges in respect of intangible assets with a finite life are recorded within administrative expenses in the income statement.
The amortisation policy is disclosed in the accounting policies and approximates to a period of four years.
In order to test goodwill for impairment the Group performs value in use calculations by preparing cash flow forecasts for each cash generating unit derived from the most recent financial budgets and strategic plans approved by management going forward three years and then extrapolates cash flows based on conservative estimated growth rates according to managements view of longer term prospects for each CGU.
The CGUs are deemed to be the subsidiaries to which the goodwill relates.
Management used growth rates deemed to be appropriate to each CGU after reviewing the particular market conditions related to the sector in which each CGU operates.
A growth rate of 3% 2016 3%5% per annum has been used.
The rate used to discount the forecast cash flows is 8% 2016 8%.
The Board considers the rate appropriate as based on publicly available information it represents the rate that a market participant would require for these assets.
The Board does not consider that there is any material difference between the markets of the CGUs to require different discount rates to be used.
The Board has chosen the discount rate having taken into account the cost of funds to the Group and the risks associated with the markets in which the CGUs operate.
Other than changes to the discount rate the key assumption which would impact the carrying value of goodwill is the margin generated by each CGU.
Whilst the sensitivities vary according to CGU for a material impairment to take place the discount rate would have to increase by 20% 2016 10% or the assumed operating margins would have to decrease by more than 10% 2016 10% before any impact on any single CGU.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 61 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 11 Property plant and equipment Freehold Plant vehicles land and buildings and equipment T otal
At 1 October 2015 2019 12675 14694 Additions  5059 5059 Disposals  4352 4352 At 1 October 2016 2019 13382 15401 Additions 319 3630 3949 Disposals  4908 4908 Acquisition of subsidiary  274 274 At 30 September 2017 2338 12378 14716
At 1 October 2015 124 1469 1593 Charge for year 37 3999 4036 Disposals  3901 3901 At 1 October 2016 161 1567 1728 Charge for year 27 4065 4092 Disposals  4601 4601 At 30 September 2017 188 1031 1219 Net book value At 30 September 2017 2150 11347 13497 At 30 September 2016 1858 11815 13673 At 30 September 2015 1895 11206 13101 The net book value of assets under finance leases at 30 September 2017 was 7583000 2016 6094000.
During the year 2332000 2016 2422000 of depreciation was charged against assets held under finance leases.
12 Inventories 2017 2016 Land 3145 4551 Raw materials 755 811 3900 5362 0.8m 2016 1.4m of inventories are pledged as security for liabilities.
13 Assets held for resale 2017 2016 Property 1500 1500 This office property has been actively marketed subsequent to a Group reorganisation when it became vacant.
Disposal has been delayed by current market conditions and the building is carried at net realisable value based on an annual independent third party valuation.
14 Investment in joint venture a Movement in year 2017 2016 At 1 October Acquired on 31 October 2016 71 Equity accounted share of net profits 166 At 30 September 237  Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 62 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 14 Investment in joint venture continued b Summarised financial information related to equity accounted joint venture 2017 2016 Current assets Trade and other receivables 378 Cash and cash equivalents 2681 Total assets 3059 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 2601 Current tax liabilities 89 Total liabilities 2690 Net assets reported by equity accounted joint venture 100% 369 Revenue 100% 6718 Expenses 100% 6222 Net profit after tax 100% 496 c Results of equity accounted joint venture 33% Group share of profit before tax 207 Group share of tax 41 Group share of profit after tax 166 The Group through a subsidiary undertaking has the following interest in the joint venture Country of Principal Percentage incorporation activity shares held Switchgear and Substation Alliance Ltd UK Engineering 33% The joint venture was acquired as part of the acquisition of Giffen Holdings Limited which is disclosed in Note 29.
15 Trade and other receivables 2017 2016 Trade receivables 73 12 Amounts due from construction contract customers 111889 87444 Other receivables 2058 4394 Prepayments and accrued income 1578 1670 115598 93520 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair value.
Included in trade and other receivables are debtors with a carrying value of 2.5m 2016 3.5m which are past due at the reporting date for which the Group has not provided as there has not been a significant change in credit quality and the Group believes that the amounts are still considered recoverable since there is no objective evidence that these financial assets are impaired.
The Group does not hold any collateral over these balances.
1.2m 2016 1.5m of these balances relate to certified retentions.
The average age of these receivables is 294 days 2016 298 days.
Ageing of past due but not impaired receivables 2017 2016 30180 days 848 1339 Greater than 1 year 939 1491 2546 3469 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 63 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 16 Construction contracts 2017 2016 Contracts in progress at the balance sheet date Amounts due from construction contract customers included in trade and other receivables 111889 87444 Amounts due to construction contract customers included in trade and other payables 2429 5883 109460 81561 Contract costs incurred plus recognised profits less recognised losses to date 2954631 3064423 Less progress billings 2845171 2982862 109460 81561 At 30 September 2017 retentions held by customers amounted to 13.7m 2016 10.5m.
Advances received from customers for contract work amounted to 2.4m 2016 5.9m.
Amounts due from construction contract customers which are past due at the reporting date amounted to 2.5m 2016 3.5m.
This amount includes retention balances of 1.2m 2016 1.5m.
The Group does not hold any collateral over these balances or other trade and other receivables.
Contract revenue recognised in the year amounted to 556.1m 2016 525.7m.
17 Cash and cash equivalents 2017 2016 Cash at bank 6958 14075 Cash in hand 9 9 6967 14084 18 Trade and other payables 2017 2016 Amounts due to construction contract customers 2429 5883 Trade payables 48905 39117 Other taxation and social security 8583 8468 Other payables 7512 5012 Accruals and deferred income 105816 94992 173245 153472 19 Borrowings 2017 2016 Bank loans repayable Within one year 3100 6200 Within two to five years  3100 3100 9300 The bank loans are secured by a fixed and floating charge over the Groups UK assets.
20 Obligations under finance leases Present value of minimum Minimum lease payments lease paymentstel 2016 Amounts payable under finance leases Within one year 2672 2784 2547 2623 Within two to five years 2542 3258 2376 3030 5214 6042 4924 5653 Less future finance charges 290 389 Present value of lease obligations 4924 5653 4924 5653 Less amount due for settlement within twelve months 2547 2623 Amount due for settlement after twelve months 2376 3030 It is the Groups policy to lease certain of its plant vehicles and equipment under finance leases.
The average outstanding lease term is 3 years 2016 3 years.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 the average effective borrowing rate was 3% 2016 3%.
Interest rates are fixed at the contract date.
All leases are on a fixed repayment basis and no arrangement has been entered into for contingent rental payments.
All lease obligations are denominated in sterling.
The fair value of the Groups lease obligations approximates to their carrying amount.
The Groups obligations under finance leases are secured on the asset to which the lease relates.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 64 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 21 Provisions
At 1 October 2016 532 Provision released during the year 182 At 30 September 2017 350 Noncurrent liabilities 314 Current liabilities 36 At 30 September 2017 350 Property obligations represent commitments on leases for properties which the Group does not occupy and where the Group does not expect to receive income sufficient to cover the full commitment.
The provision represents outflows which are expected to occur to the end of the lease commitment.
22 Other financial instruments The Groups principal financial instruments comprise bank loans cash and shortterm deposits and obligations under finance leases.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to provide finance for the Groups operations.
The Group has various other financial instruments such as trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
It is and has been throughout the period under review the Groups policy that no trading in financial instruments shall be undertaken.
The disclosures below provide information about the contractual terms of the Groups interest bearing deposits loans and borrowings.
Interest rate profile of financial assets and liabilities Financial assetsliabilities Fixed rate Fixed Floating interest rate rate rate T otal % 000 000 000
Sterling   6633 6633
Dollar   325 325 6958 6958
Sterling 3.0 4924 3100 8024 4924 3100 8024 Financial assetsliabilities Fixed rate Fixed Floating interest rate rate rate T otal % 000 000 000
Sterling   14011 14011 Euro   29 29 Dollar   35 35 14075 14075
Sterling 3.0 5653 9300 14953 5653 9300 14953 The interest bearing assets accrue interest at prevailing market rates.
Generally the Group holds deposits which are repayable on demand.
The sterling interest bearing liabilities accrue interest at a rate which is linked to the lenders base rate or LIBOR.
The maturity of the fixed rate financial liabilities is disclosed in Note 20.
The fixed rate liabilities have a weighted average period of 3 years 2016 3 years.
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities There are no material differences between fair value and the book value of the Groups financial assets and liabilities.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 65 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 22 Other financial instruments continued Financial risks The Group has exposure to a number of financial risks through the conduct of its operations.
Risk management is governed by the Groups operational policies guidelines and authorisation procedures which are outlined in the Corporate governance statement.
The key financial risks resulting from financial instruments are credit liquidity currency and market risk.
Credit risk is the risk of loss if a customer fails to meet its financial obligations and results primarily from the Groups trade and other receivables.
The degree to which the Group is exposed to this risk depends on the individual financial situation of each specific customer.
The Group assesses the credit worthiness of every customer prior to entering into any contract and requires appropriate evidence of financial capability on a case by case basis.
The Group reviews trade and other receivables for impairment on a regular basis and information relating to the ageing of receivables is provided in Note 15.
The Group does not use any form of invoice discounting or debt factoring.
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Board is responsible for ensuring that the Group has sufficient liquidity to meet its financial liabilities as they fall due and does so by monitoring cashflow forecasts and budgets.
The Board has considered the cashflow forecasts for the next twelve months which show that the Group expects to operate within its working capital facilities throughout the year.
The Board aims to maintain a strong capital base so as to ensure investor and market confidence and to sustain the future of the business.
The capital structure of the Group consists of equity attributable to equity holders of the Company as disclosed in Note 23 and reserves as disclosed in Note 24.
The Group arranges loans and short term overdraft facilities and hire purchase facilities as the Board deems necessary.
The Group does not have any derivative or nonderivative financial liabilities other than those disclosed in Notes 19 and 20 and the retirement benefit obligations disclosed in Note 27.
An analysis of the maturity profile for finance lease liabilities is given in Note 20.
The principal exposure of the Group to currency risk i. recognised in the income statement is in respect of an intercompany loan.
At 30 September 2017 the loan was 4521000 2016 2771000.
The dollar closing exchange rate was 1.34 1 2016 1.30 1 resulting in a foreign exchange charge of 121000 2016 gain of 323000 being chargedcredited to finance costs.
Consequently since the loan is not hedged the income statement is impacted by exchange rate movements.
Exchange rate movements on translation of Lovell America Incs net assets are charged to the cumulative translation adjustment within total equity.
The exchange loss arising on the translation of Lovell America Incs net assets was 42000.
The total equity statement would be impacted by 18000 for each 0.01 movement in exchange rates.
All functional currencies of the Group operations are denominated in sterling with the exception of the US operations whose functional currency is the US dollar.
Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices will affect the Groups income or the carrying amount of its holding of financial instruments.
The principal risk relates to interest rates where the Groups risk is limited to the rates applying to its interest bearing shortterm deposits and its bank loan.
A reduction in market interest rates could lead to a reduction in the Groups interest income and a reduction in its interest costs.
Consequently a 1% decrease in market interest rates would reduce annual finance costs by 10000 for every 1m of outstanding loan.
The Groups hire purchase financial liabilities are all at fixed rates of interest.
23 Share capital 2017 2016 Allotted called up and fully paid 62591451 2016 62317948 Ordinary Shares of 10p each 6259 6232 The holders of Ordinary Shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
During the year 273503 Ordinary Shares were issued following the exercise of options under the Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan.
Share options Renew Holdings 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme The Group operates a share option scheme the Renew Holdings plc 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme.
The scheme has both an Approved and Unapproved element.
The difference between the two elements is that the Approved scheme has the advantage of certain HMRC approved tax benefits.
Both elements have the same general terms and conditions.
Options issued under the scheme must be held for three years before they can vest and become exercisable.
They must be exercised within ten years from the date of grant.
As at 30 September 2017 there were 31467 options outstanding under the scheme.
During the year 10489 options were exercised.
31467 options are in issue under the Approved scheme at an exercise price of 286p.
These options are subject to the same performance criteria as options issued under the long term incentive plan described below.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 66 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 23 Share capital continued Share options continued Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan At the Annual General Meeting held on 25 January 2012 the shareholders approved a new long term incentive plan LTIP which succeeded the Renew Holdings plc 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme as the Directors believed that the LTIP was a more effective method of aligning executive and shareholder interests.
As at 30 September 2017 there were 550133 options outstanding under the scheme.
On 24 November 2016 options to subscribe for a further 243100 Ordinary Shares were granted.
During the year 305172 options were exercised.
137995 options lapsed during the year.
The options are exercisable at a nominal cost or at the par value of an Ordinary Share three years after the date of grant subject to the achievement of certain performance criteria.
Details of the options are given in the Directors Remuneration Report.
To the extent that there is a gain arising in respect of the approved options noted above the option holder will forfeit LTIP options to the same value.
Vesting of one half of the options is dependant on absolute growth in the Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR and the other half is dependant on the Companys TSR performance as compared to the TSR achieved by other companies in a comparator group of companies selected by the Remuneration Committee.
All TSR calculations are based on the average of the opening and closing share price over a 30 day period prior to the commencement and the end of the performance period.
The absolute TSR growth target requires the Companys TSR over the three year performance period to grow by more than 25%.
For TSR growth between 25% and 100% the half of the option which is subject to the absolute TSR growth target vests on a straightline basis from nil vesting at 25% growth to 100% vesting at 100% growth.
There will be no vesting if TSR growth is 25% or less.
The comparator group TSR performance target measures the Companys TSR over the 3 year performance period against the TSR of a group of companies selected by the Remuneration Committee.
If the Companys TSR performance falls below the median performance of the comparator group then the options lapse forthwith.
If the Company is ranked within the top decile of the comparator group the options shall vest in full.
If the Companys TSR performance is ranked between the median position and the top decile of the comparator group then the options shall vest on a straight line basis from nil at or below the median position to 100% at the top decile.
24 Reserves Share Capital Cumulative Share based Retained premium redemption translation payments earnings account reserve reserve reserve Restated At 1 October 2015 6989 3896 1056 327 3933 Transfer from income statement for the year 10612 Dividends paid 4611 Recognition of share based payments 244 New shares issued 1492 Exchange differences 291 Actuarial movement recognised in pension schemes 14229 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension schemes At 1 October 2016 8481 3896 1347 571 366 Transfer from income statement for the year 12427 Dividends paid 5226 Recognition of share based payments 109 New shares issued 1154 Exchange differences 42 Actuarial movement recognised in pension schemes 2089 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension schemes At 30 September 2017 9635 3896 1305 680 6284 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
There is no available analysis of goodwill written off against reserves in respect of subsidiaries that were acquired prior to 1989 and therefore in accordance with the guidance of IAS 36 the Directors are not able to state this figure.
Capital redemption reserve This reserve represents the combined impact of share buybacks and cancellations in previous years.
Cumulative translation reserve This reserve represents the foreign exchange movement on translating the opening net assets of Lovell America Inc.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 67 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 24 Reserves continued Share based payments reserve Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan Fair value has been independently measured by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP using a Monte Carlo model methodology.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equity settled share based payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Boards estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
109000 2016 244000 has been charged to administrative expenses in accordance with IFRS 2.
There is no impact on net assets since an equivalent amount has been credited to the share based payments reserve.
305172 options were exercised during the year.
The value per option represents the fair value of the option less the consideration payable.
The expected volatility has been calculated based on weekly historical volatility of the Companys share price over the three years prior to the date of grant.
The risk free rate of return has been based on the yields available on three year UK government bonds as at the date of grant.
Options granted under the Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan over the Companys Ordinary Shares at 30 September 2017 were as follows Date of grant 7 January 2015 27 January 2016 24 November 2016 T otal Awards outstanding at 30 September 2017 Directors and employees 184000 179033 187100 550133 Exercise price 0.0p 10.0p 10.0p Price at date of grant 288.5p 410.0p 394.0p Maximum option life 10 years 10 years 10 years Assumed option life for purposes of valuation 3 years 3 years 2.85 years Expected volatility 31% 30% 28% Dividend yield 1.7% 1.7% 2.0% Risk free interest rate 0.63% 0.58% 0.29% Value per option 99.0p 212.5p 289.0p 25 Capital and leasing commitments Land and Total T otal buildings Other 2017 2016 Commitments under noncancellable operating leases Under one year 1895 1560 3455 2922 Two to five years 4062 1934 5996 3879 Five or more years 1594  1594 3301 7551 3494 11045 10102 During the year 4759000 2016 4745000 was recognised as an expense in the income statement in respect of operating leases.
With regard to the operating leases held by the Group as lessor the Group recognised 185000 2016 281000 of rental income in the income statement for 2017 relating to subletting of surplus premises.
The future minimum sublease receipts expected to be received under noncancellable operating leases which all relate to land and buildings are as follows 2017 2016 Receivables under noncancellable operating leases Under one year 185 94 Two to five years 34telThe Group had capital commitments at 30 September 2017 of 697000 2016 77000.
26 Contingent liabilities Under the terms of the Groups banking agreement security over the Groups UK assets has been granted to the Groups bankers.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 68 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 27 Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations Defined benefit pension schemes The Group operates two defined benefit pension schemes the Lovell Pension Scheme and the Amco Pension Scheme.
Both schemes have been closed to new members and to further benefits accrual for many years.
IAS 19 Employee Benefits The Directors have adopted the accounting required by IAS 19 with effect from the transition date.
The Directors have discussed the assumptions used in determining the actuarial valuations set out below with independent pensions advisors and have determined that they are appropriate.
The Lovell schemes valuation at 30 September 2017 shows a surplus of 9692000 based on the assumptions set out below.
The Amco scheme shows a deficit of 760000 based on the assumptions used in its valuation which are similar to those used for the Lovell scheme except where the Directors in consultation with the schemes advisors consider it appropriate to vary them due to the different characteristics of the Amco scheme and its membership profile.
The
Directors have determined that it is appropriate to recognise the surplus as having reviewed the rules of the Lovell scheme they are of the view that the employer has an unconditional right to that surplus.
The following disclosures required by IAS 19 have been based on the most recent actuarial valuation as at 30 September 2017 carried out by Lane Clark and Peacock LLP Consulting Actuaries in respect of the Lovell scheme and Capita Employee Benefits Consulting Limited in respect of the Amco scheme using the following assumptions As at As at As at 30 September 30 September 30 Septembertel Lovell Pension Scheme Rate of increase in salaries 4.0% 4.0% 4.0% LPI increases to pensions in payment 4.2% 3.5% 3.0% Discount rate 2.6% 2.4% 3.7% Inflation assumption CPI 2.1% 2.0% 2.0% Inflation assumption RPI 3.2% 3.0% 3.0% Increases in deferred pensions 3.1% 2.9% 2.9% Amco Pension Scheme Rate of increase in salaries 3.2% 3.0% 3.0% LPI increases to pensions in payment 2.7% 2.6% 2.6% Discount rate 2.6% 2.4% 3.7% Inflation assumption CPI 2.2% 2.0% 2.0% Inflation assumption RPI 3.2% 3.0% 3.0% Increases in deferred pensions 2.2% 2.0% 1.8% The mortality tables adopted for the valuation of the Lovell scheme are the S2NA tables with future improvements in line with the Continuing Mortality Investigations 2016 model with long term improvement rates of 1.25% per annum for both males and females.
The Directors believe that this analysis provides a more reliable estimate of the mortality characteristics of the schemes membership.
Under these assumptions a 60 year old male pensioner is forecast to live for a further 27.4 years and the further life expectancy of a male aged 60 in 2037 is 28.9 years.
The mortality tables adopted for the valuation of the Amco scheme are the S2PA Mortality tables with future improvements in line with the Continuing Mortality Investigations 2016 model with long term improvement rates of 1.25% per annum for both males and females.
The Directors believe that this analysis provides a more reliable estimate of the mortality characteristics of the schemes membership.
Under these assumptions a 65 year old male pensioner is forecast to live for a further 22.1 years and the further life expectancy of a male aged 65 in 2037 is 23.5 years.
The assets in the Lovell scheme were Value as at Value as at Value as at 30 September 30 September 30 September 2017 Current 2016 Current 2015 Current 000 allocation 000 allocation 000 allocation Annuities 91400 53% 101201 53% 43216 26% Diversified portfolio 81273 47% 88592 47% 121985 74% Total 173451 100% 190524 100% 165603 100% During 2011 and 2016 the Trustees of the Lovell scheme in consultation with the Directors used scheme assets to purchase annuities which match certain pension liabilities in a transaction known as a buy in.
This asset provides protection against falls in gilt yields and risks in the performance of other asset classes.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 69 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 27 Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued IAS 19 Employee Benefits continued The assets in the Amco scheme were Value as at Value as at Value as at 30 September 30 September 30 September 2017 Current 2016 Current 2015 Current 000 allocation 000 allocation 000 allocation Annuities 6614 46% 7660 50% 6940 49% Diversified portfolio 7524 53% 6435 42% 6341 44% Cash 201 1% 1226 8% 984 7% Total 14339 100% 15321 100% 14265 100% During 2013 the Trustees of the Amco scheme in consultation with the Directors used scheme assets to purchase annuities which match certain pension liabilities in a transaction known as a buy in.
This asset provides protection against falls in gilt yields and risks in the performance of other asset classes.
Scheme Funding Levels and Actuarial Valuations Lovell Pension Scheme The scheme actuary carried out the triennial valuation of the Lovell Pension Scheme as at 31 March 2015.
The scheme showed a deficit of 12.1m compared to 24.1m when measured as at 31 March 2012.
The Group has agreed a revised recovery plan with the Trustees which commits the Group to paying annual contributions of 4260000 which is expected to result in the elimination of this deficit by 31 July 2018.
This recovery plan aims to eliminate the deficit under the Statutory Funding Objective of the Pensions Act 2004.
The Group may be required to make further contributions to achieve a buy out of all pension liabilities and the Group has agreed to continue to make such contributions under a secondary funding objective.
The necessity and quantum of these contributions will be remeasured by the scheme actuary at the next triennial valuation which is due as at 31 March 2018.
For accounting purposes under IAS19 actuaries use different assumptions than for the triennial valuation.
The major difference relates to assumptions concerning the future return on assets of the scheme which includes a number of return seeking assets invested with BlackRock Asset Management.
The key sensitivity for the valuation of the scheme under IAS19 is the selection of the discount rate which is the major determinant in measuring scheme liabilities.
A reduction of 0.1% in the discount rate would increase scheme liabilities by 2.7m.
Amco Pension Scheme The scheme actuary carried out the triennial valuation of the Amco Pension Scheme as at 31 December 2013.
The scheme showed a deficit of 2.1m compared to 2.5m when measured as at 31 December 2010.
A subsidiary undertaking has agreed a revised recovery plan with the Trustees which commits the subsidiary undertaking to paying annual contributions of 385000 which is expected to result in the elimination of this deficit by 31 October 2020.
This recovery plan aims to eliminate the deficit under the Statutory Funding Objective of the Pensions Act 2004.
The subsidiary undertaking may be required to make further contributions to achieve a buy out of all pension liabilities.
The necessity and quantum of these contributions will be remeasured by the scheme actuary at the next triennial valuation which is being measured as at 31 December 2016 and is expected to be completed in early 2018.
For accounting purposes under IAS19 actuaries use different assumptions than for the triennial valuation.
The major difference relates to assumptions concerning the future return on assets of the scheme which includes a number of return seeking assets invested with BlackRock Asset Management.
The key sensitivity for the valuation of the scheme under IAS19 is the selection of the discount rate which is the major determinant in measuring scheme liabilities.
A reduction of 0.1% in the discount rate would increase scheme liabilities by 0.2m.
Scheme Governance Both the Lovell Pension Scheme and the Amco Pension Scheme have boards of trustees chaired by an independent professional trustee Capital Cranfield Trustees Ltd.
Each scheme also has memberelected trustees who must be members of the scheme.
Both Renew Holdings plc for the Lovell Pension Scheme and Amalgamated Construction Ltd for the Amco Pension Scheme have the right to appoint employernominated trustees although neither has elected to do so other than to appoint Capital Cranfield Trustees Ltd.
The Lovell Pension Scheme trustees are advised by Lane Clark and Peacock LLP on both actuarial and investment matters.
The Lovell Scheme investments are independently managed by BlackRock Asset Management who are set a target return against which the trustees monitor their performance on a regular basis.
Annuities purchased in both 2011 and 2016 are held by Legal and General and Just Retirement.
The Amco Pension Scheme trustees are advised by Capita Employee Benefits Consulting Ltd on both actuarial and investment matters.
The Amco Scheme investments are independently managed by BlackRock Asset Management who are set a target return against which the trustees monitor their performance on a regular basis.
Diversified Portfolio BlackRock Asset Managements portfolio described above as diversified portfolio can consist of a wide range of underlying returnseeking assets including but not restricted to equities bonds gilts cash commodities and other openly traded assets.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 70 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 27 Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued IAS 19 Employee Benefits continued The following amounts at 30 September were measured in accordance with the requirements of IAS 19.
Lovell Pension Scheme 2017 Restated Movements in scheme assets and obligations T otal fair value of scheme assets brought forward 190524 165603 Interest on scheme assets 4489 6056 Employer contributions 4319 4316 Benefits paid 11315 8221 Running costs 1 11 Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 Total fair value of scheme assets carried forward 173451 190524 Present value of scheme obligations brought forward 182820 150449 Interest on scheme obligations 4253 5416 Current and past service costs 60 47 Benefits paid 11315 8221 Actuarial movement due to experience on benefit obligation 220 619 Actuarial movement due to changes in financial assumptions 6652 35748 Actuarial movement due to changes in demographic assumptions 5187 Total fair value of scheme obligations carried forward 163759 182820 Surplus in the scheme 9692 7704 Deferred tax 3392 2696 Net surplus 6300 5008 Amount charged to operating profit Current and past service costs 60 47 Running costs 1 11 Amount credited to other financial income Interest on scheme assets 4489 6056 Interest on scheme obligations 4253 5416 Net pension interest 236 640 Amounts recognised in the statement of comprehensive income Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 Actuarial movement due to changes in assumptions on scheme obligations 12059 35129 Actuarial movement 2506 12348 Movement in the net scheme surplus during the year Net scheme surplus brought forward 7704 15154 Current and past service costs 60 47 Running costs 1 11 Employer contributions 4319 4316 Net pension interest 236 640 Actuarial movement 2506 12348 Net scheme surplus carried forward 9692 7704 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note 1 Accounting Policies i.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 71 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 27 Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued IAS 19 Employee Benefits continued The following amounts at 30 September were measured in accordance with the requirements of IAS 19.
Amco Pension Scheme 2017 2016 Movements in scheme assets and obligations T otal fair value of scheme assets brought forward 15321 14265 Expected return on scheme assets 360 521 Employer contributions 972 385 Benefits paid 1634 780 Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 680 930 Total fair value of scheme assets carried forward 14339 15321 Present value of scheme obligations brought forward 17431 14864 Interest on scheme obligations 399 536 Benefits paid 1634 780 Actuarial movement due to changes in financial and demographic assumptions 1097 2811 Total fair value of scheme obligations carried forward 15099 17431 Deficit in the scheme 760 2110 Deferred tax 129 380 Net deficit 631 1730 Amount debited to other financial income Interest on scheme assets 360 521 Interest on scheme obligations 399 536 Net pension interest 39 15 Amounts recognised in the statement of comprehensive income Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 680 930 Actuarial movement due to changes in assumptions on scheme obligations 1097 2811 Actuarial movement 417 1881 Movement in the net scheme deficit during the year Net scheme deficit brought forward 2110 599 Employer contributions 972 385 Net pension interest 39 15 Actuarial movement 417 1881 Net scheme deficit carried forward 760 2110 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 72 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the accounts continued 27 Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued IAS 19 Employee Benefits continued Lovell Pension Schemetel 2014 2013 Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 18145 16348 1168 As a percentage of the assets at the end of the year 8.4% 12.0% 11.0% 11.2% 0.9% Total amount recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 2506 12348 10664 1514 5711 As a percentage of the obligations at the end of the year 1.5% 6.8% 7.1% 1.0% 0.9% The Lovell scheme has been in operation for many years and after taking advice from the Groups pensions advisors the Directors have determined that it is not possible to allocate the assets and liabilities of the scheme between the various Group companies.
As permitted by IAS 19 the Group has taken advantage of the multiemployer exemption and the surplus of the scheme is accounted for as an unallocated consolidation adjustment.
Amco Pension Schemetel 2014 2013 Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 680 930 297 731 967 As a percentage of the assets at the end of the year 4.7% 6.1% 2.1% 5.1% 7.2% Total amount recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 417 1881 1785 446 1059 As a percentage of the obligations at the end of the year 2.8% 10.8% 12.0% 3.3% 8.4% The Amco schemes sole employer is the Companys wholly owned subsidiary Amalgamated Construction Ltd.
Defined contribution pension schemes The Group operates a number of defined contribution pension schemes and individual stakeholder pension plans for its employees.
The Group made contributions of 4659000 2016 4701000 into these plans during the year.
There are also 286000 2016 430000 of accruals relating to these plans.
28 Related parties The Group has a related party relationship with its key management personnel who were Directors of the Company during the year J Samuel P Scott A Liebenberg RJ Harrison J Bishop DM Forbes and DA Brown whose total compensation amounted to 2131000 2016 3558000 all of which was represented by shortterm employment benefits including 109000 2016 244000 relating to share option charges in accordance with IFRS 2.
An analysis of this compensation is given in Note 6.
J Samuel is a director of Yorkshire Air Ambulance Ltd.
In the year ended 30 September 2017 the Group made a charitable donation of 5000 2016 5000 to sponsor the charitys annual recognition awards dinner.
There were no other transactions with key management personnel in the year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 73 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 29 Acquisition of subsidiary undertaking  Giffen Holdings Ltd On 31 October 2016 a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company acquired the whole of the issued share capital of Giffen Holdings Ltd Giffen for a cash consideration of 5m with a further 2m to redeem loans from Giffens private equity owners.
The value of the assets and liabilities of Giffen at the date of acquisition were Book value Adjustments Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets  goodwill  7523 7523 other  3679 3679 Property plant and equipment 274  274 Investments in associates and joint ventures 71  71 Deferred tax assets 791 59 732 1136 11143 12279 Current assets Inventories 71  71 Trade and other receivables 3854  3854 3925  3925 Total assets 5061 11143 16204 Current liabilities Borrowings 1999  1999 Obligations under finance leases 13  13 Trade and other payables 9563 396 9167 11575 396 11179 Total liabilities 11575 396 11179 Net assets 6514 11539 5025 Goodwill of 7523000 arises on acquisition and has been reviewed for impairment one year after the acquisition as required by IFRS 3.
The goodwill is attributable to the expertise and workforce of the acquired business.
Other intangible assets valued at 3679000 which represent customer relationships and contractual rights were also acquired and will be amortised over their useful economic lives in accordance with IFRS 3.
Deferred tax has been provided on this amount.
Amortisation of this intangible asset commenced from November 2016.
Fair value adjustments arising from the acquisition In accordance with IFRS 3 the Board has reviewed the fair value of assets and liabilities using information available up to 12 months after the date of acquisition.
Fair value has been calculated using Level 3 inputs as defined by IFRS 13.
Deferred tax assets The Directors reviewed the timing of recognition of tax losses available on acquisition and have recognised an additional 567000 deferred tax asset.
A 626000 deferred tax liability has been recognised in relation to the amortisation of other intangible assets.
Trade and other payables A loan note transferred on acquisition will not be called and therefore has a fair value of nil.
Goodwill impairment review The Board has reviewed the goodwill arising on acquisition for impairment as required by IFRS 3.
No such impairment was identified.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 74 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Company balance sheet at 30 September 2017 Restated Note 000 000 Fixed assets T angible assets E 625 642 Investments F 100825 101995 101450 102637 Current assets Stocks and work in progress G  632 Assets held for resale H 1500 1500 Debtors due after one year I 9692 7704 Debtors due within one year I 74301 76449 Cash at bank 89 76 85582 86361 Creditors amounts falling due in less than one year J 112283 117813 Net current liabilities 26701 31452 Total assets less current liabilities 74749 71185 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year K 3387 5386 Net assets 71362 65799 Capital and reserves Share capital M 6259 6232 Share premium account 9635 8481 Capital redemption reserve 3896 3896 Share based payments reserve 680 571 Profit and loss account 50892 46619 Equity shareholders funds 71362 65799 Details of the restated balance sheet are set out in Note A Accounting Policies i.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by R J Harrison OBE
21 November 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 75 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Company statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2017 Restated Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company 11128 11963 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Movement in actuarial valuation of the defined benefit pension scheme 2506 12348 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension scheme 877 4323 Total items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss 1629 8025 Items that are or may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Total items that are or may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Total comprehensive income for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent company 9499 3938 Details of the restatement are set out in Note A Accounting Policies i.
Called up Share Capital Share based Retained T otal share premium redemption payments earnings equity capital account reserve reserve Restated Restated At 1 October 2015 6192 6989 3896 327 47292 64696 Transfer from profit and loss account for the year 11963 11963 Dividends paid 4611 4611 New shares issued 40 1492 1532 Recognition of share based payments 244 244 Movement in actuarial valuation of the defined benefit pension scheme 12348 12348 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension scheme 4323 4323 At 30 September 2016 6232 8481 3896 571 46619 65799 Transfer from profit and loss account for the year 11128 11128 Dividends paid 5226 5226 New shares issued 27 1154 1181 Recognition of share based payments 109 109 Movement in actuarial valuation of the defined benefit pension scheme 2506 2506 Movement on deferred tax relating to the pension scheme At 30 September 2017 6259 9635 3896 680 50892 71362 Details of the restatement are set out in Note A Accounting Policies i.
Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 September Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 76 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the company accounts A Accounting policies i Basis of accounting Renew Holdings plc the Company is a company limited by shares and domiciled in the UK.
The accounts have been prepared on the going concern basis and in accordance with FRS 102 under the historical cost convention.
In determining that the going concern basis is appropriate the Directors have reviewed budgets including cash flow forecasts and concluded that the Company has adequate cash resources to continue trading for the foreseeable future.
Prior Year Adjustment In previous years the Company has provided for deferred tax on its pension scheme surplus at the rate of corporation tax expected to be prevailing in the future provided that the relevant legislation had been enacted.
In the year ended 30 September 2016 a rate of 18% was used.
It has now become clear to the Board that in line with tax legislation which applies in the event of a refund of a surplus on the winding up of the pension scheme that a tax rate of 35% should be applied.
Consequently the Board has restated the opening Balance Sheet as at 1 October 2015 to reflect the above.
As at that date the effect of the correction of this prior period error is to increase deferred tax liabilities associated with the Pension Scheme Asset by 2576000 with a corresponding reduction in net assets of the Company.
As at 30 September 2016 for the same reason the deferred tax liability has been increased by 1309000 compared to that previously reported.
During the preparation of these financial statements the Directors also became aware of inaccuracies in the corporation tax debtor at 30 September 2016.
Correcting these resulted in an 833000 increase in the corporation tax debtor at that date.
The net impact of these adjustments is to reduce net assets by 476000 at 30 September 2016.
The amendments related to the pension scheme tax primarily relate to movements in Other Comprehensive Income.
As such adjustments have been made to Other Comprehensive Income in 2016 and the total comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2016 is now 3938000 compared to the 1838000 previously recorded.
Following the adjustments made in respect of this matter there has been no change in income tax expense for the year ended 30 September 2016 and as a result there has been no change to the Companys profit for the year ended 30 September 2016.
The presentation currency of these financial statements is sterling.
All amounts in the financial statements have been rounded to the nearest 1000.
The Companys results are included in the consolidated financial statements of the Group.
The consolidated financial statements of Renew Holdings plc are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU.
In these financial statements the Company is considered to be a qualifying entity for the purposes of this FRS and has applied the exemptions available under FRS 102 in respect of the following disclosures Cash Flow Statement and related notes.
As the consolidated financial statements of Renew Holdings plc include the equivalent disclosures the Company has also taken the exemptions under FRS 102 available in respect of the following disclosures the disclosure required by FRS 102.11 Basic Financial Instruments and FRS 102.12 Other Financial Instrument Issues in respect of financial instruments not falling within the fair value accounting rules of Paragraph 364 of Schedule 1.
A summary of the more important Company accounting policies which have been applied consistently is set out below ii Investments in subsidiaries Investments in subsidiaries are recorded at cost less provision for impairment.
Tangible fixed assets are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Where parts of an item of tangible fixed assets have different useful lives they are accounted for as separate items of tangible fixed assets for example land is treated separately from buildings.
The Company assesses at each reporting date whether tangible fixed assets are impaired.
Provision is made at rates calculated to write off the cost of each asset less estimated residual value evenly over its expected useful life as follows Freehold land no depreciation charge Freehold buildings  fifty years Plant vehicles and equipment  three to ten years iv Leasing commitments Rentals under operating leases are charged to the profit and loss account on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 77 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS A Accounting policies continued v Taxation Tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the profit and loss account except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income.
Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable income or loss for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is provided except as noted below on timing differences that have arisen but not reversed by the balance sheet date where the timing differences result in an obligation to pay more tax or a right to pay less tax in the future.
Timing differences arise because of differences between the treatment of certain items for accounting and taxation purposes.
In accordance with FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard deferred tax is not provided on permanent timing differences.
Unrelieved tax losses and other deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that they will be recovered against the reversal of deferred tax liabilities or other future taxable profits.
Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods when the timing differences are expected to reverse based on tax rates and law enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Trade and other debtors are recognised initially at transaction price less attributable transaction costs.
Trade and other creditors are recognised initially at transaction price plus attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition they are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment losses in the case of trade debtors.
Stocks comprise land and are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost includes appropriate attributable overheads and excludes interest.
Interest is neither recognised nor charged on balances outstanding with fellow subsidiaries as they are repayable on demand.
Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences are taken to the profit and loss account.
Defined benefit pension scheme The Companys net assetliability in respect of the defined benefit scheme is calculated by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in return for their service in prior periods that benefit is discounted to determine its present value.
The fair value of any scheme assets is deducted.
The Company determines the net interest incomeexpense on the net defined benefit assetliability for the period by applying the discount rate as determined at the beginning of the annual period to the net defined benefit assetliability taking account of changes arising as a result of contributions and benefit payments.
The discount rate is the yield at the balance sheet date on AA credit rated bonds denominated in the currency of and having maturity dates approximating to the terms of the Companys obligations.
A valuation is performed annually by a qualified actuary using the projected unit credit method.
The Company recognises net defined benefit scheme assets to the extent that it is able to recover the surplus.
Changes in the net defined benefit assetliability arising from employee service rendered during the period net interest on net defined benefit assetliability and the cost of scheme introductions benefit changes curtailments and settlements during the period are recognised in profit or loss.
Remeasurement of the net defined benefit assetliability is recognised in other comprehensive income in the period in which it occurs.
Defined contribution pension schemes A defined contribution scheme is a postemployment benefit scheme under which the Company pays fixed contributions into a separate entity and will have no legal or constructive obligation to pay further amounts.
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension schemes are recognised in expense in the profit and loss account in the periods during which services are rendered by employees.
Share based payments FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard requires a fair value to be established for any equity settled share based payments.
Fair value has been independently measured using a Monte Carlo valuation model.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equity settled share based payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Directors estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Dividends unpaid at the balance sheet date are only recognised as a liability at that date to the extent that they are appropriately authorised and are no longer at the discretion of the Company.
Unpaid dividends that do not meet these criteria are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 78 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the company accounts continued B Profit and loss account As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own profit and loss account.
The profit after taxation for the financial year dealt with in the accounts of the Company was 11128000 2016 11963000.
The audit fee charged within the profit and loss account amounted to 34000 2016 31000.
C Employee numbers and remuneration 2017 2016 Number Number The average monthly number of employees all of whom were administrative staff including Executive Directors employed in continuing activities during the year was 31 36 At 30 September 29 37 Cost of staff including Executive Directors during the year amounted to Wages and salaries 2278 2694 Social security costs 478 379 Other pension costs 235 318 Share based payments 1290 1736 4281 5127 Directors emoluments Aggregate emoluments 2022 3314 Highest paid director aggregate emoluments 946 1476 Details of individual Directors emoluments and pension contributions can be found in Note 6 to the consolidated accounts.
D Dividends 2017 2016 Penceshare Penceshare Interim related to the year ended 30 September 2017 3.00 2.65 Final related to the year ended 30 September 2016 5.35 4.75 Total dividend paid 8.35 7.40 Interim related to the year ended 30 September 2017 1877 1651 Final related to the year ended 30 September 2016 3349 2960 Total dividend paid 5226 4611 Dividends are recorded only when authorised and are shown as a movement in equity rather than as a charge in the income statement.
The Directors are proposing that a final dividend of 6p per Ordinary Share be paid in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017.
This will be accounted for in the 201718 financial year.
E Tangible fixed assets Freehold land Plant vehicles and buildings and equipment T otal
At 1 October Additions  2 2 At 30 September Depreciation At 1 October Charge for year 10 9 19 At 30 September Net book value At 30 September At 30 September Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 79 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS F Investments
Shares at cost At 1 October 2016 217048 Additions 8000 Disposals 330 At 30 September 2017 224718
At 1 October 2016 115053 Provided during the year 8840 At 30 September 2017 123893 Net book value At 30 September 2017 100825 At 30 September 2016 101995 Details of subsidiary undertakings are included in Note T.
During the year the Company invested an additional 8m in YJL Limited through the issue of 8000000 ordinary shares of 1 each at par.
Disposals represents the elimination of dormant subsidiary undertakings subsequent to their dissolution.
Following the decision in April 2017 to withdraw from the lossmaking low pressure small diameter gas pipe replacement activities of Forefront Utilities Ltd the Board has carried out a review of the carrying value of the investment which has resulted in an impairment charge of 7923000.
Additionally 917000 has been provided against the carrying value of 2 dormant subsidiary undertakings.
The investment in subsidiaries is supported by their net asset values and their discounted expected future cash flows.
G Stocks and work in progress 2017 2016 Land  632 H Assets held for resale 2017 2016 Property 1500 1500 This office property has been actively marketed subsequent to a Group reorganisation when it became vacant.
Disposal has been delayed by current market conditions and the building is carried at net realisable value based on an annual independent third party valuation.
I Debtors due after one year 2017 2016 Debtors due after one year Pension scheme asset see Note S 9692 7704 Due within one year Trade debtors 73 12 Due from subsidiary undertakings 69042 73239 Corporation tax 4903 2903 Other debtors 26 37 Prepayments and accrued income 257 258 74301 76449 83993 84153 Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 80 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the company accounts continued J Creditors amounts falling due within one year 2017 2016 Bank loans and overdraft secured 77036 81459 Trade creditors 409 516 Other taxation and social security 1565 929 Due to subsidiary undertakings 26801 29136 Other creditors 297 205 Accruals and deferred income 6175 5568 112283 117813 K Creditors falling due after more than one year 2017 Restated Bank loans  3100 Deferred tax 3387 2286 3387 5386 Bank loans and overdraft repayable Within one year 77036 81459 Within two to five years  3100 77036 84559 Under the terms of the Renew Holdings plcs group banking agreement security has been granted over the Companys assets.
Deferred tax liability Defined benefit pension scheme 3392 2696 Future tax losses  405 Accelerated capital allowances 5 5 3387 2286 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are set out in Note A Accounting Policies i.
L Derivatives and other financial instruments Currency exposures The principal exposure of the Company to currency risk i. recognised in the profit and loss account is in respect of an intercompany loan.
At 30 September 2017 this loan was 4521000 2016 2771000.
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities There are no material differences between fair value and the book value of the Companys financial assets and liabilities.
M Share capital 2017 2016 Allotted called up and fully paid 62591451 2016 62317948 Ordinary Shares of 10p each 6259 6232 The holders of Ordinary Shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
During the year 273503 Ordinary Shares were issued following the exercise of options under the Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan.
Share options Renew Holdings 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme The Company operates a share option scheme the Renew Holdings plc 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme.
The scheme has both an Approved and Unapproved element.
The difference between the two elements is that the Approved scheme has the advantage of certain HMRC approved tax benefits.
Both elements have the same general terms and conditions.
Options issued under the scheme must be held for three years before they can vest and become exercisable.
They must be exercised within ten years from the date of grant.
As at 30 September 2017 there were 31467 options outstanding under the scheme.
During the year 10489 options were exercised.
31467 options are in issue under the Approved scheme at an exercise price of 286p.
These options are subject to the same performance criteria as options issued under the long term incentive plan described below.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 81 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS M Share capital continued Share options continued Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan At the Annual General Meeting held on 25 January 2012 the shareholders approved a new long term incentive plan LTIP which succeeded the Renew Holdings plc 2004 Executive Share Option Scheme as the Directors believed that the LTIP was a more effective method of aligning executive and shareholder interests.
As at 30 September 2017 there were 550133 options outstanding under the scheme.
On 24 November 2016 options to subscribe for a further 243100 Ordinary Shares were granted.
During the year 305172 options were exercised.
137995 options lapsed during the year.
The options are exercisable at a nominal cost or at the par value of an Ordinary Share three years after the date of grant subject to the achievement of certain performance criteria.
Details of the options are given in the Directors Remuneration
To the extent that there is a gain arising in respect of the approved options noted above the option holder will forfeit LTIP options to the same value.
Vesting of one half of the options is dependant on absolute growth in the Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR and the other half is dependant on the Companys TSR performance as compared to the TSR achieved by other companies in a comparator group of companies selected by the Remuneration Committee.
All TSR calculations are based on the average of the opening and closing share price over a 30 day period prior to the commencement and the end of the performance period.
The absolute TSR growth target requires the Companys TSR over the three year performance period to grow by more than 25%.
For TSR growth between 25% and 100% the half of the option which is subject to the absolute TSR growth target vests on a straightline basis from nil vesting at 25% growth to 100% vesting at 100% growth.
There will be no vesting if TSR growth is 25% or less.
The comparator group TSR performance target measures the Companys TSR over the 3 year performance period against the TSR of a group of companies selected by the Remuneration Committee.
If the Companys TSR performance falls below the median performance of the comparator group then the options lapse forthwith.
If the Company is ranked within the top decile of the comparator group the options shall vest in full.
If the Companys TSR performance is ranked between the median position and the top decile of the comparator group then the options shall vest on a straight line basis from nil at or below the median position to 100% at the top decile.
N Share based payments reserve Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan Fair value has been independently measured by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP using a Monte Carlo model methodology.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equity settled share based payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Boards estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
109000 2016 244000 has been charged to administrative expenses in accordance with FRS 102.
There is no impact on net assets since an equivalent amount has been credited to the share based payments reserve.
305172 options were exercised during the year.
The value per option represents the fair value of the option less the consideration payable.
The expected volatility has been calculated based on weekly historical volatility of the Companys share price over the three years prior to the date of grant.
The risk free rate of return has been based on the yields available on three year UK government bonds as at the date of grant.
Options granted under the Renew Holdings plc Long Term Incentive Plan over the Companys Ordinary Shares at 30 September 2017 were as follows Date of grant 7 January 2015 27 January 2016 24 November 2016 T otal Awards outstanding at 30 September 2017 Directors and employees 184000 179033 187100 550133 Exercise price 0.0p 10.0p 10.0p Price at date of grant 288.5p 410.0p 394.0p Maximum option life 10 years 10 years 10 years Assumed option life for purposes of valuation 3 years 3 years 2.85 years Expected volatility 31% 30% 28% Dividend yield 1.7% 1.7% 2.0% Risk free interest rate 0.63% 0.58% 0.29% Value per option 99.0p 212.5p 289.0p Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 82 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes to the company accounts continued O Capital and leasing commitments Land and Total T otal buildings Other 2017 2016 Annual commitments under noncancellable operating leases expiring in Under one year Two to five years Five or more years    155 During the year 348000 2016 556000 was recognised as an expense in the profit and loss account in respect of operating leases.
The Company had no capital commitments at 30 September 2017 2016 nil.
P Contingent liabilities The Company has guaranteed performance bonds in respect of certain contracts and leasing arrangements in the normal course of business of its subsidiary undertakings.
Under the terms of the Groups banking agreement security over the Companys assets has been granted to the Groups bankers.
The Company is a participant together with a number of subsidiary undertakings in the Groups banking arrangements and as a result has risks associated with the financial status and performance of the other companies within the Group.
Q Defined contribution pension scheme The Company operates a defined contribution pension scheme with individual stakeholder pension plans for its employees.
The Company made contributions of 241000 2016 318000 into these plans during the year.
There are also 11000 2016 17000 of accruals relating to these plans.
R Related parties The Company has a related party relationship with its key management personnel who are the Main Board Directors P Scott J Samuel A Liebenberg RJ Harrison J Bishop DM Forbes and DA Brown whose total compensation amounted to 2131000 2016 3558000 all of which was represented by shortterm employment benefits including 109000 2016 244000 relating to share option charges in accordance with FRS 102.
An analysis of this compensation is given in Note 6 of the consolidated accounts.
J Samuel is a director of Yorkshire Air Ambulance Ltd.
In the year ended 30 September 2017 the Company made a charitable donation of 5000 2016 5000 to sponsor the charitys annual recognition awards dinner.
There were no other transactions with key management personnel in the year.
S Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations Defined benefit pension schemes The Company operates a defined benefit pension scheme the Lovell Pension Scheme.
The scheme has been closed to new members and to further benefits accrual for many years.
FRS 102 The Directors have adopted the accounting required by FRS 102 with effect from the transition date.
The Directors have discussed the assumptions used in determining the actuarial valuation set out below with independent pensions advisors and have determined that they are appropriate.
The Lovell schemes valuation at 30 September 2017 shows a surplus of 9692000 based on the assumptions set out below.
The Directors have determined that it is appropriate to recognise the surplus as having reviewed the rules of the Lovell scheme they are of the view that the employer has an unconditional right to that surplus.
The following disclosures required by FRS 102 have been based on the most recent actuarial valuation as at 30 September 2017 carried out by Lane Clark and Peacock LLP Consulting Actuaries using the following assumptions As at As at As at 30 September 30 September 30 Septembertel Rate of increase in salaries 4.0% 4.0% 4.0% LPI increases to pensions in payment 4.2% 3.5% 3.0% Discount rate 2.6% 2.4% 3.7% Inflation assumption CPI 2.1% 2.0% 2.0% Inflation assumption RPI 3.2% 3.0% 3.0% Increases in deferred pensions 3.1% 2.9% 2.9% Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 83 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS S Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued FRS 102 continued The mortality tables adopted for the valuation of the Lovell scheme are the S2NA tables with future improvements in line with the Continuing Mortality Investigations 2016 model with long term improvement rates of 1.25% per annum for both males and females.
The Directors believe that this analysis provides a more reliable estimate of the mortality characteristics of the schemes membership.
Under these assumptions a 60 year old male pensioner is forecast to live for a further 27.4 years and the further life expectancy of a male aged 60 in 2037 is 23.5 years.
The assets in the Lovell scheme were Value as at Value as at Value as at 30 September 30 September 30 September 2017 Current 2016 Current 2015 Current 000 allocation 000 allocation 000 allocation Annuities 91400 53% 101201 53% 43216 26% Diversified portfolio 81273 47% 88592 47% 121985 74% Total 173451 100% 190524 100% 165603 100% During 2011 and 2016 the Trustees of the Lovell scheme in consultation with the Directors used scheme assets to purchase annuities which match certain pension liabilities in a transaction known as a buy in.
This asset provides protection against falls in gilt yields and risks in the performance of other asset classes.
Scheme Funding Level and Actuarial Valuation The scheme actuary carried out the triennial valuation of the Lovell Pension Scheme as at 31 March 2015.
The scheme showed a deficit of 12.1m compared to 24.1m when measured as at 31 March 2012.
The Company has agreed a revised recovery plan with the Trustees which commits the Company to paying annual contributions of 4260000 which is expected to result in the elimination of this deficit by 31 July 2018.
This recovery plan aims to eliminate the deficit under the Statutory Funding Objective of the Pensions Act 2004.
The Company may be required to make further contributions to achieve a buy out of all pension liabilities and the Company has agreed to continue to make such contributions under a secondary funding objective.
The necessity and quantum of these contributions will be remeasured by the scheme actuary at the next triennial valuation which is due as at 31 March 2018.
For accounting purposes under FRS 102 actuaries use different assumptions than for the triennial valuation.
The major difference relates to assumptions concerning the future return on assets of the scheme which includes a number of return seeking assets invested with BlackRock Asset Management.
The key sensitivity for the valuation of the scheme under FRS 102 is the selection of the discount rate which is the major determinant in measuring scheme liabilities.
A reduction of 0.1% in the discount rate would increase scheme liabilities by 2.7m.
The scheme rules permit the return of any surplus funds to the Company on the winding up of the scheme.
Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 18145 16348 1168 As a percentage of the assets at the end of the year 8.4% 12.0% 11.0% 11.2% 0.9% Total amount recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 2506 12348 10664 1514 5711 As a percentage of the obligations at the end of the year 1.5% 6.8% 7.1% 1.0% 0.9% Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 84 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS S Employee benefits Retirement benefit obligations continued Scheme Funding Level and Actuarial Valuation continued The following amounts at 30 September were measured in accordance with the requirements of FRS 102.
2017 Restated Movements in scheme assets and obligations T otal fair value of scheme assets brought forward 190524 165603 Interest on scheme assets 4489 6056 Employer contributions 4319 4316 Benefits paid 11315 8221 Running costs 1 11 Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 Total fair value of scheme assets carried forward 173451 190524 Present value of scheme obligations brought forward 182820 150449 Interest on scheme obligations 4253 5416 Current and past service costs 60 47 Benefits paid 11315 8221 Actuarial movement due to experience on benefit obligation 220 619 Actuarial movement due to changes in financial assumptions 6652 35748 Actuarial movement due to changes in demographic assumptions 5187 Total fair value of scheme obligations carried forward 163759 182820 Surplus in the scheme 9692 7704 Deferred tax 3392 2696 Net surplus 6300 5008 Amount charged to operating profit Current and past service costs 60 47 Running costs 1 11 Amount credited to other financial income Interest on scheme assets 4489 6056 Interest on scheme obligations 4253 5416 Net pension interest 236 640 Amounts recognised in the statement of comprehensive income Actual return on scheme assets less interest on scheme assets 14565 22781 Actuarial movement due to changes in assumptions on scheme obligations 12059 35129 Actuarial movement 2506 12348 Movement in the net scheme surplus during the year Net scheme surplus brought forward 7704 15154 Current and past service costs 60 47 Running costs 1 11 Employer contributions 4319 4316 Net pension interest 236 640 Actuarial movement 2506 12348 Net scheme surplus carried forward 9692 7704 Details of the restated deferred tax liability are given in Note A Accounting Policies i.
Notes to the company accounts continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 85 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS T Subsidiary undertakings Renew Holdings plc acts as the holding company of the Group.
The principal activity of the Group during the year was as contractors in Engineering Services and Specialist Building.
The subsidiary undertakings and joint ventures are listed below.
Incorporation and Proportion of principal place Ordinary Shares of business held by the Company Subsidiary undertakings and joint ventures Amco Group Holdings Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Britannia Group Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Clarke T elecom Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Forefront Group Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Inhoco 3520 Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Lewis Civil Engineering Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Corporate Director Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Fleet Management Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Group Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Nominees Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Pension Trustee Company Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Renew Property Developments Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Seymour C.
Holdings Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Shepley Engineers Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100%
Construction PLC Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% YJL Homes Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% VHE Land Projects Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% YJL Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% YJL Pension Trustee Company Ltd Owned by Renew Holdings plc England and Wales 100% Lovell America Inc Owned by Renew Holdings plc USA 100% Amalgamated Construction Scotland Ltd Owned by subsidiary Scotland 100% Amalgamated Construction Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Amco Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Amco Group Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Amco Group Trustees Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Amco Rail Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Amco Rail Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% BPE Specialised Drillings Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Britannia Construction Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% David Lewis Civil Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Forefront Utilities Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Geodur UK Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Giffen Holdings Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Giffen Group Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Hire One Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Knex Pipelines and Cables Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Mothersill Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Nuclear Decontamination Services Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100%
Electrical Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Renew Civil Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Renew Construction Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Renew Specialist Services Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Seymour Civil Engineering Contractors Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 86 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Incorporation and Proportion of principal place Ordinary Shares of business held by the Company Subsidiary undertakings and joint ventures VHE Civil Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% VHE Equipment Services Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% VHE T echnology Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Walter Lilly and Co Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% West Cumberland Engineering Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% YJL Construction Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% YJL Infrastructure Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% YJL London Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 100% Switchgear and Substation Alliance Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 33.3% InjectOMatic Guarantee Ltd Owned by subsidiary England and Wales 28.9% The registered office of Amalgamated Construction Scotland Ltd is 5 Carradale Crescent Glasgow G68 9LE.
The registered office of Lovell America Inc is 9200 Rumsey Road Columbia Maryland MD 21045 USA.
The registered office of Switchgear and Substation Alliance Ltd is Hamilton Office Park 31 High View Close Leicester LE4 9LJ.
The registered office of all other subsidiary undertakings is Yew Trees Main Street North Aberford LS25 3AA.
T Subsidiary undertakings continued Notes to the company accounts continued Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Renew Holdings plc 87 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Directors officers and advisors
R J Harrison OBE Nonexecutive Chairman P Scott Chief Executive J Bishop FCA Independent nonexecutive D M Forbes Independent nonexecutive D A Brown Independent nonexecutive A Liebenberg Director S WyndhamQuin CA Director J Samuel FCA Group Finance Director
Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU
KPMG LLP 1 Sovereign Square Sovereign Street
LS1 4DA Financial PR Walbrook PR Ltd 4 Lombard Street
EC3V 9HD Nominated advisor and broker Numis Securities Limited London Stock Exchange Building 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT Company Secretary J Samuel FCA Company number Registered address Yew Trees Main Street North
Leeds
LS25 3AA Website address site Renew Holdings plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 88 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Annual General Meeting 31 January 2018
Announcement of interim results  May 2018 Preliminary announcement of full year results  November 2018 Share Portal The Share Portal is a secure online site where you can manage your shareholding quickly and easily.
To register for the Share Portal just visit site Dividend reinvestment plan Links Dividend Reinvestment Plan offers a convenient way for shareholders to build up their shareholding by using dividend money to purchase additional shares.
For more information please call 44 0tel Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls outside the United Kingdom will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open between 0900  1730 Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Alternatively you can email email or log on to site Donate your shares to charity If you have only a small number of shares which are uneconomical to sell you may wish to donate them to charity free of charge through ShareGift Registered Charity .
Find out more at www. haregift. rg or by telephoningtel.
Share fraud warning Share fraud includes scams where investors are called out of the blue and offered shares that often turn out to be worthless or nonexistent or an inflated price for shares they own.
These calls typically come from fraudsters operating in boiler rooms that are mostly based abroad.
If you are offered unsolicited investment advice you should Check the Financial Services Register at www. ca. ite to ensure they are authorised.
Call the FCA Consumer Helpline ontel or use the share fraud reporting form at www. ca. itescams.
If you use an unauthorised firm you will not have access to the Financial Ombudsman Service or Financial Services Compensation Scheme FSCS.
Links Customer Support Centre By phone 44 0tel Calls cost 12p per minute plus your phone companys access charge.
Calls outside the United Kingdom will be charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open between 0900  1730 Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
By email email Shareholder information Our subsidiary businesses
Whaley Road
Barnsley
South Yorkshire S75 1HT Tel 0telLewis Civil Engineering Mwyndy Cross Industries Cardiff Road
Rhondda Cynon Taff CF72 8PN Tel 0telSeymour Civil Engineering Seymour House Harbour Walk
TS24 0UX Tel 0telVHE Whaley Road
Barnsley
South Yorkshire S75 1HT Tel 0telWalter Lilly Knollys House 17 Addiscombe Road
Surrey
CR0 6SR tel
30 Stephenson Road
Essex
SS9 5LY Tel 0telShepley Engineers Robinson House Westlakes Science Park Moor Row
CA24 3HY Tel 0telBritannia Britannia House Staverton Technology Park
Gloucestershire
GL51 6TQ Tel 0telClarke Telecom Unit E Madison Place Northampton Road
M40 5AG tel Renew Holdings plc Yew Trees Main Street North
Leeds
