Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Investing for Growth Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
8 13122017 120058 We are an international business information group covering asset management price discovery data and market intelligence and banking and nance under brands including Euromoney Institutional Investor BCA Research Ned Davis Research and Metal Bulletin.
We also run an extensive portfolio of events for the telecoms nancial and commodities markets.
Visit us at site Investing for Growth Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
9 13122017 120059 Financial Highlights Adjusted profit before tax 106.5m Adjusted diluted earnings per share 76.4p Dividend 30.6p Total revenue 428.4m Operational highlights Strategy on track in a year of transition We launched our revised strategy in March 2016 and highlighted that 2017 would be a year of transition.
Our improved results reflect that our strategy is on track as we continue to invest in strategic themes operate more effectively across the business taking advantage of our scale but still remaining entrepreneurial and actively manage the portfolio.
Financial independence DMGTs reduction of its equity interest in Euromoney from 68% to 49% through a combination of share buyback and market placing has provided Euromoney with balance sheet independence from DMGT.
This has allowed us to accelerate our management of the portfolio and enabled the adoption of a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in payout ratio.
Active portfolio management Active portfolio management is one of the pillars of our strategy.
By selling businesses which are not strategic for us and buying ones which fit our strategy we continue to recycle capital towards our best opportunities.
A new operating model We have established a Group Management Board made up of our divisional and functional leaders.
We continue to serve our four segments through this structure ensuring that our businesses remain entrepreneurial while enabling them to benefit from economies of scale best practice and stronger governance.
Improved governance We have made good progress in a range of areas such as recruiting new independent NonExecutive Directors reconstituting committee memberships appointing a Senior Independent Director and making sure our Board is more diverse in its makeup.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory and adjusted results is set out on pages 29 and 30 All financial information referred to in the Strategic Report and the Governance section represents the combined results of continuing and discontinued operations unless otherwise stated Statutory comparatives have been restated to exclude discontinued operations Total revenue represents the combined reported revenue from continuing and discontinued operationstel 2014 406.6tel 2014 116.2tel 2014 70.6tel 2014 Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
10 12112017 121152 PM Financial Highlights Adjusted profit before tax 106.5m Statutory profit before tax 40.7m Adjusted diluted earnings per share 76.4p Statutory diluted earnings per share 37.9p Dividend 30.6p Total revenue 428.4m Statutory revenue 386.9m A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory and adjusted results is set out on pages 29 and 30 All financial information referred to in the Strategic Report and the Governance section represents the combined results of continuing and discontinued operations unless otherwise stated Statutory comparatives have been restated to exclude discontinued operations Total revenue represents the combined reported revenue from continuing and discontinued operationstel 2014 406.6tel 2014 372.4tel 2014 116.2tel 2014 94.4tel 2014 70.6tel 2014 59.2tel 2014 Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
11 13122017 120103 Strategic report Group at a glance 04 Chairmans introduction 06 Market overview 08 CEOs statement 10 Group Management Board 13 Business model 14 Our strategy 16 Key performance indicators 18 Segment review 20 Corporate and social responsibility 24 Operating and nancial review 26 Risk management 33
Board of Directors 42 Corporate Governance Report 44 Directors Report 54
Directors Remuneration Report 58
Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report 76
Consolidated nancial statements 84 Company accounts 144
Five year record 150 Shareholder information 153 PRICE REPORTING A 3.0 INFORMATION BUSINESS Three years ago Metal Bulletin published a story about fictitious copper and aluminium sales which resulted in the price for Shanghai bonded warehouse copper dropping by a fifth.
Recognising the need for a robust price Metal Bulletin launched a Shanghai copper price which has since become an important benchmark so much so that the Chicago Mercantile Exchange has launched a derivative contract which will be settled using Metal Bulletins price.
This price will provide the market with a hedging option for copper sold to China the worlds largest consumer of the commodity and generate additional revenues for our pricereporting business.
It illustrates the close relationship between news and prices as well as highlighting the potential for our price reporting businesses to establish more benchmarks for use by buyers and sellers and on exchanges.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
1 13122017 121148 INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR INVESTING IN NEW SEGMENTS By investing in and launching FinTech capital placement platforms Institutional Investor II celebrating its fiftieth anniversary in 2017 is accelerating its transition towards becoming a B2B 3.0 information business.
By broadening its product suite II has pivoted away from its traditional publisher status to a business where over 80% of its revenues are derived from nonpublishing activities.
II has invested in its proprietary ManagerMatch platform helping investors find fund managers more efficiently and it is designed to become an integral part of investors manager diligence and selection processes.
The Group also increased its investment in Zanbato a Silicon Valley tech company whose mission is to create greater liquidity in private markets by developing a pioneering electronic Alternative Trading System ZX focused on providing exchange like functionality to institutional trading of blocks of private securities.
These are examples of investments to capitalise on the technological changes that will transform capital placement in the asset management industry.
EVENTS ACQUIRING TO EXPAND INTO NEW MARKET SEGMENTS At the Investor Day in March 2016 we outlined the potential of telecoms as one of our big investment themes because of a rapidly expanding market and the ability to develop new products and services around our TelCap business.
We have chosen to buy rather than build to move into adjacent markets to TelCap and as a result invested in BroadGroup and Layer 123.
BroadGroup organises datacloud events and specialist advisory services.
Its primary event DataCloud Europe is held annually in Monaco and brings together leading carriers datacentre providers cloud storage providers and systems integrators to develop business and to network.
Layer123 organises leading network innovation events around Software Defined Networks and Network Functions Virtualisation in Europe and America.
In addition Layer123 delivers content to its large community of networkstrategy professionals.
Strategic report Group at a glance 04 Chairmans introduction 06 Market overview 08 CEOs statement 10 Group Management Board 13 Business model 14 Our strategy 16 Key performance indicators 18 Segment review 20 Corporate and social responsibility 24 Operating and nancial review 26 Risk management 33
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
2 13122017 121150 Our ambition is to generate consistent and meaningful returns for our shareholders at relatively low risk.
Andrew Rashbass
INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR INVESTING IN NEW SEGMENTS By investing in and launching FinTech capital placement platforms Institutional Investor II celebrating its fiftieth anniversary in 2017 is accelerating its transition towards becoming a B2B 3.0 information business.
By broadening its product suite II has pivoted away from its traditional publisher status to a business where over 80% of its revenues are derived from nonpublishing activities.
II has invested in its proprietary ManagerMatch platform helping investors find fund managers more efficiently and it is designed to become an integral part of investors manager diligence and selection processes.
The Group also increased its investment in Zanbato a Silicon Valley tech company whose mission is to create greater liquidity in private markets by developing a pioneering electronic Alternative Trading System ZX focused on providing exchange like functionality to institutional trading of blocks of private securities.
These are examples of investments to capitalise on the technological changes that will transform capital placement in the asset management industry.
EVENTS ACQUIRING TO EXPAND INTO NEW MARKET SEGMENTS At the Investor Day in March 2016 we outlined the potential of telecoms as one of our big investment themes because of a rapidly expanding market and the ability to develop new products and services around our TelCap business.
We have chosen to buy rather than build to move into adjacent markets to TelCap and as a result invested in BroadGroup and Layer 123.
BroadGroup organises datacloud events and specialist advisory services.
Its primary event DataCloud Europe is held annually in Monaco and brings together leading carriers datacentre providers cloud storage providers and systems integrators to develop business and to network.
Layer123 organises leading network innovation events around Software Defined Networks and Network Functions Virtualisation in Europe and America.
In addition Layer123 delivers content to its large community of networkstrategy professionals.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
3 13122017 121151 Group at a glance The Group actively manages a portfolio of information B2B businesses across asset management pricing data and market intelligence banking and nance and commodity events.
We operate where information data and convening market participants support our clients critical activities.
Business segments Asset management Pricing data and market intelligence Banking and nance Commodity events
Serves the global asset management industry Provides prices data analysis and events that are critical for our clients business processes and workflow across a number of industries Provides market intelligence thought leadership news training and conferences to the global finance industry Consists of leading conferences in various commodity areas
Institutional Investor Investment Research Global Markets Intelligence Price Reporting Specialist Information
Banking and Finance
Events
Total revenue Adjusted operating prot Number of employees Key brands
NDR
Institutional Investor Metal Bulletin
AirFinance Journal Insurance Insider Capacity Media
Asiamoney
Global Capital
Metal Bulletin Events RISI Events
Global Grain Mining Indaba Year in review December 2016 Sale of HedgeFund Intelligence and II Intelligence to Pageant Media January 2017 DMGT completes reduction of its equity interest in Euromoney from 68% to 49% through combination of buyback and market placing Euromoney appoints David Pritchard as the Companys first Senior Independent Director
Acquisition of BroadGroup enabling our telecoms events business to operate in the datacentre and cloud IT infrastructure sector Sale of Latin Finance in a management buyout Sale of our Euromoney Indices business to IHS Markit Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
4 12112017 121314 PM Business segments Asset management Pricing data and market intelligence Banking and nance Commodity events
Serves the global asset management industry Provides prices data analysis and events that are critical for our clients business processes and workflow across a number of industries Provides market intelligence thought leadership news training and conferences to the global finance industry Consists of leading conferences in various commodity areas
Institutional Investor Investment Research Global Markets Intelligence Price Reporting Specialist Information
Banking and Finance
Events
Total revenue Adjusted operating prot Number of employees Key brands
NDR
Institutional Investor Metal Bulletin
AirFinance Journal Insurance Insider Capacity Media
Asiamoney
Global Capital
Metal Bulletin Events RISI Events
Global Grain Mining Indaba
Acquisition of RISI the leading price reporting agency for the global forest products market Acquisition of Layer 123 another addition to our telecom events business specifically targeting nextgeneration network development
Announcement of a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in the dividend payout ratio Creation of a Group Management Board
Changes to the membership of the Nominations Committee to increase number of independent NonExecutive Directors on the Committee Announced strategic review of Global Markets Intelligence Division
Sale of wine exhibition businesses Adhesion and World Bulk Wine to Comexposium Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
5 12112017 121314 PM Chairmans introduction Balance sheet independence a new dividend policy and new NonExecutive Directors an important year for Euromoney Our 2017 results atuay o a yar o tranition pu John Botts
Dear shareholders This has been an important year for Euromoney.
When CEO Andrew Rashbass defined our new strategy in March 2016 we said that 2017 would be a year of transition with a return to growth in 2018.
Our 2017 results actually show a year of transition plus using the strong US dollar to invest in our business and still deliver improved results compared with last year.
Equally the reorganisation of our management structure and the creation of the new Group Management Board has had a telling effect on performance.
Independence
Euromoney magazine was first published in 1969 and the Company has benefitted ever since from the careful stewardship of Daily Mail and General Trust plc DMGT as the majority shareholder.
In January 2017 DMGT reduced its holding in Euromoney to 49% by a secondary placing of Euromoney shares and a buyback by Euromoney of its own shares.
The Companys balance sheet is now independent of DMGT increasing Euromoneys financial flexibility.
DMGTs foresight in enabling Euromoney to become independent and its continued strong shareholder support are welcome and appreciated.
Their decision has helped Euromoney accelerate the implementation of our strategy for the benefit of all shareholders.
Dividends
During the course of the year the Company approved a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in the dividend payout ratio from approximately 33% to approximately 40% of adjusted diluted earnings per share subject to the needs of the business.
The reduction of the shares in issue following the share buyback combined with the increase in payout ratio enabled the Board to approve a 26% increase in the interim dividend to 8.8p per share which was paid to shareholders in June.
In line with the new policy the Board is recommending to shareholders a 33% increase in the final dividend to 21.8p per share to be paid on 15 February 2018 giving a total dividend for the year of 30.6p 2016 23.4p.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share Total dividend Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
6 12112017 121317 PM Governance With independence comes responsibility and the shape and composition of our Board and Committees is changing.
Good progress has been made in recruiting new independent NonExecutive Directors reconstituting Committee memberships appointing a Senior Independent Director making sure that our Board is more diverse in its makeup and appointing the Companys first General Counsel who also acts as Secretary to the Board.
Although this work is not complete the momentum is reassuring.
The coming year As the strategy becomes embedded in how the Group operates I have decided now is the right time for me to hand over the Chairmanship of the Company.
It has been a privilege to serve on the Euromoney Board for over 20 years including as Chairman for the last two.
Our results demonstrate that the strategy which the Company is implementing is working and I am confident that I hand over the chairmanship to David Pritchard with the Company in a strong position.
David will lead the process to appoint a new Chairman and be Acting Chairman in the meantime.
Our results demonstrate that the strategy under Andrews leadership is working and I am confident that Euromoney is in a strong position.
May I thank our shareholders my Euromoney colleagues and fellow Directors for your support.
I look forward to watching the Company go from strengthtostrength and becoming a 3.0 information business.
As we continue to operate in challenging times the dedication and skill of Andrew the Group Management Board and our staff across the world remain the defining feature of this remarkable Company.
John Botts
22 November 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Appointment of the Companys first Senior Independent Director Appointment announced of three new independent NonExecutive Directors Progress towards a more diverse Board Plan to search for a new independent Director to serve as Chairman Appointments of Head of Internal Audit and General Counsel Change in membership of Nominations Committee Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
7 12112017 121317 PM Market overview How we are responding to the issues driving our markets Asset management Asset management is operating under headwinds created by regulation the increasing use of passive investment approaches at the expense of traditional longonly active fund management disruptive competition and changing customer needs.
These market drivers are reducing traditional asset management revenues and changing the structure of the industry.
KEY MARKET DRIVERS MiFID II is creating new requirements for research discovery valuation and benchmarking New technologies are transforming and replacing components of the asset management valuechain Funds are shifting from traditional active managers to passive and alternative funds HOW WE ARE RESPONDING As an independent research provider we are well placed to benefit from MiFID II unbundling research fees will increase our available market.
As implementation continues and demand changes we will investigate investing in new products We will continue to monitor the market closely to identify potential threats from new technology.
We already partner with and invest in two disruptive technology firms Zanbato and Estimize Over the past 12 months we have begun to develop and launch new offerings to target directly the needs of passive and alternative asset managers ASSET MANAGEMENT INCOME MIX Assets under Management Index 2011 100 tel400 Active Manager Passive Managerteltel 2013 Pricing data and market intelligence The prevalence of price reporting and discovery has spread to new sectors.
Benchmarks in new sectors are being incorporated into financial instruments.
Business data use has increased in many areas from project and asset financing to insurance and clients are demanding more innovative and advanced information tools.
KEY MARKET DRIVERS Growth in the pricing market is driven by increased use of benchmarks in financial contracts Big data and technology improvements are increasing expectations for data and tools HOW WE ARE RESPONDING We are capitalising on growth as demonstrated by the acquisition of RISI and development of new prices and benchmarks across our price reporting businesses We have invested in our data and tools for example integrating a fleet database into AirFinance and improving the data tools for IJ Global METALS MARKET GROWTH LME Index price tonneteltel 2015 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
8 13122017 Banking and nance The low interest rate environment continues which reduces banks revenues.
However several central banks are indicating that rates are likely to rise.
The banking and finance industry has faced increased regulation and although this trend is reversing investment is still required to ensure compliance.
Competition has increased noticeably from established technology firms and new FinTech entrants.
KEY MARKET DRIVERS Recovery in the banking industry is supporting banks share prices Regulation is affecting the banking industry and requires significant resources to be allocated towards meeting compliance goals Banks in various developing markets are internationalising particularly driven by their domestic customers travelling and doing business abroad HOW WE ARE RESPONDING Clients are demanding more services and need more support to differentiate their offering.
We are developing marketing services using the strength of Rival Advocacy to offer a comprehensive service We are supporting banks in complying with their regulatory requirements and enabling them to prepare for the future structure of the industry We have created a Euromoney China team to react to the opportunity and enable us to serve better the local market BANKING MARKET GROWTH SandP Banks Select Industry Indextelteltel Commodity events Overall commodity price rises have increased revenues for the markets we serve grain due to tightness in maize supplies and coal due to a cut in production.
Metal prices are increasing due to strong demand particularly in China expectations of infrastructure investment in the US and supply constraints in some markets.
KEY MARKET DRIVERS Commodity prices in the markets we serve have been increasing Events are experiencing heightened security concerns and more disruption from extreme weather HOW WE ARE RESPONDING We have launched new events and are focusing on areas of growth for example launching Mining Cumbre a Latin American mining investment event In order to mitigate and manage risks the Companys event operations managers are required to complete a new rigorous online risk assessment COMMODITY PRICE INCREASE Dow Jones Commodity Index teltel 2016 2015
1 NDR MultiCap Institutional Universe SandP Capital IQ and MSCI Inc.
GICS Thomson Reuters IHS Markit SandP Dow Jones Indices 2 London Metal Exchange data from Bloomberg 3 SandP Dow Jones data from Bloomberg The World Bank Group 2017.
Commodity Markets Outlook October World Bank Washington DCT Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
9 13122017 121202 CEOs statement The strategy is embedded across the Group helping achieve a return to growth The strategy is working an ar ity aa o u Andrew Rashbass
Chief Executive Officer
Overview
At the Investor Day in March 2016 we said that 2017 would be a year of transition.
I believe our performance in 2017 shows that the strategy is working and we are slightly ahead of schedule.
We have been able to speed up the strategy because of the financial independence that resulted from DMGTs decision to reduce its holding in Euromoney which they completed in January and by investing some of the benefit from the strengthened US dollar compared to sterling.
We have delivered a return to growth with both yearonyear revenue and profit ahead of 2016 though this included significant help from exchange rates.
We remained focused on our use of capital by investing in the big themes such as our acquisition of RISI and disinvesting from areas which would otherwise create a drag.
We have also made good progress fixing structurally challenged businesses and returning them to growth.
In May 2017 we announced a new progressive dividend policy which aims to pay out approximately 40% of adjusted earnings each year.
The new policy the share buyback improved Group performance and our strong balance sheet have enabled us to recommend to shareholders a significant increase in dividend for the year.
In the year ahead we shall continue to focus on delivering growth through investing in areas of opportunity and disinvesting from areas that are structurally and cyclically challenged.
Strategy
Our strategy is to manage a portfolio of businesses in markets where information data and convening market participants are valued.
We deliver products and services that support our clients critical activities.
In particular we look to serve markets which are semiopaque that is where the information which organisations need in order to operate effectively is hard to find.
We characterise the business models of B2B information companies into three generations which we call B2B Information 1.0 2.0 and 3.0.
Their characteristics are set out on page 11.
As we manage our portfolio to achieve our strategy and to become a 3.0 business we categorise our business into four quadrants.
We allocate capital to the top two quadrants and withdraw capital from the bottom two.
This quadrantbased assessment leads to three pillars of strategic activity Investing around the big themes.
These include price discovery posttrade activities asset management and telecoms.
Transform the operating model.
There are two aspects to our model.
One is our target business model see page 14.
The second is a bestofbothworlds operating model which combines Euromoneys entrepreneurial culture with strong central functions that support the businesses and enable us to take advantage of our scale.
Actively manage the portfolio.
Acquisitions have always been and remain an important part of Euromoneys strategy.
We have a record of identifying businesses where our ownership adds value.
We also sell businesses where we believe we are not the best owners and to generate capital to invest in the big themes.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
10 12112017 121328 PM Our strategy is designed to develop the businesses we own and deliver strategic timely and wellexecuted acquisitions and disposals.
We aim to allocate and recycle capital efficiently to good organic and inorganic opportunities via our operating model.
Our ambition is to generate consistent and meaningful returns for our shareholders at relatively low risk.
Investing around the big themes Our big themes enable us to exploit market and industry opportunities.
In response to the challenges in our asset management segment BCA NDR and Institutional Investor due to MiFID II and the shift from active to passive investing our product development is geared to growing segments of the market BCA is developing new products targeting passive specialist and alternative investments NDR is providing tools for registered investment advisors RIAs II is launching new products targeting defined contribution pensions RIAs and the private wealth sector How information markets are evolving We characterise the business models of B2B information companies into three generations which we call B2B Information 1.0 2.0 and 3.0.
Their characteristics are set out below.
Print
Standalone events
Advertisingcentric
Productcentric
Digital
Networking events
Subscriptions
Customercentric
Embedded in workflowplatforms Trading eventsmemberships Part of the customer industry
Solutioncentric
B2B 1.0 B2B 2.0 B2B 3.0 Our quadrants PREPARE FOR THE UPTURN Protect and enhance competitive position Selective investments for when cycle turns Opportunistic revenue initiatives Tight cost control Fix any operational deficit
New product development Sales and marketing
Fix any operational deficit Accelerate transition to 3.0
Maximise shorterterm profit and cash
Prevent future buildup USE THE TIME WISELY Modest investment to move to topright quadrant Maximise shorterterm profit and cash Fix any operational deficit Consider divestment
Structure
In our pricing data and market intelligence segment we are investing in technology sales product management and in developing our people across price reporting insurance and telecoms among other areas.
Transforming the operating model We have now embedded our strategy throughout the organisation with our bestofbothworlds operating model.
This has included the creation of seven divisions grouped into our four reporting segments and five functions under the leadership of our new Group Management Board to serve our customers better.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
11 12112017 121328 PM CEOs statement
Actively managing the portfolio We continue to manage our portfolio investing in our big themes removing the bottomleft quadrant drag of businesses which are structurally challenged or finding better owners for businesses which do not fit with our strategy.
During the year we bought RISI BroadGroup and Layer123 and disposed of six businesses  HedgeFund Intelligence II Intelligence Euromoney Indices Latin Finance Adhesion and World Bulk Wine the last two completing after yearend.
We continue to look for acquisitions which are or have the potential to be 3.0 businesses.
We have also decided to review strategic options for our Global Markets Intelligence division CEIC and EMIS and you will see that they are identified in this report as held for sale.
These are good businesses but ones which we believe may fit another owners strategy better.
If sold this would give us the opportunity to recycle more capital towards our big themes.
Performance for the year Headwinds for our asset management businesses BCA NDR and Institutional Investor meant that revenues in this segment were under pressure during the year but we managed costs carefully.
Other businesses performed strongly particularly Metal Bulletin TelCap and Insurance Insider.
Overall total and statutory revenues are both up 6% yearonyear and adjusted profit before tax is up 4% on last year primarily due to the favourable USDGBP rate the high margin flowthrough from the asset management segment and the prior year restructuring of our training business.
Our fullyear adjusted profit before tax of 106.5m represents a strong performance for the Group in the year of transition with adjusted diluted earnings per share growing to 76.4p from 66.5p last year a 15% increase.
Statutory profit before tax of 40.7m is lower than adjusted profit before tax due to exceptional items primarily the impairment charge taken for NDR in the first half and acquired intangible amortisation.
In addition Euromoneys tradition of strong cash generation continues with underlying conversion of adjusted operating profit to cash in the year at 118%.
These results demonstrate our ability to both invest for growth and manage the business effectively.
Outlook
With uncertainty still surrounding Brexit and a challenging geopolitical climate we are operating in a volatile environment.
We expect our asset management businesses to continue facing challenging market conditions due to the headwinds our customers face but believe our risk mitigation plans will reduce the impact.
Commodity markets are improving and our banking clients are experiencing a recovery although the uncertainty over Brexit negotiations could make this shortlived.
Our plans are built around these factors and we will continue investing for future growth while managing risk.
The strategy we unveiled in March 2016 is working.
Growth returned slightly ahead of schedule in 2017 which we still regard as a year of transition and our view is that 2018 the third year of our strategy will be a year of further and accelerated growth.
Andrew Rashbass
Chief Executive Officer
22 November 2017 Adjusted prot before tax Statutory prot before tax Total revenue 428.4mtel 2014 A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory and adjusted results is set out on pages 29 and 30 Total revenue by division % Asset management Pricing data and market intelligence Banking and finance Commodity events Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
12 12112017 121329 PM Group Management Board The Group manages a portfolio of B2B businesses across four segments asset management pricing data and market intelligence banking and finance and commodity events.
We have created seven divisions to serve our four segments more effectively.
As part of our bestofbothworlds operating model we have also created five central functions again to serve our four segments better.
The leaders of our divisions who also serve our segments and our functional leaders sit on a newly created Group Management Board which operates under the direction and authority of the CEO.
It assists the CEO and Finance Director in implementing strategy monitoring financial performance developing the Groups approach to managing employees taking joint responsibility for the Groups approach to corporate governance and ensuring that the Groups bestofbothworlds operating model works.
The Group Management Board meets monthly to discuss strategic operational and financial issues.
Banking and Finance Investment Research Corporate Development Central Marketing Central Technology
Global Human Resources Legal Risk and Programmes
Price Reporting and Analytics Global Market Intelligence Specialist Information Institutional Investor John Orchard Case study see page 22 Bashar ALRehany Case study see page 20 Christopher Fordham Jane Wilkinson Andrew Pieri Colin Jones Gillian Fox Tim Bratton Rosalind Irving Case study see pages 02 and 23 Raju Daswani Case study see pages 01 and 40 Aloisio Parente Danny Williams Case study see page 21 Diane Alfano Case study see page 02 Corporate Development manages our MandA activity.
A significant success during the year was the Groups acquisition of RISI.
This was the Companys largest acquisition since the purchase of Metal Bulletin plc more than 10 years ago.
We were able to compete with private equity firms in part due to our ability to complete transactions quickly and efficiently.
Central Marketing is responsible for sharing best practice and achieving economies of scale.
We do this by developing training managing suppliers used by more than one division maintaining the Group customer database and providing experts in specialist areas.
Central Technology supports the Groups technology infrastructure maintaining datacentrehosted and cloudhosted services running helpdesks and implementing and supporting networks and common applications.
We work closely with the technology teams in the segments and divisions who focus on developing clientfacing products.
Finance carries out the full range of financial activities across the Group supporting the segments and divisions.
Following DMGTs sell down Finance has taken on functions previously provided by DMGT such as tax treasury and internal audit and strengthened others.
In addition it negotiated new external borrowing facilities for the Group.
Global Human Resources is responsible for recruitment retention and development of staff.
This year we changed our approach to hiring people for senior roles introducing a more formal evidencebased process.
Legal Risk and Programmes includes the Groups legal risk informationsecurity and programmemanagement experts.
The department was heavily involved in the transactional legal and regulatory work required for our share buyback  a complex project with tight deadlines.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
13 12112017 121338 PM Business model Inputs Business model PEOPLE AND CULTURE Euromoney is known for its entrepreneurial culture.
We empower our teams to deliver the best for their customers businesses and fastmoving markets Our people are creative actionoriented close to their customers passionate about their brands knowledgeable about the industries they serve and accountable for their results We have more than 2200 staff working in 40 offices across more than 20 countries who all contribute to our success OUR CUSTOMERS We have a global customer base with revenue derived from almost 200 countries Our customers are financial institutions investment banks commodity traders miners asset managers governments corporations professionalservice providers consultants and technology providers Our customers level of spend is affected by their profitability expectations of market developments and the regulatory environment Our products enable our customers to operate effectively in their markets OUR COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE We deliver products and services which form part of our customers daily workflow We have globally recognised and trusted brands We have longstanding relationships with buyers and sellers Our sophisticated infrastructure enables and supports our businesses around the world Our strong cash generation and a strong balance sheet enable us to invest in our best opportunities HIGH OPERATING LEVERAGE Create once sell many Low capital intensity
Recurring revenues
How we are structured ASSET MANAGEMENT Brands and businesses serving the global asset management industry Providing independent research enabling our clients to make informed investment decisions Running networks and conferences and providing news and data Over 80% of revenues are derived from subscriptions PRICING DATA and MARKET INTELLIGENCE Businesses spanning many industries that provide information and analysis critical for our clients business processes and workflows Including Metal Bulletin the leading price reporting agency for the metals and mining industry and RISI the leading price reporting agency for the global forestry products sector Approximately twothirds of revenues are derived from subscriptions and licences COMMODITY EVENTS The leading conferences in the metals agricultural and energy sectors Largescale trading events Bringing entire industries together to conduct business and exchange market intelligence Over 75% of revenues are from delegate fees BANKING and FINANCE Providing market intelligence news training and conferences to the global finance industry Including the flagship Euromoney magazine Our conferences across the Euromoney and IMN brands are the preeminent events for their sectors Over 70% of its revenues from delegate and sponsorship fees Four business segments supported by strong central functions Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
14 12112017 121338 PM How we monetise our activities Outputs SUBSCRIPTIONS AND CONTENT REVENUES are the recurring subscription and licence fees that customers pay to receive access to the Groups information through tools and platforms which form part of our customers daily workflow.
Asset managers also subscribe to Institutional Investors exclusive membership groups.
SHAREHOLDERS
We allocate and recycle capital efficiently to good organic and inorganic opportunities via our bestofbothworlds operating model.
Our
SPONSORSHIP REVENUES are fees paid by customers to sponsor or be associated with an event.
CUSTOMERS
We deliver products and services that support our clients critical activities and in particular to serve markets which are semiopaque that is where there is information which our customers need in order to operate effectively but the information is hard to find.
DELEGATES REVENUES are fees paid by customers to attend conferences training courses or seminars.
PARTNERS
We collaborate with our partners in mutually beneficial ways to enable us both to understand and penetrate each others markets better.
Strong thirdparty relationships are important to help us execute our strategy and we seek to build longerterm relationships with those partners where appropriate.
ADVERTISING REVENUES are fees paid by customers to place an advertisement in one or more of our publications.
As well as selling more traditional brand and product advertising we have started to meet customers thoughtleadership marketing needs.
EMPLOYEES
We serve our four segments through seven divisions supported by strong central functions to ensure that our employees can be expert creative actionoriented and customerfocussed and take advantage of Euromoneys scale share best practice operate strategically and create career paths for themselves and their colleagues across the Group.
STRONG SUSTAINED EARNINGS AND CASH GENERATION Our Strategic Pillars INVEST AROUND BIG THEMES We look to serve semiopaque markets where the information organisations need in order to operate effectively is hard to find.
This determines our big themes which include price discovery posttrade activities asset management and telecoms.
TRANSFORM THE OPERATING MODEL We have developed what we call a bestofbothworlds operating model.
Euromoney is known for its entrepreneurial culture  our people are creative actionoriented close to their customers passionate about their brands knowledgeable about the industries they serve and accountable for their results.
ACTIVELY MANAGE THE PORTFOLIO Acquisitions have always been and remain an important part of Euromoneys strategy.
We have a record of identifying good businesses where our ownership adds value.
We also sell businesses where we believe we are not the best owners and to generate capital to invest in the big themes.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
15 12112017 121339 PM Our strategy Our strategy is to manage a portfolio of businesses in markets where information data and convening market participants are valued.
We deliver products and services that support our clients critical activities Our quadrants Financial performance will come from a rigorous allocation of capital.
We allocate capital towards those businesses which we consider are or can be successful B2B 3.0 businesses see page 11.
Depending on market cycle and structure we categorise our businesses into four quadrants.
We allocate capital to the top two quadrants and withdraw capital from the bottom two.
A cyclical downturn can create opportunity for a structurally strong business.
For instance when commodities markets were depressed we put targeted investment into Metal Bulletin  we bought FastMarkets and invested in systems and people among other things.
This improved our market position so that as the commodity market turned we were able to take a disproportionate share of the uptick.
We have invested in topright businesses like those we have serving the insurance sector.
The combination of structural and cyclical strength means those businesses are now growing fast.
However for markets which are structurally challenged we will disinvest and reallocate capital.
This quadrantbased assessment leads to three pillars of strategic activity investing around the big themes transforming the operating model and actively managing the portfolio.
Our quadrants PREPARE FOR THE UPTURN Protect and enhance competitive position Selective investments for when cycle turns Opportunistic revenue initiatives Tight cost control Fix any operational deficit
New product development Sales and marketing
Fix any operational deficit Accelerate transition to 3.0
Maximise shorterterm profit and cash
Prevent future buildup USE THE TIME WISELY Modest investment to move to topright quadrant Maximise shorterterm profit and cash Fix any operational deficit Consider divestment
Structure
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
16 12112017 121339 PM Strategic pillars Invest around big themes Transform the operating model Actively manage the portfolio DESCRIPTION We look to serve semiopaque markets where the information organisations need in order to operate effectively is hard to find.
This determines our big themes which include price discovery posttrade activities asset management and telecoms.
We have developed what we call a bestofbothworlds operating model.
Euromoney is known for its entrepreneurial culture  our people are creative actionoriented close to their customers passionate about their brands knowledgeable about the industries they serve and accountable for their results.
Acquisitions have always been and remain an important part of Euromoneys strategy.
We have a record of identifying good businesses where our ownership adds value.
We also sell businesses where we believe we are not the best owners and to generate capital to invest in the big themes.
PROGRESS
MADE IN 2017 Invested in product development.
For example BCA products targeting passive specialist and alternative investments NDR tools for registered investment advisors Euromoneys thought leadership initiative and Institutional Investors ManagerMatch service Invested heavily in our price reporting capabilities with the acquisition of RISI the leading price reporting agency for the global forest products market Through the acquisitions of BroadGroup and Layer123 we expanded the market and customer segments our telecoms events businesses serve Increased our investment in and reshaped our relationship with Zanbato a company offering institutional investors alternative investment opportunities Created seven divisions Price Reporting and Analytics Investment Research Institutional Investor Banking and Finance Specialist Information Events and Global Market Intelligence to serve our four segments more effectively Created a Group Management Board to provide a new operating framework for the Groups divisions and functions Continued to develop and build our strong central functions such as HR IT Corporate Development Finance Legal Risk and Programmes to support our businesses Improved the technology leadership in the pricereporting businesses and investment research divisions Introduced sophisticated approaches to how we price our products at BCA and Metal Bulletin Successfully integrated FastMarkets into our price reporting division Acquisitions of RISI BroadGroup and Layer123 Sold Euromoney Indices II Intelligence LatinFinance HedgeFund Intelligence and after the financial yearend Adhesion and World Bulk Wine HOW WE
PROGRESS
Financial performance and KPIs demonstrate that our investment in big themes is having a positive financial impact.
61 % subscription revenue share of total revenue Following the DMGT share sell down and buyback the Group is no longer able to use DMGT central services and the investment in Euromoneys functions has enabled the Group to operate as a standalone company.
We have reduced drag impact of underperforming businesses by 4m through the above sales and grown revenue in our Price Reporting and Analytics division to 57m with a 29% operating margin.
4% growth in adjusted profit before tax
FOR 2018 Further investment in these areas through acquisition product development and expansion into new segments or geographies.
Ensure we take advantage of Euromoneys scale share best practice operate strategically and create career paths for staff across the Group.
Continue to evaluate potential MandA opportunities to reallocate capital and accelerate the Groups transition towards being a B2B 3.0 information business.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
17 12112017 121339 PM Key performance indicators The Group monitors its performance against its strategy using the following key performance indicators Relevance Performance Narrative ADJUSTED PROFIT BEFORE TAX m 1 Euromoney actively manages its portfolio and allocates capital to increase adjusted profit before tax over the long term.
The definition of adjusted profit before tax is set out on page 29.
Adjusted profit before tax increased by 4% to 106.5m reflecting favourable exchange rates more than offsetting the investment in standalone company costs and increased financing costs following the DMGT sell down.
UNDERLYING REVENUE GROWTH 1 Underlying revenue growth compares revenues on a likeforlike basis and is an important indicator of the health and trajectory of our segments and the Group as a whole.
The definition of underlying revenue is set out on page 31.
1% 3% 4% 4% 1% Underlying revenues fell by 1% due to the increasing cyclical headwinds caused by MiFID II in the asset management sector the elimination of lowmargin events in the first and fourth quarters of 2017 and the decision not to repeat events in certain markets due to increased geopolitical instability.
These factors were largely offset by the strong performance from the pricing data and market intelligence segment and the improved sentiment in the banking and commodities markets.
SUBSCRIPTION BOOK OF BUSINESS 1 Book of Business BoB represents the annual contracted values for subscriptions across the Group and reflects the impact of new sales price increases upgrades downgrades and full cancellations.
It is a key indicator of the Groups subscriptions growth.
0.8% 1.4% 0.4% The subscription BoB growth was 0.4% reflecting the increasing headwinds affecting our asset management businesses in the second half of the year cancelling out the strong growth in the price data and market intelligence segment.
SUBSCRIPTION SHARE OF TOTAL REVENUES 1 and high margins.
52% 51% 55% 58% 61% The Group has increased the proportion of revenues derived from subscription and content related products to over 60% of its total revenues.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
18 12112017 121340 PM Relevance Performance Narrative ADJUSTED OPERATING MARGIN 1 The movement in adjusted operating margin measures the efficiency of the Group.
Consistent operating margin improvement is a business imperative driven by investment choices our focus on driving out costs and improving mix.
30% 30% 26% 25% 25% The adjusted operating margin fell from 25.2% to 25.0% largely due to the required investment in standalone company costs following the DMGT sell down and the need to operate as an independent group.
This drag was partly offset by the favourable currency mix.
ADJUSTED DILUTED EARNINGS PER SHARE 1 Management seeks sustained longterm growth in adjusted diluted earnings per share to maximise overall returns to our shareholders.
76.4p The increase from 66.51p to 76.4p reflects the improvement in adjusted profit before tax and the benefit from the reduced number of shares in issue following the share buyback.
ADJUSTED CASH CONVERSION RATE 1 Cash conversion is a measure of the quality of Euromoneys earnings.
The objective is to achieve consistently a conversion of earnings into cash in excess of 100%.
This
KPI measures the percentage by which cash generated from operations covers adjusted operating profit.
88% 92% 105% 102% 110% The adjusted operating cash conversion rate was 110% 2016 102%.
This reflects an improvement in working capital management and the recovery in the events portfolio.
After adjusting for timing differences and exceptional items the underlying cash conversion rate was 118% 2016 105%.
ADJUSTED NET DEBTCASH TO EBITDA 1 The Groups strategic priority is to keep net debt below three times EBITDA.
The amount of the Groups net debt to adjusted operating profit and share of results in associates and joint ventures before depreciation and amortisation of licences and software is adjusted for the timing of acquisitions and disposals.
1.24 Following the DMGT sell down the Group arranged new fiveyear external borrowing facilities comprising termloans of US100m and 40m and a 130m multicurrency revolving credit facility.
At 30 September the Group has net debt of 154.6m largely reflecting the share buyback and the acquisitions of RISI and Layer123.
There is a further accordion facility of 130m should the Group wish to request it.
The calculation of adjusted net debtcash to EBITDA is set out on page 32.
KEY
Invest around big themes 2 Transform the operating model 3 Actively manage the portfolio The key performance indicators are all within the Boards expectations adjusted throughout the year to take into account the challenging market conditions and these indicators are discussed in detail in the operating and financial review from page 26.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 32.
All measures above combine the results of the Groups continuing and discontinued operations as the discontinued operations have been managed as part of the Group for the full year.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
19 12112017 121341 PM Segment review We have created seven divisions to serve our four segments more effectively Asset management The asset management segment includes the brands and businesses that serve the global asset management industry.
It provides independent research that enables our clients to make informed investment decisions runs networks and conferences that bring asset allocators and asset managers together in an effective and efficient way and provides news and data that are critical for the industry to stay informed and visible in an increasingly complex world.
Its main brands include BCA Ned Davis Research NDR and the Institutional Investor family of businesses.
More than 80% of the segment revenues are derived from subscriptions to its research and data products and annual membership fees.
Movement %
Total revenue 171.8 156.7 10% 2%
Adjusted operating margin 37% 35% Total asset management revenues increased by 10% to 171.8m.
Underlying revenues were flat in the first half of the year followed by a 4% decline in the second half largely reflecting the increasing cyclical headwinds caused by the MiFID II regulations.
Despite these headwinds the adjusted operating margin improved from 35% to 37% reflecting the Groups rigorous approach to capital allocation as the cyclical headwinds in asset management worsened.
During the year the asset management businesses shifted from the topright to the topleft quadrant.
Hence the segments businesses focussed on battening down the hatches and successfully implemented profit protection measures to deliver a 3% underlying growth in adjusted profit before tax.
Total revenue by type % BCA HELPING OUR CUSTOMERS TO NAVIGATE MIFID II BCA embarked on a digital and multichannel engagement programme to help inform its customers about the likely impact of MiFID II which comes into force in January 2018.
We combined a range of online marketing tools to build customer awareness share our expertise as thoughtleaders and create an advisory service.
By placing senior executives at the centre of the campaign BCA has demonstrated its subject matter expertise resulting in wide media coverage.
To compliment this we launched a MiFID II microsite containing information for customers using webcasts video podcasts and online articles.
We have also created an online assessment tool for our customers to measure their MiFID II readiness.
This has resulted in strong customer engagement with our digital channels.
We will continue to inform and guide our customers as MiFID II is implemented.
Subscriptions and content
Sponsorship
Delegates
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
20 12112017 121343 PM Pricing data and market intelligence The pricing data and market intelligence segment houses businesses span many industries that provide information and analysis critical for our clients business processes and workflows.
The segments largest business is Metal Bulletin a leading price reporting agency for the metals and mining industries but also includes our businesses active in the telecoms insurance airline and banking industries.
Twothirds of the segments revenues are derived from subscriptions.
Price discovery is a big theme and is expected to grow significantly as most industries are seeking more transparency around the prices and risks they face in their traditionally opaque markets.
During 2017 we enhanced our capabilities through the acquisition of RISI a leading price reporting agency for the global forestproducts market.
Movement %
Total revenue 165.5 132.1 25% 3%
Adjusted operating margin 31% 33% Total revenues increased by 25% to 165.5m reflecting favourable exchange rates the acquisition of RISI and strong performances from Metal Bulletin including the successfully integrated FastMarkets and the Groups wholesale telecoms business TelCap.
Underlying revenues were up 3%.
The segments adjusted operating margin decreased from 33% to 31% largely reflecting significant headcount investment in Metal Bulletin TelCap and Legal Media Group to drive new product and sales initiatives together with costs to integrate FastMarkets into Metal Bulletin and to enhance TelCaps events portfolio.
On an underlying basis adjusted operating profit was down 6%.
SPECIALIST INFORMATION INVESTING IN PRODUCT Over the last two years we have invested in our AirFinance Journal business.
We acquired a fleet database and hired leading air finance sector analysts.
These investments have been responsible for AirFinance Journals strong trading ahead of our investment case.
We have strong market share in the fastgrowing aircraft finance sector and are evolving plans to benefit further from the tailwinds the sector is experiencing.
We are working with our customers to develop tools that allow them to better evaluate assets in this sector.
Product development work is progressing.
Our tools will support our customers decisionmaking for large capital investments assist their business prospecting and allow our business to capitalise on the growth of both primary and secondary markets.
Working closely with our customers on product development our strong market position enables us to benefit from further growth in this area.
Grow your network and knowledge A Euromoney
Investor Company
Intellectual
Property
Total revenue by type %
Advertising
Sponsorship
Delegates
Other
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
21 12112017 121349 PM Segment review continued Total revenue by type % Banking and nance Banking and finance provides market intelligence news training and conferences to the global finance industry.
It includes the flagship Euromoney magazine a leading publication for the global banking sector which through its awards for excellence has been the arbiter of status for banks for over 45 years.
Its conferences across the Euromoney and IMN brands are the preeminent events for their specific industry sectors.
The segment derives over 70% of its revenues from delegates and sponsorships for its events.
Movement %
Total revenue 69.8 68.1 3% 6%
Adjusted operating margin 20% 15% Total revenues increased by 3% to 69.8m largely due to the strength of the US dollar improving IMNs growth rate.
On an underlying basis revenues were down 6% reflecting the Groups actions to eliminate lowmargin events and training courses in the first and fourth quarters.
This was partly offset by some success in the strategic investment in thoughtleadership products in Euromoney magazine.
The adjusted operating margin improved from 15% to 20% largely due to the successful restructure of the training business in the second half of 2016.
As a result on an underlying basis adjusted operating profit increased by 7%.
BANKING and FINANCE THOUGHT LEADERSHIP AND RIVAL ADVOCATES Euromoney magazine has long been known as an arbiter of status in finance.
It is now building on its existing accreditation platforms such as the Euromoney Awards for Excellence by creating digital amplification campaigns to showcase key award findings to its clients customers and peers.
Euromoney has developed the process of peer influence between banks as a powerful marketing tool through its Rival Advocacy system which improves customers net promoter scores.
Euromoney is achieving this by combining its authoritative banking coverage with a new digital audience development platform which draws on Euromoneys database of financial and corporate leaders.
These techniques place Euromoney at the heart of contentmarketing and thought leadership in finance.
Subscriptions and content
Sponsorship
Delegates
Other
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
22 12112017 121351 PM Commodity events Commodity events consists of the leading conferences in the metals agriculture and energy sectors.
Most of the conferences are large trading events bringing the whole industry together to conduct business and exchange market intelligence.
Movement %
Total revenue 27.4 29.3 6% 8%
Adjusted operating margin 25% 27% Total revenues were down 6% to 27.4m and down 8% on an underlying basis.
Despite the pickup in commodities markets during the year this performance largely reflects the selfhelp strategic actions taken in 2016 to consolidate some of the segments event activities and the decision not to repeat events in certain markets in the fourth quarter due to increased geopolitical instability.
The adjusted operating margin fell from 27% to 25% primarily due to the challenging market conditions faced by some of the segments large commoditiesrelated events before the improvement in cycle.
As a result adjusted operating profit fell by an underlying 10%.
COALTRANS EVENTS BENEFITTING FROM A MARKET ON THE UPTURN Increased demand for coal in Asia has driven coal prices up and we have therefore focused our Coaltrans portfolio in that region during 2017.
The Groups global footprint enables us to pivot and divert resource where needed across the world.
At Coaltrans Asia our hallmark event over 800 coal professionals gathered for two days of networking and dealmaking.
Our performance is enabling us to invest in our core events and event formats as well as an expanded portfolio and we will continue to do so in order to meet the evolving content and networking needs of our audience.
Coaltrans
Conferences
Total revenue by type %
Delegates
Other
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
23 12112017 121353 PM Corporate and social responsibility Our approach to Corporate and Social Responsibility CSR is largely led by staff The global nature of our Group and the fact that it serves a wide range of customers gives people an opportunity to communicate and interact with different sections of society across the world.
Our success owes much to understanding and engaging with the communities we serve.
People
Euromoney is well known as a place where entrepreneurs do well.
Historically this may have meant we overlooked some of the benefits of being a large group.
That is changing but we want to remain a place where innovators and selfstarters thrive and those who want and deserve responsibility and relish accountability can still progress rapidly.
We call combining the best of Euromoneys entrepreneurial culture with the benefits of being a substantial corporation without the downsides of either our bestofbothworlds model.
We talk about it in more detail in the strategy section on page 17.
One part of that is introducing more opportunities for staff to develop their careers in the Group.
Two years ago we operated as 30 or so separate businesses.
A talented individual who rose quickly in a business might decide that they had to leave in order to continue to develop their career.
By combining businesses into seven divisions and by coordinating our management of people across the whole of Euromoney we are now able to help our staff develop their careers beyond their current business.
Better career prospects and more development means our staff become more experienced and skilled which will enhance their performance and encourage them to stay in the Group.
Gillian Fox our Global HR Director is leading this and other changes in approach working closely with our divisional and functional heads.
Here are a few bestofbothworlds peoplerelated examples We want to recruit staff who will like our culture but we dont want to hire people simply to fit in so we are introducing more rigorous evidencebased recruitment practices.
We take seriously our duty to care for our staff.
We want to ensure our people still travel to and run events in emerging and frontier markets.
But we want to make sure they can do so as safely as possible and that we always consider the safety of delegates who attend our events.
So we have introduced training on travelling safely and a comprehensive eventsafety assessment and accompanying training for our event organisers.
At Euromoney we have always given people responsibility early in their careers.
In 2018 we will focus on training staff as managers.
We will also make sure that we have successors identified and developed for critical roles across the Group.
Diversity and inclusion Our business is dependent on recruiting retaining developing and motivating talented people.
The talents we need do not depend on gender sexual orientation religion ethnic or national origin race colour age disability or socioeconomic background.
We recognise that we need to do more to appeal to everyone who could help us to succeed.
Therefore over the past year we have started to focus more on diversity.
Part of that is making sure that everyone can fulfil their potential at Euromoney and be and feel supported by the Company in doing so by fostering an environment of inclusion.
There is always more work to be done and so this will continue in 2018.
We do not believe that diversity is about having a policy or a standalone initiative.
It needs to permeate all people related activities.
As an equal opportunity employer we seek to employ a workforce which reflects the diverse community at large.
We do not discriminate in recruitment promotion or other employee matters.
The Group endeavours to provide a working environment free from discrimination victimisation or harassment and we will not accept behaviours which contradict this.
Since the summer our Group Management Board has spent and will continue to spend time considering what more we can do to make the Group more diverse and inclusive.
This includes understanding why women make up a smaller proportion of senior staff compared to their representation at more junior levels.
We have started a pilot to focus on developing careers of highpotential women in the Company.
We have changed our approach to hiring for senior roles to make sure short lists are diverse.
We have introduced our first LGBT and womens networks and have begun to roll out unconscious bias training.
We are making sure the recruitment firms we use understand our seriousness about finding and attracting diverse candidates of the highest quality.
We have also started working with a recruitment firm that specialises in helping firms hire talented black Asian and minority ethnic staff particularly those near the start of their career.
Staff feedback on these programmes has been positive.
Gender pay gap analysis We have analysed the pay of men and women in the UK.
The analysis shows that we pay men and women roughly the same within each band of seniority.
We will be doing further analysis of the small gaps that are revealed and will take any necessary remedial action.
The issue the analysis highlights however is that we do not have enough senior women even though 47% of our Group overall are female.
We need to work across the organisation to change this.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
24 12112017 121353 PM
Group
Management
Board
Senior
Managers
Total
Employees
Male 98 83 1178 Male % 90% 67% 75% 53% Female 14 28 1050 Female % 10% 33% 25% 47% Total 10 12 111 2228 1 Above data reflects position at 22 November 2017.
Two additional female NonExecutive Directors will join the Board before the 2018 AGM Our commitment to improve gender balance applies across the Group.
As already announced we are delighted that three talented and experienced female NonExecutive Directors are joining the Board.
This is an example of how a focus on diversity widens the pool we can attract and brings in skills and experience from which the Board and Group will benefit hugely.
Environment
The Group has a small environmental footprint but that does not mean our staff do not want to help us contribute in this area.
Our main offices are all located in central city locations which generally means staff travel to work by public transport.
Our technology allows homeworking reducing work travel.
Overseas trips must be justified.
We try to do the easy things as a matter of course.
For example we switch most of the lights off at night.
Our larger offices include shower facilities for staff who prefer to cycle or run to work.
Within the office recycling bins make recycling easy.
We have found with our diversity initiatives that they work better when we harness the passion energy and experience of our staff not just via Company policy we are taking the same approach with our environmental initiatives.
Although our carbon footprint is small we think we can do more and we intend to ask our staff across the world for their ideas for what else we can do.
We shall report back next year.
Social investment Our staff drive our charity fundraising which comes from both individual fundraising efforts and the Groups charitable budget.
Our staff give their time generously to support a wide range of projects across the globe.
Hurricane Irma Our colleagues at IMN ran their annual ABS East conference in Miami in the aftermath of Irma.
They did so with the support of local government and agencies who wanted to show that Miami remained open for business.
Our team was grateful for that support and the Company donated 100000 to the Volunteer Florida Foundation to help with relief efforts and organised for conference delegates to get involved in relief efforts.
Over the year we have continued our work with TSF Afghan Connection AMREFORBIS and Haven House.
TSF
Tlcoms Sans Frontires TSF is an NGO specialising in emergency telecommunications and new technologies.
It has led emergency relief efforts in 70 countries supporting millions of victims of conflict and natural disasters as well as facilitating the relief efforts of more than 800 humanitarian organisations in wartorn and disaster zones.
Since 2014 the Group has raised more than 130000 to support TSFs projects.
Afghan Connection Afghan Connection AC has over 10 years experience successfully funding education and sports projects in
AC has funded 43 school construction projects for over 50000 children and built 50 cricket pitches.
We have donated 154000 including funds raised by staff to support the construction of Kezer School in the Rustaq district of Northern Afghanistan.
AMREFORBIS
Amref Health Africa is one of the leading health NGOs in Africa working to improve the health of women men and children by establishing a participatory health care system.
Orbis is an international charity that works across Africa Asia and Latin America transforming lives by preventing and treating avoidable blindness and visual impairment.
Since 2014 Euromoney has supported a joint project between Amref Health Africa and Orbis to help eliminate trachoma a preventable blinding eye disease in the South Omo region of Ethiopia.
Our
Haven House Haven House is a childrens hospice based on the borders of Essex and East London.
It looks after children aged from birth to 19 with lifelimiting or lifethreatening conditions.
Last year the hospice supported 353 children and young people across all its services.
Euromoney has made a 50000 contribution to Haven House during the last 12 months.
Global efforts Our staff are engaged globally in our charitable fundraising.
Our colleagues in New York support a range of local charities through initiatives such as helping with meal preparations at the Bowery Mission clothing drives for charities which provide disadvantaged men and women with professional office attire hurricane relief fundraisers and volunteer work as part of Habitat for Humanity to rehabilitate a home in Battle Hill New York.
Our teams in Sofia Bulgaria carry out fundraising including donations for the Bulgarian Red Cross and the National Fund Saint Nikola as well as a local hospital for children with cerebral palsy.
More to do The Groups success is dependent on the efforts of our staff.
That is not just true in terms of financial results but also our ability to serve our communities.
We will continue to focus on making the Group a place where people want to join and stay in part because we are an organisation where they can make a difference both inside and outside of the office by leading or participating in CSR activities that they care about.
Board % Group Management Board %
Female
Male
Female
Total Employees % Senior Managers %
Female
Male
Female
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
25 12112017 121354 PM Operating and nancial review Total revenue and adjusted prot before tax are both up despite some headwinds although currency remains a favourable tailwind Following the Groups decision to review the strategic options for the Global Markets Intelligence division CEIC and EMIS these businesses have met the recognition criteria of discontinued operations and therefore have been presented as such in the Groups financial statements.
As the division has been managed as part of the Group for the full year its results have been included in the Groups review of its performance.
Hence total adjusted and underlying measures combine the results from the Groups continuing and discontinued operations.
Detailed reconciliations of the Groups statutory adjusted and underlying results are set out on pages 29 to 32.
Revenue
Total revenue for the year increased by 6% to 428.4m largely due to favourable exchange rates.
The Groups businesses focused on price discovery data and market intelligence performed strongly benefitting from the strategic actions taken this year.
Despite modest growth in the asset management segment during the first half of the year the increasing cyclical headwinds caused by the MiFID II regulations led to its large subscription revenues being a significant drag in the second half.
The commodity events and banking and finance segments which together accounted for 22% of revenues declined largely reflecting the elimination of lowmargin events and training courses in the first and fourth quarters and the decision not to repeat events in certain markets due to increased geopolitical instability in the fourth quarter.
Underlying revenue fell by 1% however this masks markedly varied performances between the quarters.
After a 5% decline in the first quarters underlying revenue grew in the second and third quarter primarily reflecting a strong recovery in the events businesses particularly in banking and finance and commodities.
The events performance remained robust in the fourth quarter but was affected by the decision to cut certain events in markets affected by increased geopolitical instability.
Statutory revenue increased by 6% to 386.9m in line with the increase of total revenue including discontinued operations.
Total revenue m
Asset management 138.2 2% 14.2 9% 16.1 4% 3.2 4% 0.1 108% 171.8 2% Pricing data and market intelligence 113.9 5% 16.7 13% 14.5 8% 19.0 4% 1.4 9% 165.5 3% Banking and finance 8.9 5% 9.8 8% 28.0 7% 21.7 10% 1.4 11% 69.8 6% Commodity events NA NA 6.0 4% 20.8 7% 0.6 2% 27.4 8% 261.0 1% 40.7 8% 64.6 1% 64.7 5% 3.5 8% 434.5 Soldclosed businesses 4.7 Foreign exchange losses on forward contracts 10.8 Total revenue 428.4 1% 1 Figures are 2017 total revenues and percentages are underlying growth rates 2 Calculates the growth rate for underlying revenues of 423.7m for 2017 i.
Subscriptions and content Underlying subscriptions and content revenues increased by 1%.
Pricing data and market intelligence subscription revenues increased by an underlying 5% mainly due to an excellent performance from Metal Bulletin including the successfully integrated FastMarkets together with strong growth from the RISI acquisition in the second half of the year.
The increasing cost and fee pressures facing the asset management sector from the impact of MiFID II resulted in subscription revenues from this segment declining 2% on an underlying basis.
Advertising
The rate of decline in underlying advertising revenues decreased during the year reflecting success in the strategic investment in thoughtleadership products.
However its performance remains weak and declined by 8% yearonyear but it now only represents 10% of total revenue.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
26 12112017 121354 PM Sponsorship and delegates Underlying event revenues decreased 3% sponsorship fell by 1% and delegates by 5% with the banking and finance and commodity events segments the most significant reductions.
However much of this revenue decline was a direct result of the selfhelp strategic actions taken in 2016 to consolidate some of the Groups event activities and cut out a significant number of low margin events and unprofitable training courses.
This has improved profitability for both segments and improving market conditions led to renewed growth in the second and third quarters and further demonstrated the health of the large mustattend annual events and the strategic focus to continue to build large repeat highmargin events.
Adjusted results The adjusted operating margin fell from 25.2% to 25.0% largely due to the required investment in standalone company costs following the DMGT sell down and the need to operate as an independent group.
This drag was partly offset by the favourable currency mix.
Adjusted operating profit increased by 6% to 107.1m.
Adjusted profit before tax increased by 4% to 106.5m with increased financing costs following the share buyback partly offset by an improvement in adjusted profits from the Groups equity interest in associates and joint ventures principally
Adjusted diluted earnings per share increased by 15% to 76.4p 2016 66.5p largely reflecting the benefit from the reduced number of shares in issue following the share buyback.
Underlying adjusted profit before tax fell by 5%.
Statutory results The statutory profit before tax of 40.7m is lower than the adjusted profit before tax due to exceptional items of 31.3m acquired intangible amortisation of 20.6m and a 9.2m contribution from discontinued operations.
Statutory operating profit after acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items increased from 37.3m to 43.4m resulting in a slight improvement in the operating margin from 10% to 11%.
Exceptional items 2017 2016 m m Profit on disposal 2.9 7.1 Impairment charges 29.7 28.8 Release of provision for overseas sales tax 3.9 7.9 Restructuring and other exceptional costs 8.4 7.7 Continuing operations 31.3 37.3 Discontinued operations 2.4 Total 33.7 37.3 The Group recognised a 29.7m impairment charge mostly in relation to one of its large asset management businesses NDR following its disappointing financial performance in the face of tough market conditions and management changes in the first half.
During the year the Group sold HedgeFund Intelligence II Intelligence Euromoney Indices and LatinFinance resulting in a net profit of 3.8m note 15.
The disposal of the joint ventures Institutional Investor Zanbato Limited and EIIZ Discovery LLC resulted in a loss of 0.9m note 14.
An element of the provision for overseas sales tax was released resulting in a credit of 3.9m following settlement of the sales tax exposure including interest.
Restructuring and other exceptional items consist of professional fees associated with the share buyback transaction with DMGT professional fees from the legal dispute with the previous owners of Centre for Investor Education CIE which has been treated as exceptional in the prior year nonrecurring costs relating to the relocation of the New York office and costs for the acquisition of RISI note 15.
Acquisition costs for smaller transactions have not been treated as exceptional consistent with the Groups policy.
There were no exceptional severance costs in 2017.
The exceptional items of 2.4m relating to discontinued operations comprise professional fees associated with the strategic review of the Global Markets Intelligence division.
Balance sheet The main movements in the balance sheet were as follows 2017 2016 Change m m m Goodwill and other intangible assets 594.0 551.1 42.9 Property plant and equipment 17.2 10.5 6.7 Investments 30.4 35.9 5.5 Acquisition commitments and deferred consideration 11.5 11.7 0.2 Deferred income 117.0 118.8 1.8 Other noncurrent assets and liabilities 31.1 24.7 6.4 Other current assets and liabilities 30.6 48.6 18.0 Net assets before net debtcash 451.4 393.7 57.7 Net debtcash 164.5 83.8 248.3 Net cash classified as held for sale 9.9  9.9 Total net debtcash 154.6 83.8 238.4 Net assets 296.8 477.5 180.7 Goodwill and other intangible assets  the movement reflects 119.5m of goodwill and acquired intangibles following the acquisition of RISI partially offset by impairment of 27.4m for NDR reclassification of 29.6m of goodwill and acquired intangibles to assets held for sale and the unfavourable exchange movement from the predominately US dollar denominated balance Property plant and equipment  the increase is largely due to the New York office fitout and recurring capital expenditure partly offset by depreciation of 3.0m Investments  includes a 2.3m impairment of availableforsale investments a 1.5m share of loss in Dealogic during 2017 and the unfavourable foreign exchange movement from the US dollar denominated balance Acquisition commitments and deferred consideration  reflects addition for the acquisition of Layer123 offset by a credit to the Income Statement primarily from the remeasurement of the put option liability for NDRs minority stake Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
27 12112017 121354 PM Operating and nancial review
Deferred income  excluding exchange differences acquisitions and disposals deferred income increased 6.3m mainly due to the recovery in events revenue and an improvement in timing of subscriptions invoicing Other noncurrent assets and liabilities  reflects an increase in deferred tax liabilities of 20.3m recognised on acquisitions during the year partly offset by the tax effect of NDR goodwill impairment of 10.1m.
In addition the Group recognised a 2.5m convertible loan note.
Other current assets and liabilities  the reduction is largely due to the 8.7m net reclassification of assets and liabilities to held for sale the settlement of the overseas sales tax exposure during the year a movement of 10.9m on the marked to market valuation of shortterm derivative contracts and a reduction in current income tax liabilities Net debtcash The main movements in the cash flow were as follows
Cash generated from operations 118.2 103.8 14.4 Capex and other movements 17.4 5.8 11.6 Taxation 21.8 16.7 5.1 Free cash flow 79.0 81.3 2.3 Dividends paid 30.8 29.9 0.9 Net MandA 102.2 11.2 113.4 Share buyback 193.5  193.5 Opening net cash 83.8 17.7 66.1 Effect of foreign exchange rate movements 9.1 3.5 5.6 Closing net debtcash 154.6 83.8 238.4 Net debt at 30 September 2017 was 154.6m compared with net debt of 83.6m at 31 March and net cash of 83.8m at last year end.
The move to a net debt position reflects the share buyback completed in early January at a cost of 193.5m funded by 75.3m of the Groups cash and new bank termloans of 118.2m.
It also reflects the acquisitions of RISI and Layer123 in April that increased net debt by a further 102.7m and dividend payments of 30.8m.
This was partly offset by strong operating cash flows of 118.2m.
Following the share buyback the Group arranged new fiveyear external borrowing facilities comprising termloans of US100m and 40m total 114.6m and a 130m multicurrency revolving credit facility.
There is a further accordion facility of 130m should the Group wish to request it.
The termloans and drawings under the revolving credit facility bear interest charged at LIBOR plus a margin the applicable margin being based on the Groups ratio of adjusted net debt to EBITDA.
At 30 September 2017 the Groups ratio of adjusted net debt to EBITDA was 1.24 times and the committed undrawn facility available to the Group was 74.8m.
The Groups underlying operating cash conversion for the 12 months to September was 118% 2016 105% reflecting better working capital management and the recovery in events performance.
Currency
The Group generates approximately threequarters of both its revenues including approximately a third of its UK revenues and approximately 80% of operating profits in US dollars.
The exposure to US dollar revenues in its UK businesses is hedged using forward contracts to sell US dollars which delays the impact of movements in exchange rates for at least a year.
However the Group does not hedge the foreign exchange risk on the translation of overseas profits.
The average sterlingUS dollar rate for the year to 30 September was 1.27 2016 1.41.
This improved headline revenue growth rates for the year by approximately seven percentage points and adjusted profit before tax by 9.4m.
Each one cent movement in the US dollar rate has an impact on profits on translation of approximately 0.8m on an annualised basis.
The Group also translate its nonsterling denominated balance sheet items resulting in a loss of 0.4m 2016 1.9m gain.
Dividends
Following the DMGT sell down the Board reviewed the Companys dividend policy.
As a result the Board approved a reduction in the dividend cover from 3.0 to 2.5 times adjusted earnings subject to the capital needs of the business.
The 15% reduction in the number of shares in issues following the share buyback combined with the increase in the dividend payout ratio has enabled the Board to approve a 33% increase in the final dividend to 21.8p per share 2016 16.4p to be paid to shareholders on 15 February 2018.
This has resulted in a total dividend for the year of 30.6p per share 2016 23.4p.
Treasury
The treasury department does not act as a profit centre nor does it undertake any speculative trading activity and it operates within policies and procedures approved by the Board.
In order to hedge its exposure to US dollar revenues in its UK businesses a series of forward contracts are put in place to sell forward surplus US dollars.
The Group hedges 80% of forecast US dollar revenues for the coming 12 months and up to 50% for a further six months.
As a result of this hedging strategy any profit or loss from the strengthening or weakening of the US dollar will largely be delayed until the following financial year and beyond.
The Group does not hedge the foreign exchange risk on the translation of overseas profits.
The Groups borrowings are in both sterling and US dollars with the related interest tied to LIBOR.
It is the Groups policy to hedge up to 80% of its term loan interest exposure converting its floating rate debt into fixed debt by means of interest rate swaps.
The predictability of interest costs is deemed to be more important than the possible opportunity cost foregone of achieving lower interest rates.
Details of the financial instruments used are set out in note 19 to the Groups financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
28 12112017 121354 PM Tax The adjusted effective tax rate based on adjusted profit before tax and excluding deferred tax movements on intangible assets prior year items and exceptional items is 19% 2016 18%.
The tax rate in each year depends mainly on the geographic mix of profits and applicable tax rates.
The Groups statutory effective tax rate decreased to 8% compared to 33% in 2016.
The Group continues to benefit from reductions in the UK corporate tax rate and the tax effects of asset acquisitions made in the UK prior to July 2015.
The rate was further reduced by prior year items and a disposal of shares in a subsidiary.
Significant reconciling items include nontaxable income of 1.6m 2016 0.4m that arises from a tax deductible loss on disposal of shares in a subsidiary and other items deductible for tax purposes of 5.1m 2016 5.3m that results from financing arrangements that give rise to asymmetrical tax treatment in the territories involved.
Prior year items primarily reflect settlement of open items with tax authorities in 2017.
The net deferred tax liability held is 21.9m 2016 10.3m and relates primarily to capitalised intangible assets and tax deductible goodwill net of shortterm temporary differences and tax losses.
The increase in the net deferred tax liability relates to a 27.2m liability in respect of acquired goodwill and intangibles from the acquisitions of RISI and Layer123 and deferred tax movements on financial instruments.
The Group continues to have a number of uncertain tax positions primarily the Canadian and UK exposures which have been highlighted in previous periods for which the maximum exposures are explained in note 2 of the Groups financial statements.
Headcount
The number of people employed is monitored monthly to ensure there are sufficient resources to meet the forthcoming demands of each business and to make sure that the businesses continue to deliver sustainable profits.
During 2017 the Directors have focused on maintaining headcount at a similar level to that in 2016 hiring new heads only where it was considered essential or for investment purposes.
Headcount has fallen by 16 since September 2016 to 2228 mainly attributable to the disposals of Euromoney Indices LatinFinance HedgeFund Intelligence and II Intelligence and profit protection measures undertaken in the asset management segment offset by the acquisitions of RISI and Layer123.
Adjusted measures The Directors believe that the adjusted measures provide additional useful information for shareholders to evaluate and compare the performance of the business from period to period.
These measures are used by management for budgeting planning and monthly reporting purposes and are the basis on which executive management is incentivised.
The nonIFRS measures also enable the Group to track more easily and consistently the underlying operational performance by separating out the following types of exceptional income charges and noncash items.
Total revenue represents the combined reported revenue from continuing and discontinued operations.
Adjusted earnings include the results of continuing and discontinued operations.
The discontinued operations for the Global Markets Intelligence division have been included in the adjusted results as it was owned and managed as part of the Group for the entire period and to aid yearonyear comparability of the Groups results.
Adjusted figures are presented before the impact of amortisation of acquired intangible assets comprising trademarks and brands databases and customer relationships exceptional items share of associates and joint ventures acquired intangibles amortisation exceptional items and tax and net movements in deferred consideration and acquisition commitments.
The amortisation of acquired intangible assets is adjusted as the premium paid relative to the net assets on the balance sheet of the acquired business and is classified as either goodwill or as an intangible asset arising on a business combination and is recognised on the Groups balance sheet.
This differs to organically developed businesses where assets such as employee talent and customer relationships are not recognised on the balance sheet.
Impairment and amortisation of intangible assets and goodwill arising on acquisitions are excluded from adjusted results as they are balance sheet items that relate to historical MandA activity rather than the trading performance of the business.
Exceptional items are items of income or expense considered by the Directors either individually or if a similar type in aggregate as being significant.
The accounting policy for exceptional items can be found in note 1 to the Groups financial statements.
Adjusted share of results in associates and joint ventures excludes the share of exceptional items that relates to restructuring and earnout costs in Dealogic.
IFRS requires that earnout payments to selling shareholders retained in the acquired business for a contractual time period are treated as a compensation cost.
Given that these payments are in substance part of the cost of an investment and will not recur once the earnout payments have been made they have been excluded from the share of adjusted profit.
In respect of earnings adjusted amounts reflect a tax rate that includes the current tax effect of the goodwill and intangible assets.
Many of the Groups acquisitions particularly in the US give rise to significant tax savings as the amortisation of goodwill and intangible assets on acquisition is deductible for tax purposes.
The Group considers that the resulting adjusted effective tax rate is therefore more representative of its tax payable position.
Further analysis of the adjusting items is presented in notes 3 5 7 8 12 and 14 to the Groups financial statements.
The Group has consistently applied this definition of adjusted measures as it has reported on its financial performance in the past and it is the Groups intention to continue to consistently apply this definition in the future.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
29 12112017 121355 PM Operating and nancial review
The reconciliation below sets out the adjusted results of the Group and the related adjustments to the statutory Income Statement that the Directors consider necessary to provide useful and comparable information about the Groups trading performance.
2017 2016
Statutory
Adjustments
Adjusted discontinued operations
Restated statutory
Adjusted discontinued operations
Total revenue 3 386923  41490 428413 366062  37050 403112 Adjusted operating profit 3 95253  11886 107139 91358  10092 101450 Acquired intangible amortisation 12 20566 20566  16817 16817 Exceptional items 5 31253 31253  37264 37264 Operating profit 43434 51819 11886 107139 37277 54081 10092 101450 Share of results in associates and joint ventures 14 1890 5183  3293 1823 4009  2186 Finance income 7 3290 3147 107 250 391  303 694 Finance expense 7 4146  74 4220 2401 601 1 1801 Net finance costsincome 7 856 3147 33 3970 2010 601 302 1107 Profit before tax 40688 53855 11919 106462 33444 58691 10394 102529 Tax expense on profit 8 3390 14236 2219 19845 11118 5282 1666 18066 Profit for the year 37298 39619 9700 86617 22326 53409 8728 84463 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 36829 39619 9700 86148 22057 53409 8728 84194 Equity noncontrolling interests 469  469 269  269 37298 39619 9700 86617 22326 53409 8728 84463 Diluted earnings per share 10 37.91p 76.44p 24.29p 66.51p Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
30 12112017 121355 PM Underlying measures When assessing the performance of our businesses the Board considers the adjusted results.
The yearonyear change in adjusted results may not however be a fair likeforlike comparison as there are a number of factors which can influence growth rates but which do not reflect underlying performance.
When calculating underlying growth adjustments are made to give a likeforlike comparison.
For example the adjusted results in 2017 benefitted from the strengthening of the US dollar relative to sterling.
To calculate underlying growth the prior year comparatives are restated using 2017 exchange rates.
Similarly adjustments are made to exclude disposals from both years.
When businesses are acquired the prior year comparatives are adjusted to include the acquisition.
The timing of events can also be a distortion.
To give a fair likeforlike comparison when calculating underlying growth significant timing event differences are excluded from the year in which they were held.
The Groups adjusted and underlying measures should not be considered in isolation from or as a substitute for financial information presented in compliance with IFRS.
The adjusted and underlying measures used by the Group are not necessarily comparable with those used by other companies.
The following table sets out the reconciliation from statutory to underlying for revenues and profit before tax
Total
Change % Statutory revenue 386923 366062 6% Discontinued operations 41490 37050 Total revenue 428413 403112 6% MandA 4716 5897 Timing differences  2977 Foreign exchange  34471 Underlying revenue 423697 428709 1% Statutory profit before tax 40688 33444 22% Adjustments 53855 58691 Discontinued operations 11919 10394 Adjusted profit before tax 106462 102529 4% MandA  891 Timing differences  2074 Foreign exchange  10892 Underlying profit before tax 106462 112238 5% Cash conversion Cash conversion measures the percentage by which cash generated from operations covers adjusted operating profit.
Adjusted operating profit 107139 101450 Cash generated from operations 118201 103764 Exceptional items 12375 3736 Other working capital movements 4551 1365 Underlying cash generated from operations 126025 106135 Adjusted cash conversion % 110% 102% Underlying cash conversion % 118% 105% The underlying basis is after adjusting for significant timing differences affecting the movement on working capital and exceptional items.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 exceptional items largely consist of cash payments for the 2016 restructuring costs legal and professional fees and share buyback costs.
The other working capital movements are largely the result of the landlords contribution to the fitout of the New York office which will be amortised over the period of the lease and the rentfree period of the London and New York offices.
For the year ended 30 September 2016 exceptional payments related to the strategic review in 2016 and the development of the Groups new strategy.
The other working capital movements in prior year related to the rentfree period of the London offices.
As cash generated from operations in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows includes those from discontinued operations we have not provided the statutory cash conversion rate as it would not give a fair indication of the Groups cash conversion performance.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
31 12112017 121355 PM Operating and nancial review
Adjusted net debtcash to EBITDA The Groups borrowing facilities contain certain covenants including adjusted net debt to EBITDA.
The amounts and foreign exchange rates used in the covenant calculations are subject to adjustments as defined under the terms of the arrangement.
Net debtcash 154621 83782 Exchange rate adjustment 2188 Adjusted net debtcash 156809 83782 Adjusted operating profit 107139 101450 Share of adjusted results in associates and joint ventures 3293 2186 Add back Intangible amortisation on licences and software 3965 3675 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 3202 2806 Share of associates interest depreciation and amortisation 4632 3650 MandA annualised adjustment 3912 Adjusted EBITDA 126143 113767 Adjusted net debtcash to EBITDA ratio 1.24 0.74 The bank covenant ratio uses an average exchange rate in the calculation of net debt and includes an annualised adjustment attributable to acquisitions and disposals in the calculation of adjusted EBITDA.
When businesses are acquired after the beginning of the financial year the calculation of adjusted EBITDA includes EBITDA attributable to the business as if the acquisition had been completed on the first day of the financial year.
The calculation excludes the EBITDA of any businesses disposed of during the year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
32 12112017 121355 PM Risk management We are placing an increased focus on the management of risk as well as the reporting of risk The Board and Risk Committee note that of the principal risks identified in the previous financial year the structural shifts being seen in the asset management sector one of the four segments pose the most significant operational risk and the most challenging risk to manage.
The Board wishes to continue to serve the asset management segment because it considers it to be attractive over the medium term.
The Risk Committee has completed a robust and detailed assessment of both the risk management processes and the risk register and has considered the impact of significant risks to the Group.
Further details of the risk management processes the governance structure for risk and the Risk Committee can be found in the Governance section.
We use a number of tools to analyse risks and facilitate discussions at the Board Group Management Board and Risk
The risk matrix below shows the relative impact and likelihood of the principal risks.
The risks are shown as postmitigation residual risks.
We also consider the extent to which each risk arises from external or internal factors and whether each risk is established and understood or is an emerging risk and therefore less well understood.
The risk radar below maps the principal risks using this criteria with increasing risk indicated by the larger data points.
Arrows are used to indicate directional movement.
The principal risks and uncertainties the Group faces vary across its different businesses and are identified in the risk register.
Management of significant risk is the responsibility of the Board and is overseen by the Risk Committee.
The Risk Committee changed its terms of reference during the year both to reflect market practice and to introduce an express requirement for the Committee to focus on the management of risk as well as the identification and reporting of risk.
The membership of the Committee changed during the year with the General Counsel and Company Secretary and Chief Information Officer joining the Committee.
The Groups risk register identifies the principal risks facing the business.
The register is put together following a Groupwide assessment of risks reported in its business risk registers bottomup approach.
Each business risk register considers the likelihood of a risk occurring and both the monetary and reputational impact of the risk crystallising.
The risk assessment process also considers the appetite for the risk topdown approach.
The Group registers its risks based on a residual risk rating after taking account of mitigating controls.
1 Downturn in key geographic region or market sector cyclical downturn 2 Product and market transformationdisruption structural change 3 Exposure to US dollar exchange rate 4 Information security breach resulting in challenge to data integrity 5 Reputational damage from a legal regulatory or behavioural issue arising from operational activities 6 Disruption to business operations 7 Catastrophic or high impact risk affecting key events or wider business 8 Acquisition or disposal fails to generate expected returns 9 Unforeseen tax liabilities or losses from treasury operations 10 Failure to implement the strategy effectively due to a loss of key staff Risk matrix Risk radar
Established operations Established risks Emerging operations Emerging risks
Internal
External
Very low Almost certain Severe Impact Establishedknown Emergingnew Risk change This level of risk is increasing No change to the level of risk Risk movement Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
33 12112017 121355 PM Risk management
The Groups principal risks and uncertainties are summarised below.
The arrows indicate the change in level of perceived risk compared to last year.
Key factors Mitigation Risk appetite Link to strategic pillars DOWNTURN IN KEY GEOGRAPHIC REGION OR MARKET SECTOR CYCLICAL DOWNTURN Concentration of customers in financial services sector makes this exposure acute Economic or geopolitical uncertainty increases this risk The asset management sector faces significant structural headwinds such as the shift from active to passive portfolio management new technologies and the uncertain impact of new regulation MiFID II Brexit continues to create uncertainty for the UK and European markets Boards view The Board wishes to continue to serve the asset management segment because it considers it to be attractive over the medium term.
There are limited options to mitigate impact in the short and medium term from a significant cyclical downturn.
The residual risk will remain high.
The Group actively manages cyclical risk through its strategic framework A comprehensive risk review by the Group of its asset management businesses resulting in output including detailed mitigation plans for each business and continuous tracking of effective risk management The Group operates in many geographical markets Some diversification in sector mix Ability to cut some costs temporarily and quickly Events can be switched to better performing regions Risk tolerant Prior years relative position 2016 Risk tolerant 2015 Risk tolerant 2014 Risk tolerant
Increasing
Description of risk change Global economic and geopolitical uncertainty is increasing following the US election limited progress of Brexit negotiations and disruption in a sector with concentrated Group revenues PRODUCT AND MARKET TRANSFORMATIONDISRUPTION STRUCTURAL CHANGE Competition from existing competitors new disruptive players and new entrants New technologies change how customers access and use our products Changing demographics can affect customer needs and opportunities Structural pressure on customer business models will affect demand for the Groups products and services particularly in financial services New regulations such as MiFID II creating both challenges and opportunities in asset management sector Free content available via the Internet increases the threat to paid subscription model Lower barriers to entry for new entrants Inability to acquire the types of assets that the Groups strategy requires Boards view Highquality controls are in place but exposure to this risk cannot be entirely mitigated.
Strategy designed to appraise and evaluate structural risks and respond to them taking advantage of opportunities where identified Regular CEOled reviews across all divisions Entrepreneurial approach Effective management reporting with regular budget reviews Portfolio spreads risk to some degree Third of Groups profits remain eventbased Portfolio management allows the Group to sell structurally challenged businesses and to buy structurally strong ones Introduction of a cyclical review of divisional activities by the Risk Committee Risk tolerant Prior years relative position 2016 Risk tolerant 2015 Risk tolerant 2014 Risk tolerant
Unchanged
Description of risk change As an entrepreneurial business the Group is experienced at managing this risk Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
34 12112017 121356 PM Key factors Mitigation Risk appetite Link to strategic pillars EXPOSURE TO US DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE Approximately threequarters of revenues and profits are generated in US dollars including approximately 30% of the revenues in its UKbased businesses.
This gives significant exposure to movements in the US dollar for both UK revenues and the translation of results of foreign subsidiaries A significant strengthening of sterling against the US dollar could reduce profits and dividends The Group also undertakes transactions in many other currencies although none currently provides a significant risk to the results Boards view The risk to revenue and profit resulting from a depreciation of the US dollar against sterling has previously been reported within risks from treasury operations.
Although the Group considers this risk unchanged the increased volatility and uncertainty of sterling after Brexit as well as the US dollar following the US election is expected to continue for some time.
US dollar forward contracts are used to hedge 80% of UK based US dollar revenues for the coming 12 months and 50% of these revenues for a further six months Exposure from the translation of US dollardenominated earnings is not directly hedged but is partially offset by US dollar costs and the use of US dollardenominated debt Sensitivity analysis is performed regularly to assess the impact of currency risk and is reviewed by the Tax and Treasury Committee Risk tolerant Prior years relative position 2016 Risk tolerant 2015 Risk tolerant 2014 Risk tolerant
Unchanged
Description of risk change The Group is experienced at managing risks related to its exposure to the US dollar and this risk remains unchanged INFORMATION SECURITY BREACH RESULTING IN CHALLENGE TO DATA INTEGRITY Integrity of data products is fundamental to the success of the business The Group relies on large quantities of data including customer employee and commercial data Increasing number of cyberattacks affecting organisations globally The Group has many websites and is reliant on distributed technology increasing exposure to threats A successful cyberattack could cause considerable disruption to business operations lost revenue regulatory fines and reputational damage The new EU General Data Protection Regulation will increase regulatory scrutiny and penalties Technological innovations in mobile working cloudbased technologies and social media introduce new information security risks Boards view Controls to prevent an information security breach or cyberattack are regularly enhanced.
However the rising number of cyberattacks affecting organisations globally the Groups greater dependency on technology and the growing threat from cybercrime are increasing this risk.
Governance provided by Risk Committee and Information Security Steering Group New information security standards and policies which are reviewed on a regular basis Active information security programme including access management and cyberresilience planning to align all parts of the Group with its information security standards Crisis management and business continuity framework covers all businesses including disaster recovery planning for IT systems IT controls including firewalls and intrusion detection software Access to key systems and data is restricted monitored and logged with auditable data trails in place Comprehensive backups for IT infrastructure systems and business data Creation of Group Chief Information Officer role and appointment of expert individual into role with responsibility for and oversight of both central and divisional technology functions Professional indemnity insurance provides cover for cyber risks including cyberattack and data breach incidents Information security is reviewed as part of our internal audit process Annual information security training for employees and freelancers Risk averse Prior years relative position 2016 Risk averse 2015 Risk averse 2014 Risk neutral
Increasing
Description of risk change Most industry information security analysts report that this risk is increasing and warn that companies will continue to face more regular and sophisticated cyberattacks Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
35 12112017 121356 PM Risk management
Key factors Mitigation Risk appetite Link to strategic pillars REPUTATIONAL DAMAGE FROM A LEGAL REGULATORY OR BEHAVIOURAL ISSUE ARISING FROM OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES The Group operates in many jurisdictions and must be compliant with all applicable laws and regulations The Groups businesses publish market and license increasingly complex content and data which in some cases is data on which its customers may choose to rely when executing transactions Claimants can forum shop when determining where to litigate or threaten legal proceedings Success of the Group is dependent on client confidence in integrity of products and brands Compliance risk increasing for information providers as price benchmark and index reporting activities are coming into scope of new regulations being introduced as a result of the financial crisis of 2008 and LIBOR scandal Risk or reputational damage can arise from errors in underlying data or content failures of data integrity failure to educate customers on appropriate usage of data inappropriate reliance on third party data or content to create proprietary content or errors in content creation or a failure to comply with applicable law or regulation Processes and methodologies for assessing commodity prices and calculating benchmarks and indices are clearly defined and documented Compliance staff appointed in key positions Compliance with International Organization of Securities Commissions IOSCO standards achieved for relevant pricing products Code of conduct and other key policies in place for price assessment benchmark and index reporting activities Updated publishing law guide to be issued to editorial staff in 2018 Refreshed antibribery and corruption training and awareness programme to be rolled out globally in 2018 Review processes for operation of events and awards Specialist training provided to relevant staff New technology being introduced to provide enhanced monitoring and better exception reporting Companywide speak up policy in place Comprehensive legal disclaimers in place Professional indemnity insurance Risk and compliance role recruited in Price Reporting and Events divisions Risk averse Prior years relative position 2016 Risk averse 2015 Risk averse 2014 Risk averse
Unchanged
Description of risk change Information providers face increased compliance risks as a result of the complexity of data they publish which customers may rely on for certain business decisions Boards view The publication of data and content in digital businesses inevitably exposes the Group to global legal and regulatory risk.
The manner in which we conduct our businesses can also result in risk if policies are not complied with.
The business has invested in its central functions such as legal risk and internal audit which provide more specialist resource to raise awareness of manage and mitigate risk.
Legal and regulatory compliance risk for the Group is unchanged.
DISRUPTION TO BUSINESS OPERATIONS Significant reliance on thirdparty technology hosting services Many products are dependent on specialist technical and editorial expertise A significant incident affecting one or more of the Companys key offices London New York Montreal Hong Kong or Sofia could lead to disruption to Group operations and reputational damage Divisional structure with 40 international offices makes regular testing of plans across the Group challenging Global distribution of property and staff creates exposure in many geographical locations Crisis management and business continuity framework covers all businesses including disaster recovery planning for IT systems Groupwide ITDR testing conducted every six months Clear responsibilities for business continuity planning established across divisions Substantial central and business group investment in cloud based platforms and software Risk assessments for new suppliers and technologies consider operational and financial resilience Risk averse Prior years relative position 2016 Risk averse 2015 Risk averse 2014 Risk averse
Unchanged
Description of risk change The Group recognises that business continuity events will arise from time to time and remains committed to active management of this risk Boards view Business disruption is an unavoidable risk but can be mitigated if business continuity plans are well developed and managed.
In spite of extreme weather in Asia and the US and a number of system failures all businesses maintained operations successfully throughout which demonstrated that effective controls are in place.
However more regular business continuity planning is required.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
36 12112017 121356 PM Key factors Mitigation Risk appetite Link to strategic pillars CATASTROPHIC OR HIGH IMPACT INCIDENT AFFECTING KEY EVENTS OR WIDER BUSINESS The Group has a number of large events which are exposed to oneoff risks including natural hazards and security incidents Risk affects customers as well as staff and revenue Prolonged interruption to business travel will harm event revenues and disrupt management and sales operations Past incidents such as hurricanes terrorist attacks SARS Ebola and Zika virus and events such as the disruption to airline schedules from volcanic ash in Europe have all had a negative impact on the Groups results although none materially The Group operates in regions with higher risk of natural hazards Crisis management and business continuity framework requires all businesses to plan for high impact events Specialist security and medical assistance services engaged to support all staff working away from the office New event venue risk assessment process was introduced in 2017 Mandatory security and risk management training programme for event staff and business travellers With sufficient notice events can be moved to nonaffected regions Cancellation insurance for the Groups largest events Risk averse Prior years relative position 2016 Risk averse 2015 Risk averse 2014 Risk neutral
Increasing
Description of risk change The Group recognises that international events businesses are exposed to this risk Boards view The Group continues to invest in training and resources to keep staff safe when travelling and to improve eventconference resilience.
ACQUISITION OR DISPOSAL FAILS TO GENERATE EXPECTED RETURNS Active portfolio management means the Group continues to make strategic acquisitions and disposals Significant growth has been MandA related through both acquired profit and growth in acquired businesses Failure to integrate may mean an acquired business does not generate the expected returns Risk of impairment loss if an acquired business does not generate the expected returns Disposal risks arise from failing to identify the time at which businesses should be sold or failing to achieve optimal price Group strategy relies on successful recycling of capital and therefore MandA execution impacts core strategy Boards view This risk will increase given the Groups strategy of increased MandA and portfolio management.
Active portfolio management with a clear framework and operating in line with agreed strategy Development of key objective criteria against which acquisition or disposal decisions are tested Board and CEO focus on investment and divestment plans.
Formal reviews and approvals in place Senior head of Corporate Development in place recently supplemented by additional industry hire with both subject matter and industry expertise Investment in external independent commercial due diligence The Group has developed a rigorous framework to manage the integration planning and ownership of new acquisitions Risk neutral becoming more tolerant Prior years relative position 2016 Risk neutral 2015 Risk neutral 2014 Risk neutral
Increasing
Description of risk change See Boards view Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
37 12112017 121356 PM Risk management
Key factors Mitigation Risk appetite Link to strategic pillars UNFORESEEN TAX LIABILITIES OR LOSSES FROM TREASURY OPERATIONS The Group operates within many increasingly complex tax jurisdictions Counterparty risk if a bank fails Cash and working capital requirements for multiple overseas locations mean some debt is always exposed to exchange rate movements Boards view Effective controls are in place but the Group cannot eliminate this risk entirely due to the complexity of the Groups structure and the number of jurisdictions in which it operates.
Audit Committee and Tax and Treasury Committee oversight Tax and treasury advice provided by a mix of external tax experts and inhouse specialists We have a policy to comply with tax laws in a responsible manner and have open and constructive relationships with tax authorities We take appropriate care to protect the Groups reputation and relationship with fiscal authorities We take regulatory and commercial constraints into account when taking steps to mitigate tax exposure Derivatives are used to hedge market risks including exchange rates and interest rates Appropriate policies define segregation of duties and strict authorisation limits Internal audit programme covers tax and treasury controls Risk averse Prior years relative position 2016 Risk averse 2015 Risk averse 2014 Risk averse
Unchanged
Description of risk change The Group is experienced at managing tax and treasury risks arising from its international business portfolio and this risk remains unchanged FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT THE STRATEGY EFFECTIVELY DUE TO A LOSS OF KEY STAFF In 2016 the Group announced a new strategy which has become embedded across the Group and is having a positive impact on financial performance Our segments and divisions have individual strategies Implementation of strategy is dependent on the performance of staff in critical roles An inability to recruit retain and train for critical roles will adversely impact our ability to deliver the strategy successfully Ensuring compensation is competitive Ensuring compensation for critical staff includes a balance of shortterm and longterm incentives Investment in training and developing our staff in critical roles will be a focus in 2018 Maintaining the Groups reputation for enabling an entrepreneurial approach making the Company an attractive place to work There are sufficient businesses within each segment and segments within the Group to mitigate the impact of business asusual departures of critical staff Succession plans are being developed but this work needs to accelerate Contractual notice periods are designed to manage the risk of critical staff leaving on short notice Risk neutral This is a new risk
Increasing
Description of risk change
Boards view The Board recognises the importance of retaining critical staff to ensure effective delivery of Group segmental and divisional strategies.
A range of controls are used to manage this risk effectively although succession planning needs to accelerate.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
38 12112017 121357 PM Viability Statement In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group and have selected a period of three years for the assessment.
The threeyear forecasting horizon has been selected because the Directors believe there is sufficient realistic visibility available to assess the Groups current and anticipated operating environment and market conditions over this period.
The threeyear period is also used for the Groups strategic planning cycle and is therefore considered an appropriate period for the longterm viability statement.
The assessment conducted considered the Groups operating profit revenue cash flows dividend cover and other key financial ratios over the threeyear period.
These metrics were subject to severe downside stress and sensitivity analysis over the assessment period taking account of the Groups current position the Groups experience of managing adverse conditions in the past and the impact of a number of severe yet plausible scenarios based on the principal risks set out in the Strategic Report.
The stress testing considered the principal risks which were assessed to have the highest probability of occurrence or the most severe impact crystallising both individually and in combination.
In making the statement the Directors have applied the following key scenarios The asset management segment is increasingly affected by uncertainty from MiFID II and the structural shift towards passive management and leading to a significant decline in our subscription revenues The pricing data and market intelligence segment suffers a downturn due to the reputational fallout from inaccuracies in one of its reporting indexes with a significant fall in subscription revenues Significant reversal of the foreign exchange movement since Brexit adversely impacts the financial results of the Group It is assumed that all material open tax items as detailed in note 2 of the Groups financial statements will result in the maximum cash outflow The Directors have also modelled an extreme scenario that combines the scenarios with a number of other risks that are deemed to have a lower probability of occurrence or lower impact to assess the viability of the Group.
In making the assessment the Directors have considered the Groups robust capital position the cashgenerative nature of the business the visibility of subscriptions revenue the ability of the Company to cut costs quickly the access to available credit the absence of significant pension and MandA liabilities and the Groups ability to restrict dividends.
Based on the results of this analysis the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the threeyear period under review.
The Strategic Report was approved by the Board of Directors on 22 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Andrew Rashbass
Chief Executive Officer
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Strategic report Euromoney AR2017 StrategicProof 6.
39 12112017 121357 PM PRICE REPORTING COMPLIANCE AS A COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE Our pricereporting division uses compliance and standards to create competitive advantage.
Over the last two years Metal Bulletin has developed and implemented its MInD database which manages and stores the data collected by our price reporters.
This year through a combination of documentation controls and monitoring Metal Bulletin achieved International Organization of Securities Commissions IOSCO compliance.
The
Groups auditors PwC provided assurance that the policies processes and controls that Metal Bulletin Group have designed and implemented comply with the IOSCO Principles for Oil Price Reporting Agencies.
This compliance process is an important step in our Price Reporting and Analytics divisions transition towards becoming a price reporting agency.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 40 Governance
Board of Directors 42 Corporate Governance Report 44 Directors Report 54
Directors Remuneration Report 58
The recently announced changes to our Board provide the dual benefits of a fresh perspective and will enable a greater degree of Code alignment.
John Botts
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Governance Board of Directors ANDREW RASHBASS
Chief Executive Officer
Appointed to the Board 2015 Skills and experience Andrew Rashbass has broad international experience managing information businesses.
Between 2013 and 2015 Andrew was Chief Executive of Reuters the news division of Thomson Reuters.
Before joining Reuters he spent 15 years at The Economist Group where for the last five years he was Chief Executive.
JOHN BOTTS NonExecutive Chairman Chairman of the Remuneration and Nominations Committees Appointed to the Board 1992 Skills and experience John Botts is senior adviser of Allen and Company in London and a director of several private companies.
He was formerly NonExecutive Chairman of United Business Media plc.
John has announced his intention to retire from the Board following the Companys AGM in 2018.
R N A COLIN JONES Finance Director Appointed to the Board 1996 Skills and experience Colin Jones is a chartered accountant.
He joined the Company in 1996 from Price Waterhouse and was appointed Finance Director in November 1996.
Colin has announced his intention to retire from the Board by the summer of 2018.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
42 12112017 114824 AM DAVID PRITCHARD Independent NonExecutive Director Senior Independent Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee Appointed to the Board 2008 Skills and experience David Pritchard is a director of The Motability Tenth Anniversary Trust.
David has over 30 years of experience in the banking industry.
He was formerly Chairman of AIB Group UK plc Songbird Estates Plc and Cheltenham and Gloucester plc Deputy Chairman of Lloyds TSB Group and a director of Scottish Widows Group and LCH. learnet Group.
David will take on the role of Acting Chairman following the 2018 AGM.
THE VISCOUNT ROTHERMERE NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 1998 Skills and experience The Viscount is Chairman of Daily Mail and General Trust plc and he brings significant experience of media.
He worked at the International Herald Tribune in Paris and the Mirror Group before moving to Northcliffe Newspapers in 1995.
In 1997 he became Managing Director of the Evening Standard.
SIR PATRICK SERGEANT NonExecutive Director and President Appointed to the Board 1969 Skills and experience Sir Patrick founded the Company in 1969 and was Managing Director until 1985 when he became
He retired as Chairman in September 1992 when he was appointed as President and a NonExecutive Director.
PAUL ZWILLENBERG NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2016 Skills and experience Paul Zwillenberg is Chief Executive of Daily Mail and General Trust plc.
Paul has over 25 years experience across the media sector.
He has a breadth of experience across DMGTs portfolio and a broad knowledge of the Group having set up the digital division of dmg media formerly Associated Newspapers digital in 1996.
Prior to joining DMGT Paul was the Global Leader Media Sector at The Boston Consulting Group where he focused on digital media and content and before that founded an early interactive media company and launched a European technology services firm.
ANDREW BALLINGAL Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2012 Skills and experience Andrew Ballingal is Chief Executive of Ballingal Investment Advisors an independent investment firm based in Hong Kong.
Andrew has over 20 years of experience as an advisor investor and partner in hedge and absolute return funds much of it in Asia.
KEVIN BEATTY NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2017 Skills and experience Kevin Beatty is an experienced media executive and CEO of dmg media.
His prior roles in the media sector include Managing Director of the Scottish Daily Record and Sunday Mail.
Kevin has also been COO of Associated New Media and Northcliffe Newspapers.
TIM COLLIER NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2017 Skills and experience Tim Collier is Chief Financial Officer of Daily Mail and General Trust plc.
His experience spans media and business information industries and prior to joining DMGT he was CFO of Thomson Reuters Financial and Risk Business.
TRISTAN HILLGARTH Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2012 Skills and experience Tristan Hillgarth has over 30 years of experience in asset management and has held senior positions at Framlington Invesco and Jupiter.
He is a NonExecutive Director of JPMorgan Global Growth and Income plc.
IMOGEN JOSS Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed to the Board 2017 Skills and experience Imogen Joss has held a number of senior executive positions in the business information industry and most recently served as the President of SandP Global Platts
She holds NonExecutive Director roles at Grant Thornton the International Property Securities Exchange IPSX and Gresham Technologies plc.
R N Member of the Nominations Committee Member of the Remuneration Committee Member of the Audit Committee Chairman of the committee R N A 1 Resigned from the Nominations Committee on 27 September 2017 2 Appointed to the Board on 10 November 2017 3 Resigned from the Board on 21 November 2017 4 Appointed to the Board on 21 November 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
43 12112017 114825 AM Corporate Governance Report Statement of compliance The Company continues substantially to comply with the Code.
Daily Mail General Trust plc DMGT has ceased to be the Companys majority shareholder but remains a significant shareholder in the Company and retains two NonExecutive positions on the Board which are not regarded as independent under the Code.
The Companys founder president and exchairman Sir Patrick Sergeant remains on the Board but is not regarded as an independent Director under the Code.
The Company therefore did not comply throughout the financial year ended 30 September 2017 with certain provisions of the Code as set out below.
The Company is making significant progress including through changes made in 2017 to bring its Board and committee structure more in line with Code requirements.
For example since 2015 the majority of our Board has comprised NonExecutive Directors.
A number of changes have been made during the financial year the Board appointed a Senior Independent Director the CEO and a NonExecutive Director resigned from the Nominations Committee a new Group Management Board was created the Company has recently announced the appointment of three new independent NonExecutive Directors one of whom is expected to take on the role of Chairman of the Remuneration Committee after a suitable period and following the decision of our Chairman John Botts to retire after our next AGM we have announced our intention to commence a search for a new independent Director to appoint as Chairman the Nominations Committee has also appointed a search firm with a view to hiring a new Chairman of the Audit Committee.
This Corporate Governance Report explains how the Company has applied the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
We have used the key themes of the Code as a framework Leadership and effectiveness are on pages 46 to 50.
Accountability The reports of the Audit and Risk Committees are set out on pages 50 to 53.
Relations with shareholders on page 53.
Remuneration is covered in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 58 to 73.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
44 12112017 114825 AM These changes will provide the Board with the ability to alter the composition of certain of its committees in due course in order to achieve greater alignment with the Code.
Provision Code principle Explanation of noncompliance A.3.1 Appointment of the
John Botts did not meet the Codes definition of independence on appointment as Chairman due to his length of service.
However the Board believes that his length of service has enhanced his role as a NonExecutive Director.
The Board intends to appoint a new independent Director to serve as Chairman.
B.1.2 Composition of the
Less than half the Board are independent NonExecutive Directors.
However there are clear divisions of responsibility within the Board such that no one individual has unfettered powers of decision.
The Company reduced the number of Executive Directors following the 2015 AGM and the changes described on page 44 illustrate that the Company is making progress to achieve its aim of being more in line with Code requirements in the near term in relation to the number of independent NonExecutive Directors the number of independent NonExecutive Directors is now four compared to three in 2016 with an additional two new independent NonExecutive Directors joining the Board in the coming months.
B.2.1 Composition of the Nominations
The Nominations Committee does not comprise a majority of independent Non Executive Directors.
The Committee now comprises five NonExecutive Directors increased from three in 2016 including two considered independent under the Code compared to no independent directors in 2016.
All are considered by the Board to be the most appropriate members.
B.3.2 Terms and conditions of appointment of NonExecutive
John Botts David Pritchard Andrew Ballingal Tristan Hillgarth and Imogen Joss have terms and conditions of appointment.
The Viscount Rothermere Paul Zwillenberg and Sir Patrick Sergeant operate under the terms of their employment contracts with DMGT and Euromoney respectively.
C.3.1 Composition of the Audit Committee The Audit Committee does not comprise at least three independent Non Executive Directors.
The Committee comprises three members only two of whom are considered independent under the Code the other is the Chairman of the Company who is considered by the Board to be a valuable and independently minded member of the Committee.
Since the resignation of Stephen Daintith who represented DMGT on the Committee the Committee has lacked a member with recent and relevant financial experience.
The Company has mitigated this impact through reliance on internal and external expertise and DMGTs current CFO who possesses the requisite experience joined the Committee on 21 November 2017.
C.3.2 Risk Committee approach The Risk Committee does not comprise at least three independent NonExecutive
The Committee comprises six members none of whom is considered independent under the Code.
David Pritchard as Chairman of the Audit Committee and independent NonExecutive Director is invited to attend all meetings of the Committee.
The role and responsibilities of the Risk Committee including its membership are considered appropriate and well suited to reviewing the Companys risk management approach.
The Risk Committee and the Audit Committee work collaboratively and include members or attendees common to both committees to ensure that the principles of the Code are achieved within this structure.
D.2.1 Composition and chairmanship of the Remuneration
The Remuneration Committee does not comprise at least three independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee comprises three NonExecutive Directors only one of whom is considered independent under the Code and one is the Chairman of the Company.
The Company has announced the appointment of an independent NonExecutive Director who is expected to become Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
E.1.1 Dialogue with shareholders David Pritchard the Companys Senior Independent Director was appointed in January and is scheduled to have his first investor meetings in November 2017.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
45 12112017 114825 AM Corporate Governance Report
Leadership and effectiveness Role of the Board and its committees
MEETS EVERY TWO MONTHS  CHAIRED BY JOHN BOTTS Approve and monitor strategy identify evaluate and manage material risks review trading performance ensure adequate funding examine major acquisition possibilities and approve reports to shareholders.
Page 47 MATTERS RESERVED TO THE BOARD AND DELEGATED AUTHORITIES The Board has delegated certain aspects of the Groups affairs to standing committees each of which operates within defined terms of reference available on the Companys website.
However to ensure its overall control of the Groups affairs the Board has reserved certain matters to itself for decision.
Procedures are established to ensure that appropriate information is communicated to the Board in a timely manner to enable it to fulfil its duties.
BOARD
NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE MEETS AS NEEDED CHAIRED BY JOHN BOTTS Reviews the structure size and composition of the Board and makes recommendations to the Board accordingly.
Page 50 REMUNERATION COMMITTEE MEETS THREE TIMES A YEAR CHAIRED BY JOHN BOTTS Responsible for determining the contract terms remuneration and other benefits of Executive Directors including performance related incentives.
This Committee also recommends and monitors the overall level of remuneration and remuneration for senior management including Group wide share option schemes.
Page 72 AUDIT COMMITTEE MEETS AT LEAST THREE TIMES A YEAR CHAIRED BY DAVID PRITCHARD Reviews and is responsible for oversight of the Groups financial reporting processes and the integrity of the financial statements.
It scrutinises the work of the external and internal auditors and any significant accounting judgements made by management.
The
Committee reports on its operations to the Board to enable the Directors to determine the overall effectiveness of the Groups internal controls system.
Page 50 MANAGEMENT COMMITTEES
MANAGEMENT BOARD MEETS EACH MONTH A management board that operates under the direction and authority of the CEO and comprises the Groups divisional and functional leaders.
It assists the CEO and Finance Director in implementing strategy monitoring financial performance developing the Groups approach to managing employees taking joint responsibility for the Groups approach to corporate governance and ensuring that the Groups bestofbothworlds operating model works.
A profile of each member of the Group Management Board is included on page 13.
TAX AND TREASURY COMMITTEE MEETS TWICE A YEAR CHAIRED BY COLIN JONES Responsible for recommending policy to the Board.
The Groups treasury policies are designed to reduce the impact of shortterm currency movements giving greater certainty and ensuring that the Group has adequate liquidity for working capital and debt capacity for funding acquisitions.
The Committee is also responsible for the Groups tax strategy.
The members are the CEO Finance Director and General Counsel and Company Secretary.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee and the CFO of DMGT are also invited to attend the meetings.
RISK COMMITTEE MEETS FOUR TIMES A YEAR CHAIRED BY ANDREW RASHBASS Oversees the Groups risk management processes.
It reviews specific risks and monitors developments in relevant legislation and regulation assessing the impact on the Group.
The Committee reports on its operations to the Board to enable the Directors to determine the overall effectiveness of the Groups risk management.
Its
Director Chief Information Officer MD Corporate Development General Counsel and Company Secretary and Head of Risk.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee is also invited to attend the meetings.
Page 53 The discussions of the Committees are summarised and reported to the Board at the next meeting following each Committee meeting together with recommendations on matters reserved for Board decisions Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
46 12112017 114825 AM Board composition and roles During the financial year the Board comprised a NonExecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and six NonExecutive Directors.
There are clear divisions of responsibility within the Board such that no one individual has unfettered powers of decision.
There is a procedure for all Directors in the furtherance of their duties to take independent professional advice at the Companys expense.
They also have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
Their key responsibilities are set out in the table below Executive Directors CEO Andrew Rashbass Strategy and Group performance Finance Director Colin Jones Group financial and operational performance NonExecutive Director Chairman John Botts Board governance and performance and shareholder engagement.
President Sir Patrick Sergeant As founder and president of the Company his insight and external contacts remain valuable to the Company.
Support and constructively challenge the executive Directors using their broad range of experience and expertise.
Monitor the delivery of the agreed strategy within the risk management framework set by the Board.
Independent
NonExecutive Directors David Pritchard Andrew Ballingal Tristan Hillgarth Bring an external perspective sound judgement and objectivity to the Boards deliberations and decisionmaking.
NonExecutive Directors also directors of DMGT The Viscount Rothermere Paul Zwillenberg Bring the views of the Companys largest shareholder to the Board.
Independence
The Board has determined that David Pritchard Senior Independent Director Andrew Ballingal and Tristan Hillgarth are independent within the meaning of the Code.
John Botts has been on the Board for more than the recommended term of nine years under the Code and the Board believes that his length of service enhances his role as a NonExecutive Director and that he remains independentlyminded.
However due to his length of service John Botts was not considered to be independent at the time of his appointment.
Sir Patrick Sergeant has served on the Board in various roles since founding the Company in 1969 and has been a NonExecutive Director since 1992.
Due to his length of service Sir Patrick Sergeant is not considered to be independent.
The Viscount Rothermere and Paul Zwillenberg are also Executive Directors of DMGT a significant shareholder of the
These Directors bring valuable experience and advice to the Company although have no involvement in the daytoday management of the Company and the Board does not believe these NonExecutive Directors are able to exert undue influence on decisions taken by the Board nor does it consider their independence or objectivity to be impaired by their positions with DMGT.
However their relationship with DMGT as a significant shareholder in the Company means they are not considered to be independent.
Effectiveness
The Code requires an externally facilitated evaluation of the Board to be concluded every three years.
This was conducted during the year and externally facilitated by Independent Audit Limited using their online assessment service.
Independent
Audit Limited has no connection with the Company.
The scope of the review included both the Board and its main Committees.
The evaluation indicated that the effectiveness of the Board has improved since progress has been made in the course of the changes taking place at the Company since the appointment of Andrew Rashbass as CEO in October 2015 when the roles of CEO and Chairman were split and most Executive Directors resigned from the Board.
The review highlighted areas for the Board to continue focusing on.
Areas for development which were identified in this years evaluation process were the Companys approach to succession planning Board composition including diversity and Board communications.
The Board is exploring ways to improve its performance in these areas.
The Senior Independent Director separately coordinated a review of the performance of the Chairman.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
47 12112017 114826 AM Corporate Governance Report
Board meetings and attendance The Board meets six times each year at least every two months and there is frequent contact between meetings.
At least once a year the Companys Chairman meets the NonExecutive Directors without the other Executive Directors being present.
The
NonExecutive Directors either meet together or individually with the Companys Senior Independent Director in both cases without the Companys Chairman present at least annually to appraise the Chairmans performance and on other occasions as necessary.
NonExecutive Directors are also encouraged to meet senior management in the business without the Executive Directors present in order to have access to a range of views and perspectives on the Company and its operation.
The number of Board and Committee meetings and their attendance by each Director during the year was as follows Director Board
Committee
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Executive Directors Andrew Rashbass Colin Jones 66 NonExecutive Directors John Botts 66 11 44 88 The Viscount Rothermere Sir Patrick Sergeant David Pritchard Andrew Ballingal 66 Tristan Hillgarth Paul Zwillenberg Imogen Joss Kevin Beatty Tim Collier Board activities The key areas of Board activity in 2017 either directly at the Board or through its Committees were
Governance approved appointment of David Pritchard as Senior Independent Director approved the Nominations Committees recommendation to appoint new NonExecutive Directors discussed the output of the Board independent evaluation and agreed on areas of focus approved updated list of matters reserved to the Board approved updated terms of reference for the Risk Committee approved the scheduling of meetings of the Nominations Committee and received reports from the chairs of the Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees Risk management and internal control received reports from the Risk Committee on the Groups significant and emerging risks and with the support of the Risk and Audit Committees reviewed principal risks and the effectiveness of the systems of internal control and risk management and discussed the Groups risk appetite for 2017 Financial performance considered the financial performance of the business and approved the annual budget reviewed the key financial judgements all financial results announcements and approved the Annual Report considered and approved the Groups going concern and viability statements and dividend policy for 2017 considered longerterm financial projections as part of its regular discussions on the Groups strategy and funding requirements and approved a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in the dividend payout ratio from approximately 33% to approximately 40% Significant transactions approved the terms of the Companys buyback of shares from DMGT approved the cancellation of the Groups debt facility with DMGT approved the implementation of a new Group debt facility with HSBC as well as a revolving credit facility approved the terms of a new relationship agreement with DMGT following DMGTs sell down of its shareholding and as part of the strategy to manage the Groups portfolio approved the acquisitions of RISI BroadGroup and Layer123 and the disposals of HedgeFund Intelligence Euromoney Indices II Intelligence LatinFinance and shortly after the financial yearend Adhesion and World Bulk Wine 1 Resigned from Nominations Committee on 27 September 2017 2 Appointed to Nominations Committee on 27 September 2017 3 Appointed to Board on 10 November 2017 4 Resigned from the Board on 21 November 2017 5 Appointed to the Board on 21 November 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
48 12112017 114826 AM Leadership and people discussed succession planning talent development and diversity across management discussed employee reward schemes and discussed the creation of a new Group Management Board including the Groups divisional and functional leaders Monitoring and oversight Fair balanced and understandable The Directors have responsibility for preparing the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and for making certain confirmations concerning it.
In accordance with the Code provision C.1.1 the Board confirms that taken as a whole the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
The Board reached this conclusion after receiving advice from the Audit Committee.
Internal control and risk management See pages 34 to 38 for the Groups principal risks and mitigating actions The Board as a whole is responsible for the oversight of risk the Groups system of internal control and reviewing its effectiveness.
The Company aims to manage rather than eliminate risk and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board has implemented a continuing process for identifying evaluating and managing the material risks faced by the Group.
The Board has delegated the daytoday responsibility for internal controls and financial risk to the Audit Committee and for operational risk to the Risk Committee.
The Directors completed a review of the effectiveness of the Groups system of risk management and internal controls covering all material controls including financial operational and compliance controls.
The majority of controls operated throughout the year though some additional controls were implemented during the year.
The review did not identify any significant weaknesses or failings in the system of internal control and risk management.
The Company is taking action to address any weaknesses or failings identified during the course of the review.
The controls to prevent an information security breach or cyberattack are regularly reviewed and where appropriate updated.
Cyber and other information security risks are increasing and the mitigation of these risks continues to be a focus for the Risk Committee and the Board.
The diverse range of products and the many geographic markets that the Group operates in makes regular testing of business continuity plans a challenge.
The Group is committed to improving its testing regime including rolling out and enhanced testing programme.
The Board has established procedures to ensure effective internal control.
These have been in place throughout the year and up to the date of this report are as follows The Board of Directors The Board has overall responsibility for the Group and there is a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for decision by the Board.
The Board reviews and assesses the Groups principal risks and uncertainties at least annually and has performed a robust assessment of those principal risks seeks assurance that effective control is being maintained through regular reports from divisional management the Risk and Audit committees and various independent monitoring functions approves the annual budget after performing a review of key risk factors.
Performance is monitored regularly by way of variances and key performance indicators to enable relevant action to be taken and forecasts are updated each quarter.
The
Board considers longerterm financial projections as part of its regular discussions on the Groups strategy and funding requirements and approves proposals for investments and capital expenditure beyond specified limits Risk and Audit Committee The Board has determined that having separate Audit and Risk Committees with specific terms of reference is useful to provide challenge and review across the range of businesses the Group operates.
The terms of reference for the Risk Committee were revised and changes agreed at the Risk Committee meeting in March 2017 to ensure greater focus on the management not just the reporting of risk.
An example of this is the Risk Committees active participation in directing risk reviews and mitigation planning related to the changes in the asset management segment affecting some areas of the Group.
The Audit Risk and Remuneration Committees are made of members who possess the requisite skills and experience to allow each Committee to meet its obligation and to provide the relevant assurance to the Board.
The Committees collaborate with one another and each is attended by at least one member from the other Committees.
This ensures that matters of mutual interest raised in any of the three Committees are discussed in the others and actioned in the operating businesses.
Entity level controls Each segment division or function is responsible for managing risks and operating controls within their area.
Each division confirms the operation of key controls including with management to central management annually.
The purpose of the assessment is to confirm the operation of a framework of internal controls including antifraud controls which are expected to be in place in each business unit.
They are intended to provide standards against which the control environments of the Groups business units can be monitored.
An annual bribery and fraud risk assessment is completed at the same time detailing risks and mitigating controls.
In each case the central management team followsup these submissions as appropriate.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
49 12112017 114826 AM Corporate Governance Report
The Group Management Board meets monthly to discuss strategic operational and financial issues.
The Groups tax financing and foreign exchange positions are overseen by the Tax and Treasury Committee.
Controls and procedures over the security of data and disaster recovery are periodically reviewed and are subject to internal audit.
Accounting controls and procedures are regularly reviewed and communicated throughout the Group.
Attention is paid to authorisation levels and segregation of duties.
Internal audit The Group has invested in its own internal audit department which is described on page 52.
The department works closely with the Companys Finance Director the Chairman of the Audit Committee as well as the Groups General Counsel and Company
It undertakes internal control reviews across the Group and reports its findings to the Audit Committee.
Viability statement See page 39 for the viability statement Nominations Committee The Nominations Committee is responsible for proposing candidates for appointment to the Board having regard to the balance of skills structure and composition of the Board and ensuring the appointees have sufficient time available to devote to the role.
Committee members John Botts Chairman of the Committee Tristan Hillgarth independent Andrew Rashbass Sir Patrick Sergeant The Viscount Rothermere Paul Zwillenberg David Pritchard independent Kevin Beatty Tim Collier 1 Appointed as a member of the Committee on 27 September 2017 2 Resigned as a member of the Committee on 27 September 2017 3 Resigned as a member of the Committee on 21 November 2017 4 Appointed as a member of the Committee on 21 November 2017 Key activities The Committee recommended the appointment of three new independent NonExecutive Directors to the Board.
The
Committee carried out an extensive search using Egon Zehnder which has no connection with the Company.
Although only one formal meeting was required this year informal discussions were held at other times during the year and the Committee has decided to schedule meetings at least three times each year.
Focus for 2018 The key activities for the year ahead will be the recruitment of a new Chairman and CFO reviewing the composition of the Board and its Committees including diversity to ensure that the right skills and experience to support the Groups strategy are represented and to improve the Companys ability to comply with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code in terms of its Committee memberships the recruitment of at least one additional NonExecutive Director who can take on the role of Chairman of the Audit Committee during the year and an increased emphasis on succession planning
The Committee recognises that diversity is important for Board effectiveness.
The Company has recently announced the appointment of three new female independent NonExecutive
Diversity including but not limited to gender diversity will continue to be a consideration when contemplating the composition and refreshing of the Board as well as senior and wider management.
As part of its review of the composition of the Board in 2018 the diversity position will continue to be monitored in light of best practice.
The Groups gender diversity information is set out in the Strategic Report on pages 24 and 25.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee is responsible for oversight of the Groups financial reporting processes and the integrity of the financial statements.
It scrutinises the work of the external auditor and any significant judgements made by management.
The
Committee reports on its operations to the Board to enable the Directors to determine the overall effectiveness of the Groups internal controls system.
Committee members David Pritchard Chairman of the Committee independent John Botts Tristan Hillgarth independent Tim Collier 1 Appointed as a member of the Committee on 21 November 2017 Stephen Daintith resigned from the Committee in April 2017.
All current members are NonExecutive Directors and have a high level of financial literacy.
Stephen Daintith and Tristan Hillgarth are chartered accountants and members of the ICAEW and David Pritchard has considerable Audit Committee experience.
Stephen Daintith was not considered to be independent or a NonExecutive Director but was the designated member with recent and relevant financial experience.
Tim Collier DMGTs CFO who possesses the requisite experience joined the Committee on 21 November 2017.
Responsibilities
The Committee meets at least three times each financial year and is responsible for monitoring the integrity of the interim report the Annual Report and Accounts and other related formal statements reviewing accounting policies used and judgements applied reviewing the content of the Annual Report and Accounts and advising the Board on whether taken as a whole it is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy considering the effectiveness of the Groups internal control systems considering the appointment or reappointment of the external auditor and reviewing their remuneration both for audit and nonaudit monitoring and reviewing the external auditors independence and objectivity and the effectiveness of the audit process monitoring and reviewing the resources and effectiveness of internal audit reviewing the internal audit programme and receiving periodic reports on its findings reviewing the whistleblowing arrangements available to staff reviewing the Groups policy on the employment of former audit staff and reviewing the Groups policy on nonaudit fees payable to the external auditor Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
50 12112017 114826 AM Key activities The Committee met four times and in addition met with the representatives from internal and external audit after each meeting without executives present.
The Chairman of the Committee also held separate private meetings during the year with the external auditor representatives from internal audit and the Finance Director and his team.
The key activities included identifying and assessing the matters which required significant judgement in 2017 including discussion and review of the exceptional items that may impact the performance of the business advising the Board on whether the Annual Report was fair balanced and understandable reviewing the Groups system of internal control and risk management including managements launch of a finance transformation project to improve quality and efficiency of financial reporting and tightening financial controls and processes reviewing and discussing internal audit reports and investigations and monitoring the resolution of issues raised and appointing a new inhouse Head of Internal Audit There was no interaction with the Financial Reporting Council FRC corporate reporting team during the year.
Looking ahead the additional topics in 2018 will be to support the transition of the new CFO evaluate the Groups rollout of new financial systems and associated processes and to increase the Committees direct interaction with finance staff across the Group to widen and deepen its knowledge of people processes and systems.
The Committee will continue to work closely with the Head of Internal Audit to monitor the resources and effectiveness of the inhouse internal audit department.
Financial reporting and significant financial judgements The Committee with input from the external auditor assessed whether suitable accounting policies had been adopted whether management had made appropriate estimates and judgements and whether disclosures were balanced and fair.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 the Committee reviewed the following main issues Issue Review Fair balanced and understandable At the request of the Board the Committee has considered whether in its opinion the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable.
Following the Committees review of the accounts and after applying its knowledge of matters raised during the year the Committee is satisfied that taken as a whole the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable.
Presentation of adjusted and underlying performance Presentation of the adjusted and underlying performance and adjusting items including identification and treatment of exceptional items.
Management considered the latest ESMA guidelines on alternative performance measures to ensure that the Annual Report and Accounts had been updated in line with best practice.
The Committee reviewed the 2017 Annual Report and Accounts and discussed with management and the external auditor the appropriateness of the adjusted items including consideration of their consistency and the avoidance of any misleading effect on the financial statements.
The Committee challenged management to ensure that each item is appropriate to classify as an exceptional item.
The Committee concluded that the presentation of the adjusted and underlying performance including discontinued operations is appropriate.
Goodwill and other intangibles The Group has goodwill of 400m and other intangible assets of 194m.
As a result of the impairment review at the halfyear the Group recognised an impairment charge for NDR of 27.4m.
A sensitivity analysis for NDR has been included as further disclosures are required under IAS 36 if any reasonably possible change to a key assumption would cause the cash generating units carrying amount to exceed its recoverable amount.
The Committee has considered the assessments made in relation to the impairment of goodwill.
The Committee discussed the methodology and assumptions used in the model supporting the carrying value.
The
Committee reviewed those businesses where headroom has decreased or where management has identified impairments.
The Committee has also understood the sensitivity analysis used by management in its review and disclosure of impairment.
Investments
The Group holds material balances relating to investments in associates and available for sale amounting to 30.4m.
As a result of the impairment review at yearend the Group recognised an impairment charge of 2.3m.
The Committee reviewed the assessments made in relation to the Dealogic Zanbato and Estimize for potential impairments at the half year and year end.
The Committee is satisfied with the carrying value recognised for Dealogic and that no impairment is required.
The
Committee recognised that Zanbato and Estimize businesses are still in startup phase but based on progress to date the Committee agreed with management that an impairment at yearend of the investment in Estimize was appropriate.
The Committee also reviewed the Board presentation of Zanbato and the Groups further investment in convertible securities and concluded that no impairment was required at yearend.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
51 12112017 114826 AM Corporate Governance Report
Issue Review Accounting for acquisitions and disposals The Group made a number of acquisitions and disposals during the year.
There were a number of consequential accounting considerations including identification and fair values of intangible assets fair value of other assets goodwill arising and gain on sale of disposal recognised.
The Group also has acquisition commitments on previous acquisitions.
The Committee has reviewed the results of the work undertaken in this area the disclosure in the financial statements and has sought further explanation where necessary.
The Committee reviewed the inputs and assumptions into the calculation of the acquisition commitments liability at yearend.
Discontinued operations and assets heldfor sale The Group announced in September 2017 its intention to explore strategic options for its Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS.
Management has classified the assets of 45.3m and liabilities of 23.0m as heldforsale at 30 September 2017 in accordance with IFRS 5.
Since the businesses constitute a single division and two independent cash generating units and contribute 11% to the Groups adjusted operating profit they have also been classified as discontinued operations in the Income Statement at 30 September 2017 with restated comparatives.
The Committee has reviewed managements assumptions in accordance with the requirements of IFRS 5 and agree with the classification as assets heldforsale and discontinued operations in the Income Statement at 30 September 2017.
The Committee has reviewed the disclosure and restated comparatives including the presentation of adjusted performance to include discontinued operations.
Taxation
Taxation represents a significant cost to the Group in both cash and accounting terms and the Group is exposed to differing tax regimes and risks which affect both the carrying values of tax balances including deferred tax and the resultant Income Statement charges.
The Committee requested third party advice to support its assessment of challenges by HMRC and the Canadian Revenue
The Group is also exposed to similar risks for indirect tax.
The Committee reviewed the tax charge at the half year and full year including the underlying tax effect deferred tax balances and the provision for uncertain tax positions for direct and indirect tax.
The
Committee also reviewed managements disclosure of taxrelated matters in the Annual Report and Accounts including uncertain tax matters in note 2 to the financial statements.
The Chairman also attends Tax and Treasury Committee meetings which provides valuable insight into the tax matters related provisions and helps establish the appropriateness of the recognition of the deferred tax balances.
The Committee is satisfied that all issues have been addressed appropriately and in accordance with the relevant accounting standards and principles.
Effectiveness of internal control systems The Committee has responsibility for reviewing the process for identifying and managing risk and for reviewing internal controls.
It reviews reports on internal controls including reports by the Risk Committee Finance Director and the results from internal audits and any investigations performed.
In addition the Committee reviews the external auditors assessment of the Groups minimum financial controls framework.
Internal audit Following DMGT ceasing to be a majority shareholder a new Head of Internal Audit was appointed to manage the Groups new inhouse internal audit function from 1 April 2017.
The function is responsible for providing independent assurance to management and the Committee on the design and effectiveness of internal controls to mitigate financial operational and compliance risks.
The purpose authority and responsibility of Internal Audit are defined in the Internal Audit Charter which is reviewed on an annual basis by the Committee.
The Head of Internal Audit reports directly to the Chair of the Audit Committee.
The internal audit plan follows a riskbased approach and is approved annually by the Committee.
The plan takes into consideration the principal risks of the Group previous internal audit findings results of management selfassessments and significant strategic Group projects such as the finance transformation project.
Internal audit also collaborate with the external auditors to ensure an appropriate breadth of audit coverage is obtained.
The Head of Internal Audit is responsible for updating the Committee on progress against the plan and any changes to the plan are approved by the Committee.
At every meeting a summary of work performed key findings and progress of management action plans are presented to the Committee which assists the annual internal audit effectiveness review performed by the Committee.
In order to deliver the plan and any additional work such as fraud investigations internal audit makes use of external resources to supplement inhouse expertise.
The Committee review internal audit resource requirements at every meeting and the use of external support is considered a practical way to scale up the resources of the function when required.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
52 12112017 114826 AM External auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC were appointed by shareholders as the Groups statutory auditor in 2015 following a formal tender process.
The lead audit partner Giles Hannam has held the position for three years.
The external audit contract will be put out to tender at least every ten years.
The Company has complied with the Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 for the financial year under review.
As part of its role in ensuring effectiveness the Committee reviewed PwCs audit plan to ensure its appropriateness for the Group and has completed a review which focussed on the effectiveness independence and objectivity of the external audit.
The assessment of effectiveness is based on a framework setting out the key areas of the audit process for the Committee to consider as well as the role that management has contributed to an effective process.
Results from tailored questionnaires sent to the Finance Director Deputy Finance Director and Divisional Finance Directors and PwCs client satisfaction survey were discussed by the Committee and no significant issues were raised by the assessment.
PwC confirmed to the Committee that they maintained appropriate internal safeguards to ensure their independence and objectivity.
The Committee recommends the reappointment of PwC at the 2018 AGM.
Nonaudit work The Committee completes an annual assessment of the type of nonaudit work permissible and a maximum level of nonaudit fees acceptable.
Any nonaudit work performed outside this remit is assessed and where appropriate approved by the
Fees paid to PwC for audit services auditrelated services and other nonaudit services are set out in note 5.
During 2017 PwC did not provide significant nonaudit services.
The Groups nonaudit fee policy was updated in 2016 to ensure compliance with the FRCs Ethical Standard for Auditors.
Risk committee The Risk Committee oversees the Groups risk management processes and considers the Group risk register biannually.
It reviews specific risks and monitors developments in relevant legislation and regulation assessing the impact on the Group.
The Committee reports on its operations to the Board to enable the Directors to determine the overall effectiveness of the Groups risk management.
Committee members Andrew Rashbass CEO  Chairman of the Committee Christopher Fordham MD Corporate Development Tim Bratton General Counsel and Company Secretary Colin Jones Finance Director Andrew Pieri Chief Information Officer Toby Smith Head of Risk
The Committee is responsible for review and consideration of the risks which the Committee believes are those most pertinent to the Group and its subsidiaries including emerging or potential future risks and their likely impact on the Group the impact of those risks and proposed remedial actions where appropriate the Group risk register and risk registers from each operating business including the applicable controls and reports on any material risk incidents and the adequacy of proposed action including managements responsiveness to the findings The Committee is responsible for review of the Groups overall risk assessment approach and methodology including the Groups capability to identify and manage new risk types the Groups procedures for detecting fraud and for the prevention of bribery the adequacy and security of the Groups speakup arrangements and the principal risks and uncertainties disclosure and other relevant risk management disclosures for inclusion in the annual report The Committee also advises the Board on current risk exposures of the Group future risk mitigation strategies and the overall risk appetite and tolerance.
Key activities The Committee meets four times a year and this year met four times.
The activities during the year included reviewing the Groups risk management processes and the Group risk register reviewing the Groups principal risks to align with the new strategy assessment of the Groups cyber risk and information security governance and assessment of the management of operational risk by the Groups divisions Looking ahead the Risk Committee will continue to monitor key risks affecting operating businesses and the Group.
Key areas will continue to include information security data protection including the new EU General Data Protection Regulation and business continuity.
Relations with shareholders The Companys Chairman together with the Board encourages regular dialogue with shareholders.
Meetings with shareholders are held with the CEO Finance Director and Chairman to discuss annual and interim results and highlight significant acquisitions or disposals or at the request of institutional shareholders.
Shareholders have the opportunity to participate in the AGM.
In line with best practice all shareholders have at least 20 working days notice of the AGM at which the Executive Directors NonExecutive Directors and Committee chairs are available for questioning.
The Companys CEO and Finance Director report to fellow Board members matters raised by shareholders and analysts to ensure members of the Board develop an understanding of investors and potential investors views of the Company.
All Board members receive analysts reports about the Company to provide additional insight into how the market perceives the Company.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
53 12112017 114827 AM Directors Report Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a member of the FTSE 250 share index.
The Directors Report comprises pages 44 to 57 of this report together with the sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference.
Some of the matters required by legislation have been included in the Strategic Report pages 04 to 39 as the Board considers them to be of strategic importance particularly future business developments and principal risks.
It is expected that the Company which has no branches will continue to operate as the holding Company of the Group.
Forwardlooking statements Certain statements made in this document are forwardlooking.
Such statements are based on current expectations and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual events or results to differ materially from any expected future events or results referred to in these forwardlooking statements.
Unless otherwise required by applicable law regulation or accounting standards the Directors do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward looking statements whether as a result of new information future developments or otherwise.
Nothing in this document shall be regarded as a profit forecast.
Group results and dividends The Group profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the parent amounted to 42.7m 2016 30.7m.
The Board approved a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in the dividend payout ratio from approximately 33% to approximately 40% of adjusted diluted earnings per share.
The Board is able to recommend an increased final dividend of 21.80p per ordinary share 2016 16.40p payable on Thursday 15 February 2018 to shareholders on the register on Friday 1 December 2017.
This together with the interim dividend of 8.80p per ordinary share 2016 7.00p which was declared on 18 May 2017 and paid on brings the total dividend for the year to 30.60p per ordinary share 2016 23.40p.
Share capital The Companys share capital is divided into ordinary shares of 0.25p each.
At 30 September 2017 there were 109101608 ordinary shares in issue and fully paid.
During the year 35425 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 2016 64462 ordinary shares with an aggregate nominal value of 88 2016 161 were issued following the exercise of share options granted under the Companys share option schemes for a cash consideration of 0.3m 2016 0.3m.
On 6 January 2017 the Group completed the purchase for cancellation of 19247173 ordinary shares from its then majority shareholder DMG Charles Limited a DMGT group company.
The aggregate nominal value of shares cancelled was 48118.
Details of the Companys share capital are given in note 23 to the Groups financial statements.
Employee Share Trust The Executive Directors of the Company together with other employees of the Group are potential beneficiaries of the Euromoney Employee Share Trust and as such are deemed to be interested in any ordinary shares held by the trust.
At 30 September 2017 the trusts shareholding totalled 1700777 shares representing 1.6% of the Companys calledup ordinary share capital.
There have been no awards transferred between 30 September 2017 and the date of this Annual Report and Accounts.
Voting rights and restrictions on transfer of shares Each share entitles its holder to one vote at shareholders meetings and the right to receive one share of the Companys dividends.
There are no special control rights attached to them.
The Company is not aware of any agreements or control rights between existing shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities shares or loan notes or on voting rights.
Change of control There are a number of agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover bid.
These include the Groups debt facility agreement with HSBC under which the bank can demand immediate repayment of outstanding debt upon a change of control.
Other than this agreement none of these agreements is deemed to be significant in terms of their potential impact on the business of the Group as a whole.
The Companys share plans contain provisions that take effect in such an event but do not entitle participants to a greater interest in the shares of the Company than created by the initial grant or award under the relevant plan.
Details of the Directors entitlement to compensation for loss of office following a takeover or contract termination are given in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Authority to purchase and allot own shares At the 2017 AGM the Company was authorised by shareholders to purchase up to 10% of its own shares and to allot shares up to an aggregate nominal amount of 81800.
The resolutions to renew this authority for a further period will be put to shareholders at the 2018 AGM.
Share buyback In December 2016 Daily Mail General Trust plc DMGT announced its intention to reduce its equity interest in Euromoney from 68% to 49% through a combination of a 15% share buyback by the Company and a 10% placing with institutional shareholders which was completed in early
The 193.4m share buyback was funded by a mix of cash and new borrowing facilities arranged by the Company and its borrowing facility with DMGT was terminated.
Significant shareholdings As at 13 November 2017 the Company had been notified of the following significant interests Name of holder
Number of shares % of voting rights DMG Charles Limited Direct 53546470 49.1 Standard Life Aberdeen plc Indirect 7371779 6.8 Woodford Investment Management Direct 6167186 5.7 Heronbridge Investment Management LLP Indirect 5468492 5.0 Relationship deed The Company and DMGT the parent company of DMG Charles Limited entered into a revised relationship deed on 8 December 2016 which supersedes the agreement entered into on 16 July 2014 in accordance with the Listing Rules and have acted in accordance with its terms since execution.
Employees
Quality and integrity of employees The competence of people is ensured through high recruitment standards.
Highquality and honest personnel are an essential part of the control environment.
The high ethical standards expected are communicated by management and through the employee handbook which is provided to all employees.
The employee handbook includes specific policies on matters such as the use of the Groups information technology resources data protection policy the UK Bribery Act and disciplinary and grievance procedures.
The Group operates an intranet which is used to communicate with employees and provide guidance and assistance on daytoday matters facing employees.
The Group has a specific whistleblowing policy that is supported by an externally managed whistleblowing hotline.
The whistleblowing policy is updated when necessary and is reviewed by the Audit Committee.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
54 12112017 114827 AM Human rights and health and safety requirements The Group is committed to the health and safety and the human rights of its employees and communities in which it operates.
Health and safety issues are monitored to ensure compliance with all local health and safety regulations.
External health and safety advisors are used where appropriate.
Disabled employees It is the Groups policy to give full and fair consideration to applications for employment from people who are disabled to continue wherever possible the employment of and to arrange appropriate training for employees who become disabled and to provide opportunities for the career development training and promotion of disabled employees.
Political donations No political donations were made during the year 2016 nil.
Post balance sheet events Events arising after 30 September 2017 are set out in note 30 to the Groups financial statements.
Going concern Having assessed the principal risks and the other matters discussed in connection with the viability statement the Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing this Annual Report and Accounts.
Additional disclosures Additional information that is relevant to this report and which is incorporated by reference into this report including information required in accordance with the UK Companies Act 2006 and Listing Rule 9.8.4R can be located as follows Financial instruments note 19 Related party transactions note 29 Greenhouse Gas GHG reporting The Group participates in a carbon footprint analysis completed by ICF International.
This exercise has been undertaken every year since 2007 using the widely recognised GHG protocol methodology developed by the World Resource Institute and the World Business Council for Sustainable
The Directors are committed to reducing the Groups absolute carbon emissions and managing its carbon footprint.
GREENHOUSE EMISSION STATEMENT The following emissions have been calculated according to the Greenhouse Gas Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition methodology.
Data was gathered to fulfil the requirements under the CRC Energy Efficiency scheme and emission factors from the UK Governments GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2014.
The carbon footprint is expressed in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent and includes all the Kyoto Protocol gases that are of relevance to the business.
The Companys footprint covers emissions from its global operations and the following emission sources Scope 1 and 2 as defined by the GHG Protocol business travel and outsourced delivery activities.
ASSESSMENT PARAMETERS Baseline year 2012 Consolidation approach Operational control Boundary summary All entities and facilities either owned or under operational control Consistency with the financial statements The only variation is that leased properties under operational control are included in scope 1 and 2 data all scope 3 emissions are offbalance sheet emissions Assessment methodology Greenhouse Gas Protocol and Defra environmental reporting guidelines Intensity ratio Emissions per m of revenue GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION SOURCE 2017 2016 tCO 2e tCO 2e m tCO 2e tCO 2e Scope 1 Combustion of fuel and operation of facilities 1900 4.4 2100 5.2 Scope 2 Electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for own use 2600 5.6 2200 6.0 Total scope 1 and 2 4300 10.0 4300 11.2 Scope 3 Business travel and outsourced activities 5400 12.6 6200 14.6 Total emissions 9700 22.6 10500 25.8 Statutory carbon reporting disclosures required by Companies Act 2006
Each Director confirms that so far as heshe is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and that each of the Directors has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director to make himself herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of the information.
A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as the Companys statutory auditor and to authorise the Audit Committee to determine their remuneration will be proposed at the 2018 AGM.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
55 12112017 114827 AM Directors Report
Annual general meeting The Companys next AGM will be held at Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX on 1 February 2018 at 9.30 a.
A separate circular comprising the Notice of Meeting together with explanatory notes accompanies this Annual Report and Accounts.
Directors
Directors and directors interests The membership of the Board and biographical details of the Directors are given on pages 42 and 43.
Details of the interests of the Directors in the ordinary shares of the Company and of options held by the Directors to subscribe for ordinary shares in the Company are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 58 to 73.
Appointment and removal of directors The Companys Articles of Association give power to the Board to appoint Directors from time to time.
In addition to the statutory rights of shareholders to remove a Director by ordinary resolution the Board may also remove a Director where 75% of the Board gives written notice to such Director.
The Articles of Association themselves may be amended by a special resolution of the shareholders.
Following best practice under the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and in accordance with the Companys Articles of Association all Directors submit themselves for reelection annually.
Accordingly all Directors will retire at the forthcoming AGM and being eligible will offer themselves for reelection.
In addition in accordance with the Code before the reelection of a NonExecutive Director the Chairman is required to confirm to shareholders that following formal performance evaluation the NonExecutive Directors performance continues to be effective and demonstrates commitment to the role.
Accordingly the NonExecutive Directors will retire at the forthcoming AGM and being eligible offer themselves for reelection.
Directors indemnities A qualifying thirdparty indemnity QTPI as permitted by the Companys Articles of Association and Section 232 and 234 of the Companies Act 2006 has been granted by the Company to each of the Directors of the Company.
Under the provisions of QTPI the Company undertakes to indemnify each Director against liability to third parties excluding criminal and regulatory penalties and to pay Directors costs as incurred provided that they are reimbursed to the Company if the Director is found guilty or in an action brought by the Company judgement is given against the Director.
Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and applicable law.
Under Company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 102 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups and the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
56 12112017 114827 AM Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 42 and 43 of the Annual Report and Accounts confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Companys financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces On behalf of the Board Andrew Rashbass
Chief Executive Officer
22 November 2017 Colin Jones Finance Director 22 November 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
57 12112017 114828 AM Directors Remuneration Report In this section This report has been prepared in accordance with the relevant requirements of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2013 and of the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority.
Report from Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 58 Remuneration Policy 59
Annual Remuneration Report 66
Executive Directors 66 NonExecutive Directors 69 Other performance measures and disclosures 70 Information subject to audit Report from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for 2017 which has been prepared by the Remuneration Committee Committee on behalf of the
The Committee continues to place great importance on ensuring there is a clear link between remuneration and delivery of the Groups strategy.
For 2017 the priority has been to progress with the transformation of the Group in line with the three pillar strategy and reshaping the operating model into four segments and seven clear divisions with strategic alignment.
As trialled last year this has necessitated a strategic talent review and the Committees main activity during the year included an overhaul of reward at the Group Management
The key remuneration outcomes for the year and plans for the coming year are below.
Further details are provided in the second section of the report commencing on page 66.
2017 reward outcomes The Group continues its transformation following the launch of its new strategy and has delivered an improved performance over the prior year and is now on firmer foundations for future growth.
Total revenues were 428.4m an increase of 6% yearonyear although 1% down on an underlying basis.
Adjusted profit before tax increased by 4% to 106.5m marginally ahead of expectations.
As a result of the increase in adjusted profit before tax significant progress on the portfolio and action on managing the senior talent the annual bonus for Andrew Rashbass will pay out at 107% of salary against a maximum of 150%.
Any annual bonus earned in excess of 100% of salary will be paid via a nilcost option the vesting of which will be deferred for two years.
Colin Jones the Groups Finance Director is on a profit share scheme linked to adjusted diluted earnings per share before tax and his profit share increased by 25% to 0.7m in line with the increase in adjusted earnings per share.
Finance Director During the year Colin Jones announced his intention to retire by the summer of 2018.
Colin has served for 21 years on the Board and has been instrumental in the growth of Euromoney during that time for which the Board is grateful.
When appointing a replacement for Colin during 2018 the Committee will adhere to the remuneration policy on recruitment.
Committee Chair Imogen Joss joined the Board recently as a NonExecutive Director who has a wealth of experience in this area and is expected subject to the decision of the Nominations Committee to become Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in due course.
Remuneration Policy Shareholder approval at the 2018 AGM In line with the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2013 the Directors Remuneration Policy which will be effective from 1 October 2018 is being put forward for a binding shareholder vote.
The existing policy will remain in force until that date and this can be found on the Companys website.
The Annual Remuneration Implementation Report together with this letter is subject to an advisory shareholder vote.
Both the binding vote and advisory vote will be put to the 2018 AGM to be held on 1 February 2018.
The sections of this report that have been subject to audit are marked in the contents above.
The members of the Committee include a representative of its major shareholder DMGT.
The Committee consults with its shareholders prior to any major changes in its remuneration arrangements.
John Botts Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 22 November 2017 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
58 12112017 114828 AM Remuneration Policy The Board believes in aligning the interests of management with those of shareholders.
It is the Groups policy to construct executive remuneration packages such that a significant part of a Directors remuneration is linked to performance measures aligned with the Groups key strategic financial and operational objectives and with the creation of sustainable longterm shareholder value.
Salaries and benefits are generally not intended to be the most significant part of a Directors remuneration.
The policy is being put forward for a binding shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM to be effective from 1 October 2018.
The existing policy remains in force until that date.
Information not subject to audit
The current remuneration policy was approved by shareholders at the General Meeting held on 1 June 2015 and can be found on our website siteinvestors.
The policy took effect from 1 October 2015.
The policy has been updated to reflect subsequent guidance and to take account of the organisational changes at the Company and will take effect from 1 October 2018.
The key changes in the new remuneration policy are The removal of profit share incentives for Executive Directors which have been replaced by the annual bonus and Performance Share Plan PSP arrangements approved on 1 June 2015 The Capital Appreciation Plan CAP 2014 has been removed as it will not vest and no further awards under the CAP scheme will be made The level of deferral under the Annual Bonus award has been specified as has the maximum level of bonus payment at threshold achievement The normal grant under a PSP will be a threeyear performance period with a further two years holding period Increasing the shareholding requirement to 200% of basic salary for all Executive Directors and the introduction of a shareholding requirement of 100% of annual fees for NonExecutive Directors Adjustments to reflect the transformed Board and organisational structure The Daily Mail General Trust DMGT Share Incentive Plan SIP is no longer available to employees of the Company Committee discretion to make nonstandard remuneration decisions where an Executive Director is appointed on an interim basis Clarification on the treatment of tax on NonExecutive Directors expenses Commitment to introduce wider consultation with both employees and shareholders The new remuneration policy provides flexibility for designing future incentive plans for Executive Directors and senior management and ensuring these incentives are closely aligned with the Groups longterm strategy.
The implementation of the current remuneration policy for the Executive Directors in 2017 is set out on pages 66 to 69.
These new arrangements are expected to take effect from 1 October 2018.
Compliance statement This report sets out the Groups policy and structure for the remuneration of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
This policy report is intended to be in full compliance with the requirements of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2013.
In formulating its Directors Remuneration Policy the Committee has considered employee pay and benefits and has also sought advice on best practice from Deloitte.
The Committee consulted with its top shareholders by equity holding.
No specific consultation with employees was undertaken for this policy however the Company is committed to introducing an employee forum for consulting on remuneration matters including executive remuneration.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
59 12112017 114828 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Benets Key Features of Policy Maximum Opportunity BASIC SALARY Purpose and link to strategy Part of an overall market competitive pay package with salary generally not the most significant part of a Directors overall package Reflect the individuals experience role and performance within the Company No absolute maximum has been set for Executive Director salaries.
The Committee is guided by the general increase for the broader employee population although larger increases may be considered appropriate in circumstances including but not limited to a change in an individuals responsibilities or in the scale of their role or in the size and complexity of the Group.
Larger increases may also be considered appropriate if a Director has been initially appointed to the Board at a lower than typical salary Operation  Paid monthly in cash Normally reviewed by the Remuneration Committee in April each year Benchmarking  The Remuneration Committee examines salary levels at FTSE 250 companies and other listed peer group companies to help determine Executive Director pay increases The Remuneration Committee takes into account the general level of salary increases awarded to employees Relationship to employee salaries The approach to setting base salary increases across the Group takes into account performance of the individuals concerned the performance of the business they work for micro and macroeconomic factors and market rates for similar roles skills and responsibility
Purpose and link to strategy Basic benefits are provided as part of a market competitive pay package There is no overall maximum as the level of benefits depends on the annual cost of providing individual items in the relevant local market and the individuals specific role Operation Benefits may include Private healthcare Life insurance Overseas relocation and housing costs The Committee has discretion to add or remove benefits from this list
Benefits are available to all Directors and employees subject to a minimum length of service or passing a probationary period Benefit levels  All Executive Directors participate in the healthcare scheme offered in the country where they reside
Purpose and link to strategy Retirement benefits are provided as part of a market competitive pay package The maximum employers contribution to a pension scheme is 15% of pensionable salary Operation  Directors may participate in the pension arrangements applicable to the country where they work A Director who elects to cease contributing to a Company pension scheme due to changes in tax or pension legislation may choose to receive a pension allowance in lieu of the Companys pension contributions
All Directors and employees are entitled to participate in the same pension scheme arrangements applicable to the country where they work Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
60 12112017 114828 AM Benets Key Features of Policy Maximum Opportunity ANNUAL BONUS PLAN Purpose and link to strategy The Annual Bonus Plan links reward to key business targets and an individuals contribution The Annual Bonus Plan provides alignment with shareholders interests through the operation of bonus deferral The maximum award that can be made under the Annual Bonus Plan is 150% of salary.
Each year the Remuneration Committee will determine the maximum annual bonus opportunity for individual Executive Directors within this limit The maximum level of bonus payment at threshold achievement is 0% Operation  Any Executive Director may participate in the Annual Bonus Plan Annual bonus payments will be paid in cash following the release of audited results andor as a deferred award over Company shares Any bonus earned in excess of 100% of salary will be awarded as a deferred award Deferred awards are usually granted in the form of conditional share awards or nilcost options and may also be settled in cash Deferred awards usually vest two years after award although may vest early on leaving employment or on a change of control see later sections An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under deferred awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis The annual bonus payable is based on performance assessed over one year and may be based upon any of appropriate financial strategic and individual performance measures.
No more than half of the Annual Bonus will generally be determined by strategic andor individual performance measures Any annual bonus payout is ultimately at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee The cash bonus will be subject to recovery and  or deferred awards will be withheld at the Remuneration Committees discretion in exceptional circumstances where before the preliminary announcement of audited results during the third financial year following the financial year in which the bonus is determined a material misstatement or miscalculation comes to light which resulted in an overpayment under the Annual Bonus Plan or there is gross misconduct Relationship to all employee incentive schemes Incentive schemes like the Annual Bonus Plan are an important part of the Group culture.
The Directors believe they directly reward good and exceptional performance.
Most employees across the Group have an incentive scheme in place Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
61 12112017 114828 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Benets Key Features of Policy Maximum Opportunity LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS Purpose and link to strategy Share schemes are an important part of overall compensation and align the interests of Directors and managers with shareholders.
They encourage Directors to deliver longterm sustainable profit and share price growth The maximum annual award permitted under the PSP is shares with a market value of 200% of annualised basic salary Operation 2015 Performance Share Plan PSP Any Executive Director may participate in the PSP These awards will normally be subject to a performance period of three years with an additional holding period of two years.
If the Remuneration Committee determines so an alternative performance period may be applied with a minimum of at least three years.
The aggregate of the performance period and additional holding period shall not be less than five years.
Awards may vest early on leaving employment or on a change of control see later sections.
Vesting of these awards will be based on financial performance measures andor strategic business goals with the precise measures and weighting of the measures determined by the Remuneration Committee on the grant of each award.
For achieving a threshold level of performance against a performance measure no more than 25% of the portion of the PSP award determined by that measure will vest.
Vesting of that portion would then increase to 100% for achieving a stretching maximum performance target All PSP awards may be granted as conditional awards of shares or nilcost options or if appropriate as cashsettled equivalents.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under PSP awards to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares and this payment may assume that dividends had been reinvested in Company shares on a cumulative basis PSP awards will be subject to recovery and  or withholding at the Remuneration Committees discretion in exceptional circumstances where before the preliminary announcement of audited results during the sixth financial year following the financial year in which the award is granted a material misstatement or miscalculation comes to light which resulted in an overvesting of PSP awards or gross misconduct Relationship to all employee longterm incentive schemes The PSP rewards the creation of longterm shareholder value and is potentially available to all senior employees across the Group LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLANS ALLEMPLOYEE SCHEMES Purpose and link to strategy Allemployee share schemes align staff with the Groups financial performance and promote a sense of ownership Participants save a fixed monthly amount of up to 500 or such other limit as may be approved from time to time by HMRC for three years Operation Euromoney SAYE scheme The Group operates an allemployee save as you earn scheme in which those Directors employed in the UK are eligible to participate.
No performance conditions attach to options granted under this plan.
It is designed to incentivise all employees.
Participants are able to buy shares in the Company at a price set at a discount of up to 20% to the market value at the start of the savings period Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
62 12112017 114828 AM Notes to table The Remuneration Committee may vary any performance conditions if an event occurs which causes it to determine that a varied condition would be more appropriate provided that any such varied condition is not materially less difficult to satisfy.
In the event that the Remuneration Committee was to make an adjustment of this sort a full explanation would be provided in the next Remuneration Report.
Performance measures  The performance measures used in the variable incentive plans are reviewed annually and chosen to focus executive rewards on delivery of key financial targets for the relevant performance period in addition where appropriate to key strategic or operational goals relevant to an individual.
Precise targets are set at the start of each performance period by the Remuneration Committee based on relevant reference points including for Group financial targets the Companys business plan and are designed to be appropriately stretching.
The Remuneration Committee intends to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors on their original terms including outstanding incentive awards which have been disclosed in previous remuneration reports and where relevant are consistent with a previous policy approved by shareholders.
Any such payments to former Directors will be set out in the Remuneration Report as and when they occur.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payments and payments for loss of office including exercising any discretions available to it in connection with such payments notwithstanding that they are not in line with the policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed i before the date the Companys first remuneration policy approved by shareholders in accordance with section 439A of the Companies Act came into effect and ii before the policy set out above came into effect provided that the terms of the payment were consistent with the shareholderapproved remuneration policy in force at the time they were agreed or iii at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Remuneration Committee the payment was not in consideration for the individual becoming a Director of the
For these purposes payments includes the Remuneration Committee satisfying awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
The Remuneration Committee may make minor amendments to the Policy for regulatory exchange control tax or administrative purposes or to take account of a change in legislation without obtaining shareholder approval for that amendment.
The Remuneration Committee will operate the variable incentive plans according to their respective rules which provide flexibility in a number of regards.
Under the PSP and the deferred share bonus plan outstanding awards will vest early in the event of a change of control  takeover unless the change of control is an internal reorganisation or the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise in which case awards will be exchanged for equivalent awards over shares in the acquiring company.
In the case of PSP awards the extent to which awards vest will take into account the satisfaction of the performance conditions and unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise on a time prorated basis by reference to the proportion of the performance period that has elapsed.
If the Company is wound up or is or may be affected by a demerger delisting special dividend or other event which would in the Remuneration Committees opinion affect the Companys share price the Remuneration Committee may allow PSP and deferred share bonus plan awards to vest on the same basis as for a takeover.
Any buyout award granted as part of the recruitment of an Executive Director will be treated on a change of control in line with the agreed commercial terms of that award.
If there is a variation of the Companys share capital or a demerger delisting special dividend rights issue or other event which in the Remuneration Committees opinion would affect the Companys share price the Remuneration Committee may adjust the terms of the awards.
NonExecutive Directors The Remuneration of NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Board based on the time commitment required by the NonExecutive Directors their role and market conditions.
Each NonExecutive Director receives a base fee for services to the Board with an additional fee payable for NonExecutive Directors with selected additional responsibilities for example the chairs of the Remuneration and Audit Committees and the Senior Independent Director.
The NonExecutive Directors do not participate in any of the Companys incentive schemes.
The NonExecutive Directors receive reimbursement for reasonable expenses including where relevant tax payable on those expenses incurred as part of their role as Non Executive Directors.
Policy on external appointments The Company allows its Executive Directors to take a limited number of outside directorships provided they are not expected to impinge on their principal employment.
Subject to the approval of the Company Chairman Executive Directors may retain the remuneration received from the first such appointment.
Recruitment policy Compensation packages for new Board Directors are set in accordance with the prevailing Remuneration Policy at their time of joining the Board.
The main components are detailed below.
New Executive Directors will receive a salary commensurate with their responsibilities and which will not be the most significant part of their overall remuneration package.
The
Director will also be offered the benefit of private healthcare and life assurance.
Other benefits may include a pension allowance relocation or housing allowance.
New Executive Directors will participate in one or more of the incentive plans outlined in the section Detailed remuneration arrangements of Executive Directors earlier in this Policy
The initial annual bonus andor longterm incentive plan award to a new recruit may be granted with different measures and or targets to other Directors in the year of joining if deemed appropriate.
Where appropriate a new Executive Director may be granted a oneoff buyout award for loss of earnings from previous employment which have been forfeited in order to join the
When structuring a buyout award the Remuneration Committee will take account of all relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to forfeited incentive awards the likelihood of those conditions being met the proportion of the vestingperformance period remaining and the form of the award e. cash or shares.
The overriding principle will be that any replacement buyout award should in aggregate not exceed the commercial value of the earnings which have been forfeited.
The Remuneration Committee may in a recruitment scenario rely upon the Listing Rules exemption from shareholder approval to grant a oneoff buyout award to facilitate the recruitment of a Director.
New Executive Directors are entitled to participate in the Euromoney SAYE scheme.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
63 12112017 114828 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Where an Executive Director is appointed from within the organisation the normal policy of the Company is that any legacy arrangements would be honoured in line with the original terms and conditions.
Similarly if an Executive Director is appointed following the Companys acquisition of or merger with another company or business legacy terms and conditions would be honoured.
Where an appointment is made to fill an Executive Director role on a shortterm basis the Remuneration Committee retains discretion to make appropriate remuneration decisions outside the standard Policy to meet the individual circumstances of recruitment on an interim basis.
New NonExecutive Directors appointed to the Board will receive a base fee in line with that payable to other Non Executive Directors.
In the event that a NonExecutive Director is required to temporarily take on the role of an Executive Director their remuneration may include any of the elements listed above for Executive Directors.
Directors service contracts The Companys policy is to employ Executive Directors on service agreements which are terminable on 12 months notice.
The Remuneration Committee seeks to minimise termination payments and believes these should be restricted to the value of remuneration for the notice period.
The Companys Executive Directors are employed for an indefinite term and the service agreements provide for a notice period of 12 months from the Company and the executive.
Each Executive Director participates in bonus or incentive arrangements and in the case of Andrew Rashbass a recruitment award as compensation for forfeiting remuneration in order to join the Company.
The service agreement for the Chief Executive Officer Andrew Rashbass includes the following provisions on termination 12 months notice from the Company and the Executive and during such notice the Executive will normally continue to be entitled to receive at the absolute discretion of the Remuneration Committee bonus longterm incentive awards that accrue during the notice period and the recruitment bonus to the extent that the award vests during the notice period.
If the Company terminates employment and elects to make a payment in lieu of notice PILON this will be calculated on the basis of Andrew Rashbass base salary for the notice period and will also take account of any recruitment bonus to which he would become entitled during the notice period.
At the absolute discretion of the Remuneration Committee he will also be considered for any bonuses to which he would or may become entitled during the notice period.
The other Executive Directors service agreements provide for 12 months notice and provisions for payment in lieu of notice and garden leave.
The service agreements for the Executive Directors are expressed to expire on reaching their respective retirement age however the Executive Directors could not under UK law be required to retire at this age following the abolition of the default retirement age.
In the event that employment is terminated due to incapacity 90 calendar days absence in a rolling 12month period the service agreements provide for termination on six months notice.
In these circumstances the Company would also make a payment for pension up to the date of termination for all Executive Directors.
With the exception of Sir Patrick Sergeant none of the Non Executive Directors has a service contract although John Botts David Pritchard Tristan Hillgarth and Andrew Ballingal serve under a letter of appointment.
The service contract of Sir Patrick Sergeant provides for 12 months expense allowance and an expense allowance up to the date of termination in the event of incapacity.
The Directors service contracts are available for shareholder inspection at the Companys registered office.
Policy on payment for loss of office The Companys approach to payments in the event of termination is to take account of the individual circumstances including the reason for termination individual performance contractual obligations the terms of bonus incentives and long term incentive plans in which the Executive Director participates.
The Companys general practice for all Executive Directors is to provide for 12 months salary and pension up to the date of termination.
The Company may lawfully terminate an Executive Directors employment without compensation in circumstances where the Company is entitled to terminate for cause this is defined in the service agreements.
The Remuneration Committee may determine that any Executive Director is eligible to receive an annual bonus in respect of the financial year in which they cease employment.
This bonus would usually be time apportioned.
In determining the level of bonus to be paid the Remuneration Committee may at its discretion take into account performance up to the date of cessation or over the financial year as a whole.
The treatment of outstanding share awards in the event of termination is governed by the relevant share plan rules as summarised below.
If an Executive Director participates in the PSP and ceases to be an officer or employee of the Group during the performance period in any circumstances other than those set out below an unvested award will lapse on the date on which their employment ceases.
If a participant dies an unvested PSP award will vest at the time of the participants death taking into account the satisfaction of the performance condition and unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise on a time prorated basis by reference to the proportion of the performance period that has elapsed.
If a participant is treated as a good leaver because cessation of employment is as a result of illhealth injury disability the sale of the individuals employing business or entity out of the Group or any other reason at the Remuneration Committees discretion a Good Leaver Reason a participants unvested PSP award will usually continue until the normal vesting date except where the Remuneration Committee determines it should vest as soon as reasonably practicable following the participants cessation.
The extent to which the award vests will take account of the extent to which the performance condition is satisfied and unless the Remuneration Committee determines otherwise on a time prorated basis by reference to the proportion of the performance period that has elapsed.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
64 12112017 114828 AM If a PSP award is subject to a holding period and a participant ceases to be an officer or employee of the Group during that holding period hisher award will normally be released at the end of the holding period except where the Remuneration Committee determines it should be released following the participants cessation.
However if a participant is summarily dismissed during a holding period hisher award will lapse immediately.
Nilcost options will normally be exercisable for six months after release.
Where an Executive Director participates in the deferred share bonus plan and ceases employment their outstanding awards will normally lapse unless cessation is due to the participants death or a Good Leaver Reason in which case outstanding awards will vest at the normal vesting date or if the Remuneration Committee so determines as soon as reasonably practicable following the individuals cessation.
Any buyout award granted as part of the recruitment of an Executive Director will be treated on cessation of employment in line with the agreed commercial terms of that award.
The Remuneration Committee reserves the right to make any other payments in connection with a Directors cessation of office or employment where the payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of a compromise or settlement of any claim arising in connection with the cessation of a Directors office or employment.
Any such payments may include but are not limited to paying any fees for outplacement assistance andor the Directors legal andor professional advice fees in connection with his cessation of office or employment.
No other termination payments are provided unless otherwise required by law.
Policy for Directors holding equity in the Company There is a minimum shareholding requirement of 200% of base salary for Executive Directors on a continuous basis.
A newly appointed Executive Director will have a period of five years from their date of appointment to meet the minimum shareholding requirement.
There is a minimum shareholding requirement of 100% of annual fees for NonExecutive Directors on a continuous basis.
This excludes NonExecutive Directors who are also Executive Directors of DMGT as they have a similar requirement at DMGT.
Scenario charts for Directors remuneration The chart below provides illustrative values of the remuneration package for the Chief Executive Officer Andrew Rashbass under three assumed performance scenarios for 2018.
This chart is for illustrative purposes only and actual outcomes may differ from those shown.
Assumed performance Assumptions used All performance scenarios Fixed pay Consists of total fixed pay including base salary benefits and pension.
Base salary  salary effective as at 1 October 2017 Benefits  estimated value of 2000 Pension allowance  10% of salary for the CEO Minimum less than threshold performance Variable pay No payout under the annual bonus.
No vesting under the PSP.
Performance in line with expectations Variable pay 23rd of the maximum payout under the annual bonus for the CEO 50% vesting under the PSP.
Maximum performance Variable pay 100% of the maximum payout under the annual bonus.
100% vesting under the PSP.
PSP awards have been shown at face value with no share price growth or discount rate assumptions.
Allemployee share plans have been excluded.
Colin Jones is on different arrangements as described elsewhere in this report and the details for the incoming CFO have not been agreed at this time therefore the only chart shown below is for Andrew Rashbass the CEO.
The new CFOs remuneration arrangements once approved will be determined in line with the policy and disclosed in the 2018
Annual Remuneration Report.
CEO
Maximum In line with expectations Minimum 33% 33% 33% 43% 33% 24% 100% Fixed pay PSP Annual bonus Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
65 12112017 114829 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Remuneration Report
Executive Directors audited The key elements of remuneration for the CEO and Finance Director in 2017 in line with the Directors Remuneration Policy in force were as follows Salary Annual incentive Bonus deferral LTIP Pension Benefits A Rashbass
750000 Annual bonus plan 150% of salary maximum 100% of salary target The performance measures were 75% adjusted profit before tax 25% individual objectives Any amount above target deferred into nilcost options for two years PSP  Annual award of 200% of salary vesting after five years 10% of salary per annum payable in cash
Life insurance CR Jones Finance Director 270300 Profit share scheme linked to the growth in adjusted pretax EPS of the Group.
A sum of 500 is payable for every percentage point that the adjusted pretax EPS is above 11 pence and an additional sum of 800 is payable for every percentage point that the adjusted pretax EPS is above 20 pence CAP 2014 PSP  Annual award of 100% of salary vesting after five years 15% of salary per annum payable in cash
Life insurance The table below sets out the breakdown of the single figure of remuneration for each Executive Director in 2017 and 2016.
Salary
Benefits
Profit share
Pension
Total before buyout award
Award
Total
A Rashbass 2017 750000 1284  800250 75000 1626534 518931 2145465 2016 750000 1192  953955 75000 1780147 980400 2760547 CR Jones 2017 270300 1284 668487  40545 980616  980616 2016 267650 1281 534922  40148 844001  844001 Total 2017 1020300 2568 668487 800250 115545 2607150 518931 3126081 2016 1017650 2473 534922 953955 115148 2624148 980400 3604548 1 The value of the buyout award made to A Rashbass on 1 October 2015 was calculated using the average midmarket price of the five days preceding vesting on 30 September 2017 of 11.74.
Due to a close period no vesting of the buyout award occurred in 2017 Annual Bonus Plan A Rashbass 000 Actual bonus 800250 Deferred into shares 50250 Performance measures Weighting Minimum On target Maximum Actual
Payout % of salary Financial adjusted profit before tax 1and2 75% 94.2m 104.7m 115.1m 108.5m 112.5% 88.5% Individual objectives 25%  37.5% 18.2% Total payout % of salary 100% 150.0% 106.7% 1 A reconciliation of adjusted profit before tax is set out on page 30 2 The adjusted profit before tax result was amended to take account of MandA activity with a negative adjustment of 2.0m and an adjustment for the unbudgeted interest cost relating to the DMGT sell down and MandA activity with a positive adjustment of 4.0m resulting in an overall positive adjustment of 2.0m Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
66 12112017 114829 AM The individual objectives for Andrew Rashbass in 2017 were Objective Outcome % bonus payable Book of business growth yearonyear.
Below threshold 0% Portfolio management targeting reducing drag from bottom left quadrant businesses and improving upper right quadrant businesses see page 16.
Between threshold and target 5.7% Deliverables against the strategic talent review At maximum 12.5% These objectives were weighted equally and monitored by the Committee.
In determining the final level of bonus payable the Committee noted that the book of business growth was below the threshold required for the objective to be met.
Progress had been made on the identified quadrants within the portfolio albeit below the target levels required.
The Committee agreed that Andrew Rashbass had made an outstanding contribution on the organisation operating model resulting in a new Group Management Board.
On the basis of the above the annual bonus will pay out at 49% achievement of maximum opportunity against the individual objectives and an overall bonus of 107% of salary.
Any annual bonus earned in excess of 100% of salary will be paid as a nilcost option the vesting of which will be deferred for two years.
Pensions
Pension amounts are those contributed by the Company to pension schemes or cash amounts paid in lieu of pension contributions.
Executive Directors can participate in the Euromoney Pension Plan a money purchase plan or their own private pension scheme.
The Harmsworth Pension Scheme closed to future accrual of benefits on 31 December 2015.
Under the Harmsworth Pension Scheme the following pension benefits were earned by the Directors Accrued annual benefit at 30 Sept 2017 based on normal retirement age Normal retirement age of 65 Additional value of benefits if early retirement taken Weighting of pension benefit value as shown in single figure table CR Jones 48476 15 Aug 2025 none Cash allowance 100% Buyout award for Andrew Rashbass A oneoff award of shares in the Company with a value of 2250000 was made in 2016 in order to compensate Andrew Rashbass for incentives foregone on leaving his previous employment.
This was considered to be no more than the comparable commercial value of the incentives foregone by him from his previous employment.
Based on the Companys average share price for the month of September 2015 221011 shares were awarded on 1 October 2015.
Subject to continued employment 40% of this award vested on 30 September 2016 a further 20% was due to vest on 30 September 2017 and the remaining 40% will vest in two equal tranches on 30 September 2018 and 2019 respectively.
Under the terms of this award 44202 options 2016 88404 were due to vest on 30 September 2017.
This date was in a close period and the rules of the scheme determine no vesting should occur until there is an open period.
As at the date of this Annual Report and Accounts there had been no open period and therefore no exercise has taken place.
Longterm incentives No share plan awards under the PSP or CAP 2014 were due to vest in the year for the Executive Directors.
As the performance criteria of the CAP and Company Share Option Plan CSOP have not been met Colin Jones outstanding awards of 14457 under CAP 2014 and 2688 under CSOP 2014 have lapsed.
There were 167419 options granted to Executive Directors during the year under the PSP.
Details of the Groups share option schemes are set in the Remuneration Policy that can be found on the website and note 24 to the Groups financial statements.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
67 12112017 114829 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Directors interests The following tables set out all interests in the equity of the Company held by Executive Directors and a comparison to the shareholding guidelines for Executive Directors at 30 September 2017.
Share options subject to performance conditions The table below sets out the details of the longterm incentive awards granted under the PSP where vesting will be determined according to the achievement of performance measures that will be tested in 2019.
Awards under the PSP were granted to Andrew Rashbass and Colin Jones on 19 December 2016.
In addition the Executive Directors have a further twoyear holding period following the performance measurement period.
No other awards under the PSP have been granted to the Executive Directors during 2017.
Type of option awarded Basis of award Face value of award made Number of shares End of performance period A Rashbass Nilcost option 200% of salary 1500000 141857 Sep 2019 CR Jones Nilcost option 100% of salary 270300 25562 Sep 2019 1 Calculated as maximum number of shares that would vest if all performance measures are met.
The share price used to determine the number of shares awarded was 10.57 being the average of the middle market quotations of an Ordinary Share as derived from the Daily Official List for the five dealing days preceding 23 December 2016 Details of performance measures for the December 2016 PSP awards are as follows Maximum opportunity Performance measure Weighting Performance target Vesting level A Rashbass 200% of salary
100% 8% or more Full vesting Between 3% Between 25% and 100% CR Jones 100% of salary and 8% on a sliding scale 3% 25% Less than 3% Nil 1 EPS will be the adjusted diluted earnings per share disclosed in note 10 to the Groups financial statements The table below sets out the details of PSP awards held by Executive Directors as at 30 September 2017.
Year Relating to Award type Exercisable from Expiry date Status Award price pence
Outstanding
Awards
A Rashbass 2015 PSP Nilcost option 18 Dec 2020 18 Dec 2025 Outstanding 941.8  159269 2016 PSP Nilcost option 19 Dec 2021 19 Dec 2026 Outstanding 1057.4  141857 Total 301126 CR Jones 2016 PSP Nilcost option 19 Dec 2021 19 Dec 2026 Outstanding 1057.4  25562 Deferred shares not subject to performance conditions The table below sets out the details of deferred bonus award granted to Andrew Rashbass on 19 December 2016 for 2016 bonus and outstanding buyout awards.
Year Relating to Award type Exercisable from Expiry date Status Award price pence
Outstanding
Awards
2015 Buyout award Nilcost option 30 Sep 2017 1 Oct 2025 Outstanding 1018.5  44202 2015 Buyout award Nilcost option 30 Sep 2018 1 Oct 2025 Outstanding 1018.5  44202 2015 Buyout award Nilcost option 30 Sep 2019 1 Oct 2025 Outstanding 1018.5  44202 2016 Deferred bonus Nilcost option 22 Dec 2018 22 Dec 2028 Outstanding 1063.6  19175 Shareholding guidelines Executive Director Shares required to be held % of salary Number of shares required to be held Number of beneficially owned shares
A Rashbass 200% 128096 46854 No CR Jones 100% 23083 192000 Yes 1 The number of shares is calculated using the closing midmarket price on 30 September 2017 of 11.71.
The requirement is for A Rashbass to hold 200% of salary and CR Jones to hold 100% of salary within five years of appointment 2 A Rashbass was appointed Executive Director on 1 October 2015 and therefore has not yet built up shares equal to his individual requirement There have been no changes in the shareholdings of the Executive Directors between 30 September 2017 and the date of this Annual Report and Accounts.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
68 12122017 45412 PM Payments to past Directors There were no payments to past Directors made in the year.
Payments for loss of office There were no payments for loss of office made in the year.
NonExecutive Directors audited The fees for the Chairman and other NonExecutive Directors were increased on 1 February 2017 having last been reviewed in 2013 and now reflect the expected level of duties.
The Chairmans fees increased from 175000 to 190000 inclusive of fees for the role of Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
As of 1 February 2017 each NonExecutive Director receives a base fee for services to the Board of 50000 2016 30000 with an additional fee of 10000 2016 6500 payable to the chairs of the Remuneration and Audit Committees and with an additional fee of 10000 2016 nil paid to the Senior Independent Director.
Single figure of remuneration The table below sets out the breakdown of the single total figure of remuneration for each NonExecutive Director in 2017 and 2016.
JC Botts Chairman 185000 156863 The Viscount Rothermere 43333 30000 Sir Patrick Sergeant 43333 30000 DP Pritchard Senior Independent Director 58833 36500 ART Ballingal 43333 30000 TP Hillgarth 43333 30000 PA Zwillenberg appointed 1 June 2016 43333 10000 MWH Morgan retired 31 May 2016  20000 Total 460498 343363 1 Fees includes prorata fee increase from 1 February 2017 Directors interests Shareholding guidelines for the NonExecutive Directors have been introduced see page 65.
The interests of the NonExecutive Directors in the ordinary shares of the Company as at 30 September 2017 were as follows
Number of ordinary shares JC Botts 15503 The Viscount Rothermere Sir Patrick Sergeant 165304 DP Pritchard ART Ballingal TP Hillgarth PA Zwillenberg There have been no changes in the shareholdings of the NonExecutive Directors between 30 September 2017 and the date of this Annual Report and Accounts.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
69 12112017 114830 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Other performance measures and disclosures unaudited Comparison of overall performance and remuneration of the CEO The chart below compares the Companys total shareholder return with the FTSE 250 index over the past nine financial years.
For these purposes shareholder return represents the theoretical growth in value of a shareholding over a specific period assuming that dividends are reinvested to purchase additional shares.
The Company is a constituent of the FTSE 250 index and accordingly this is considered to be the most appropriate benchmark.
Total shareholders return % 5tel25telSept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept 30 Sept Company FTSE 250 The table below sets out the remuneration data for Directors undertaking the role of CEO during each of the last eight years.
The single figure of remuneration for the CEO set out below includes salary benefits Company pension contributions and longterm incentives as set out on page 66 of this report.
CEOteltel 2016 2017 Single figure of remuneration 000 A Rashbass  1780 1627 CHC Fordham  1.647 895.
PR Ensor 3977 4397 4857 Annual incentive payment % of maximum A Rashbass 85% 71% CHC Fordham 58% 52% 17% PR Ensor 82% 82% 82% Longterm incentive vesting % of maximum A Rashbass CHC Fordham PR Ensor  100% 100% 1 A Rashbass was awarded an annual bonus under the Groups Annual Bonus Plan 2 CHC Fordham and PR Ensor were paid under the Groups profit share scheme.
The profit share scheme has no ceiling the maximum annual variable element of remuneration was therefore calculated assuming that profits achieved had been 20% higher Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
70 12122017 45413 PM Percentage change in remuneration of the CEO The table below illustrates the change in remuneration for the CEO compared with the change in remuneration of the average employee across the Group at constant currency.
The Directors feel that this group of people is the most appropriate as a comparator because employee pay is determined annually by the Committee at the same time as that of the CEO and under the same economic circumstances.
The Directors believe this demonstrates the best link between the changes in average remuneration compared to the CEO.
Salary Benefits Incentives CEO remuneration  8% 16% Average employee 2% 5% 2% Remuneration in the above table excludes longterm incentive payments and pension benefits.
There is no change in salary from 2016 for the CEO remuneration as Andrew Rashbass did not receive an increase in the April salary review.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below illustrates the Companys spend on employee pay in comparison to profits and distributions to shareholders.
These are deemed by the Directors to be the significant distributions made during the year and will assist stakeholders in understanding the relative importance of spend on pay.
For this purpose total employee pay includes salaries profit shares and bonuses.
Total employee pay 163.8 148.9 10% Dividends paid 30.2 29.6 2% Adjusted profit before tax 106.5 102.5 4% 1 Total employee pay is affected by foreign exchange translation as more than half of the Groups employees are based outside of the UK 2 From continuing and discontinued operations Directors interests in Daily Mail and General Trust plc The interests of the Directors in the shares of Daily Mail and General Trust plc DMGT as at 30 September 2017 were as follows Ordinary shares of 12.5p each A ordinary nonvoting shares of 12.5p each A ordinary nonvoting nilcost options The Viscount Rothermere 1and2 19890364 61644654 240099 CR Jones  1900 PA Zwillenberg  24619 109569 1 The figures in the table above include A shares awarded to executives under the DMGT Executive Bonus Scheme 2 DMGT has been notified that under section 793 and 824 of the Companies Act 2006 The Viscount Rothermere was deemed to have been interested as a shareholder in 19890364 ordinary shares of 12.5 pence at 30 September 2017 At 30 September 2017 The Viscount Rothermere was beneficially interested in 756700 ordinary shares of Rothermere Continuation Limited the Companys ultimate parent company.
Since 30 September 2017 Paul Zwillenberg purchased through the DMGT SIP scheme 45 additional A ordinary nonvoting shares in DMGT respectively.
There have been no other changes in the Directors interests since 30 September 2017.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
71 12112017 114830 AM Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Committee The Committee meets four times a year and additionally as required.
It is responsible for determining the contract terms remuneration and other benefits of Executive Directors including performancerelated incentives.
The Committee reviews the remuneration and incentive plans of the Executive Directors and other key employees as well as looking at the remuneration costs and policies of the Group as a whole.
The Committees terms of reference are available on the Companys website.
During 2017 the Committee met eight times and informal discussions were held at other times during the year.
Committee members John Botts Chairman of the Committee David Pritchard independent Paul Zwillenberg Imogen Joss Kevin Beatty 1 Appointed as a member of the Committee on 10 November 2017 2 Resigned as a member of the Committee on 21 November 2017 3 Appointed as a member of the Committee on 21 November 2017 All members of the Committee are NonExecutive Directors of the Company.
For the year under review the Committee also sought advice and information from the Companys CEO Finance Director the Director of Human Resources and the Group Reward Director.
The Committees terms of reference permit its members to obtain professional advice on any matter.
Guidance was sought from Deloitte on benchmarking of NonExecutive Director fees the review of the Remuneration Policy and PSP performance measures and fees of 38350 were payable for this advice.
Deloitte was appointed in 2013 by the Committee is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and voluntarily operates under the code of conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee is satisfied as to the independent nature of their advice.
The key activities of the Committee in the year included approving the grant to and setting suitable performance measures for the PSP options for Andrew Rashbass and Colin Jones setting objectives for the Annual Bonus Plan for Andrew Rashbass approving the salary increase implementation of Annual Bonus and PSP share grants to Divisional Directors to replace profit share some transitional arrangements remain in place recommending to the Board the increase in fees for the Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors.
John Botts was not involved in any decision regarding his own fee approving the annual profit shares and bonuses for Executive Directors and Divisional Directors approving the grant of a SAYE offer at a 20% discount to market price and reviewing the Directors Remuneration Policy and recommending changes for approval by shareholders Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
72 12112017 114830 AM Implementation of the Remuneration Policy in 2018 Basic salary Directors salaries from 1 October 2017 are as set out on page 66 and are unchanged.
The salary for the incoming CFO will be in line with the remuneration policy regarding recruitment.
Salaries will be reviewed in April 2018.
Pensions and benefits No change to prior year for Andrew Rashbass or Colin Jones.
The incoming CFO will be in line with the remuneration policy regarding recruitment.
Annual incentive Annual Bonus Plan The weightings for the individual and financial objectives for Andrew Rashbass Annual Bonus Plan in 2018 will remain the same as 2017 with 75% based on adjusted profit before tax and 25% on individual objectives.
The Committee considers that disclosing the precise targets which are commercially sensitive of the Annual Bonus Plan would not be in shareholders interests and awards made will be published at the end of the performance period where possible.
The incoming CFO will be placed on the Annual Bonus Plan arrangements and will have a maximum opportunity that does not exceed the remuneration policy.
Annual bonus deferral Any amount above target for Andrew Rashbass and the incoming CFO will be deferred into nil cost options for two years in line with 2017.
Profit share Colin Jones profit share scheme is set out on page 66 and will remain the same for 2018 and will be paid prorata to his leaving date.
Longterm incentive In addition to EPS a second performance measure of operating margin will be introduced for 2018 for awards to be made under the PSP to Andrew Rashbass and the incoming CFO.
The quantum of award will remain unchanged for Andrew Rashbass.
Directors employed in the UK are eligible to participate in the SAYE.
NonExecutive Directors fees NonExecutive Directors fees will not be reviewed.
Shareholding requirement Guidelines recommended by the Committee and as indicated in the revised remuneration policy are NonExecutive Directors 100% of annual fee Executive Directors 200% of salary Group Management Board 75% of salary.
General Meetings  shareholder vote outcome The first table below shows the binding shareholder vote on the 2016 Directors Remuneration Report at the January 2017 AGM.
The second table shows the binding vote on the remuneration policy at the June 2015 General Meeting.
Votes for % Votes against % Abstentions 74275095 77.9% 21110292 22.1% 7087557 Votes for % Votes against % Abstentions 103127111 87.1% 15212519 12.9% 704902 On behalf of the Board John Botts Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 22 November 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC
Euromoney AR2017 GovernanceProof 6.
73 12112017 114830 AM 3.
Financial statements
Independent Auditors Report 76
Consolidated nancial statements 84 Company accounts 144
Five year record 150 Shareholder information 153
W e have adopted a new progressive dividend policy with an increase in payout ratio.
Colin Jones Finance Director Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialDividerProof 6.
74 13122017 120655 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialDividerProof 6.
75 13122017 120657 25610  12 December 2017 447 PM  Proof 5
Independent Auditors Report
Report on the audit of the nancial statements
In our opinion Euromoney Institutional Investor PLCs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit and cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 102 The Financial Reporting Standard applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland and applicable law and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts the Annual Report which comprise the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the Company Balance Sheet at 30 September 2017 the Consolidated Income Statement and Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows and the Consolidated and Company Statements of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Company.
Other than disclosed in note 4 to the financial statements we have provided no nonaudit services to the Group or the Company in the period from 1 October 2016 to 30 September 2017.
Our audit approach
Materiality
Audit scope Key audit matters Overall Group materiality 4.2m 2016 4.1m based on 5% of statutory profit before tax from continuing and discontinued operations adjusted for certain exceptional items.
Overall Company materiality 13.5m 2016 3.7m based on 1% of total assets.
We conducted work in three key territories being the UK US and Canada.
This included full scope audits at four components and specific financial statement line item audit procedures performed at a further four components.
Taken together the components at which audit work has been performed accounted for approximately 76% of Groups revenue 83% of the Groups statutory profit before tax and 91% of the Groups statutory profit before tax from continuing and discontinued operations adjusted for certain exceptional items.
Carrying values of goodwill and acquired intangible assets Group and investments in subsidiaries
Uncertain tax positions Group Presentation of exceptional items Group Acquisition accounting for RISI Group Presentation of discontinued operations Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
76 12122017 45206 PM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud and the risk of fraud in revenue recognition.
Procedures designed to address these risks included testing of material journal entries and postclose adjustments testing and evaluating managements key accounting estimates for reasonableness and consistency understanding and testing management incentive plans undertaking cutoff procedures to test proper cutoff of revenue and expenses and testing the existence and accuracy of revenue transactions.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Carrying values of goodwill and acquired intangibles assets Group Refer to the Audit Committee report on page 51 and to note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
At 30 September 2017 the Group had 594m of goodwill and intangible assets including 189m of acquired intangibles and 399m of goodwill.
During the year the Group recognised a 27.4m impairment charge related to goodwill for Ned Davis Research Inc.
NDR.
Recoverability of the carrying values of goodwill and acquired intangible assets is contingent on future cash flows of the underlying cash generating units CGUs and there is a risk that if these cash flows do not meet managements expectations the assets will be impaired.
The cash flow forecasts and related value in use calculations include a number of significant judgements and estimates including profit growth cash conversion terminal growth rate and discount rate.
Where businesses are held for sale fair value less cost of disposal rather than value in use has been used to value CGUs.
The related calculations are based on an estimate of disposal proceeds.
Changes in the key assumptions underpinning these calculations have a significant impact on the headroom available in the impairment calculations.
We obtained managements goodwill impairment model and tested the reasonableness of key assumptions including revenue profit and cash flow growth rates terminal values and the selection of discount rates.
We agreed the underlying cash flow projections to management approved budgets and forecasts and assessed how these projections are compiled.
Deploying our valuations experts we assessed the terminal growth rate and discount rate applied to each CGU compared with third party information past performance the Groups cost of capital and relevant risk factors.
We evaluated indicative offers from third parties where CGUs are held for sale and have therefore been valued on a fair value less cost of disposal basis.
We performed our own risk assessment by considering historical performance and managements forecasting accuracy by applying any current year budget shortfalls to future forecasts to highlight the CGUs with either lower headroom or which are more sensitive to changes in key assumptions.
We focused our attention on those businesses where headroom has decreased or where management has identified impairments namely NDR.
We performed our own independent sensitivity analysis to understand the impact of reasonable changes in managements assumptions on the available headroom.
We challenged the significant assumptions specifically relating to revenue and profit growth in light of the individual CGUs past performance to assess whether the forecasts are achievable.
We focused in particular on the goodwill relating to NDR in order to determine whether we agreed with managements decision to impair and whether in our view the impairment charge is sufficient.
We checked for any additional impairment triggers in other businesses through discussions with management review of management accounts and board minutes and examining performance of recent acquisitions to identify underperforming businesses.
As a result of our work we determined that the impairment charge recognised in 2017 was appropriate.
For those intangible assets including goodwill where management determined that no impairment was required and that no additional sensitivity disclosures should be given we found that these judgements were supported by reasonable assumptions that would require significant downside changes before any additional material impairment was necessary.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
77 12112017 115725 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5
Independent Auditors Report
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Carrying value of investments in subsidiaries Company Refer to note 6 to the Company financial statements.
Investments in subsidiaries of 1087m are accounted for at cost less impairment in the Company Balance Sheet at 30 September 2017.
Investments are tested for impairment if impairment indicators exist.
If such indicators exist the recoverable amounts of the investments in subsidiaries are estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
Any such impairment loss is recognised in the income statement.
Management judgement is required in the area of impairment testing particularly in assessing 1 whether an event has occurred that may indicate that the related asset values may not be recoverable 2 whether the carrying value of an asset can be supported by the recoverable amount being the higher of fair value less costs to sell or the net present value of future cash flows which are estimated based on the continued use of the asset in the business 3 the appropriate key assumptions to be applied in preparing cash flow projections including whether these cash flow projections are discounted using an appropriate rate.
Changing the assumptions selected by management to determine the level if any of impairment including the discount rates or the growth rate assumptions in the cash flow projections could materially affect the net present value used in the impairment test and as a result affect the Companys financial condition and results of operations.
We evaluated managements assumption whether any indicators of impairment existed by comparing the net assets of the subsidiaries at 30 September 2017 with the Companys investment carrying values.
For those investments where the net assets were lower than the carrying values management prepared a discounted cash flow model.
We have tested the reasonableness of key assumptions including revenue profit and cash flow growth rates terminal value and the selection of discount rates management has applied.
We performed our own independent sensitivity analysis to understand the impact of reasonable changes in managements assumptions on the available headroom.
As a result of our work we considered that the carrying values of the investments held by the Company are supportable in the context of the Company financial statements taken as a whole.
Uncertain tax positions Group Refer to the Audit Committee report on page 52 and to note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Group operates in a complex multinational tax environment in relation to direct and indirect taxes and there are a number of open tax matters with tax authorities especially in the UK US and Canada.
From time to time the Group enters into transactions with complicated accounting and tax consequences and judgement is required in assessing the level of provisions needed in respect of uncertain tax positions.
In addition the Group is subject to sales taxes in the
The evolving nature both of US sales tax legislation and of the Groups product base as the business goes increasingly digital means that management periodically needs to exercise judgement supported by external specialist advice in assessing appropriate levels of provisioning.
We evaluated managements judgements in respect of estimates of tax exposures and contingencies in order to assess the adequacy of the Groups tax provisions.
In understanding and evaluating managements judgements we deployed our tax specialists and considered third party tax advice received by the Group the status of recent and current tax authority audits and enquiries the outturn of previous claims judgemental positions taken in tax returns and current year estimates and developments in the tax environment.
We refreshed our independent assessment of tax risks in the Groups most material markets UK US and Canada and we evaluated the appropriateness and completeness of related tax provisions.
The most significant uncertain tax positions comprise the Canadian Revenue Agencys assessment of a foreign currency trade in 2009 and HMRCs challenge related to the Dealogic transaction in 2015.
Deploying our tax specialists we discussed tax advice received by the Group direct with the Groups third party advisors in relation to the challenges by the Canadian Revenue Agency and the UKs HMRC.
From the evidence obtained we considered the level of provisioning for direct and indirect taxes and the related disclosures to be acceptable in the context of the consolidated financial statements taken as a whole.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
78 12112017 115725 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Presentation of exceptional items Group Refer to the Audit Committee report on page 51 and to note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
The Group continues to present adjusted earnings by making adjustments for costs and profits which management believes to be exceptional by virtue of their size and incidence.
During the year the Group presented 31.3m of net costs as exceptional items primarily comprising goodwill and available for sale investment impairments 29.6m other exceptional costs 8.4m offset by the release of a provision for US sales tax 3.9m and net profit on disposal or closure of businesses and joint ventures 2.9m.
Given that the Group presents adjusted earnings measures in addition to its statutory results we focused on the classification of these items as exceptional in the consolidated financial statements particularly considering the nature of such items whether they are nonrecurring and whether they are significant in size.
We considered the appropriateness of the adjustments made to statutory profit measures to derive adjusted profit measures.
We understood managements rationale for classifying items as exceptional and considered whether this is reasonable and appropriate in arriving at an adjusted profit measure for 2017.
We considered the appropriateness of classifying the goodwill and available for sale investment impairment charges as exceptional.
Due to their size and nature we accepted managements presentation of these items as exceptional.
We were satisfied that the release of the provision for US sales taxes through exceptional items was appropriate as the provision was originally recorded as an exceptional.
Overall we found that management was even handed and consistent in its treatment of exceptional credits and debits.
We were satisfied that excluding the oneoff net profit on disposal or closure of businesses and joint ventures from adjusted profit was consistent with the Groups historical practice.
Where other costs were treated as exceptional we considered whether the Company had complied with its accounting policy and with the financial hurdle set by the Directors below which items of cost and income should not be treated as exceptional.
We considered the appropriateness and transparency of the disclosures in the consolidated financial statements regarding the nature of the reconciling items between statutory and adjusted profit measures especially in the context of the principle that financial reporting as a whole should be fair balanced and understandable.
As a result of our work we determined that the classification of exceptional items was reasonable that the Groups policy in this area has been consistently applied and that the rationale for including or excluding items from adjusted profit has been consistently applied across gains and losses.
Acquisition accounting for RISI Group Refer to the Audit Committee report on page 52 and to note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.
On 6 April 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the equity share capital of RISI the leading price reporting agency for the global forecast products market for approximately 100m.
A provisional purchase price allocation exercise has been performed by management assisted by an external expert.
The primary element of the valuation exercise assessed the fair value of identifiable intangible assets in the form of trade name 24m customer relationships 41m and technology 1m along with the related tax impact 26.6m.
Goodwill of 66m was recognised as a result of the acquisition.
Judgement was required in identifying and valuing these acquired intangible assets and goodwill and in determining the valuation of the other assets and liabilities acquired.
We obtained and reviewed the sale and purchase agreement SPA and due diligence reports to gain an understanding of the key terms of and business rationale for the acquisition.
In testing the valuation of the intangible assets acquired we considered whether the identified intangible assets were appropriate by reference to the SPA due diligence reports and other supporting documentation.
Deploying our valuations experts we engaged with management and with managements third party expert to assess the methodology employed for calculating the fair values of the assets and liabilities and the appropriateness of the key assumptions used including discount rates.
We checked that the material fair value adjustments to the net assets were consistent with the accounting standard requirements.
Based on the evidence obtained we did not identify any indication that the fair value adjustments identified by management were inappropriate or that material fair value adjustments were omitted from managements assessment.
We specified certain procedures for our component team to undertake on the opening balance sheet acquired by the
We reviewed managements analysis of the impacts of the differences between RISIs accounting policies against the Groups accounting policies and noted no material differences.
We read the disclosures in the financial statements to satisfy ourselves that they are in line with the requirements of the relevant accounting standards.
As a result of our work we determined that the acquisition accounting and related disclosures applied by the Group on a provisional basis at 30 September 2017 were appropriate.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
79 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5
Independent Auditors Report
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Presentation of discontinued operations Group Refer to the Audit Committee report on page 52 and to note 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
In September 2017 the Group announced its plan to explore the sale of its Global Markets Intelligence Division consisting of CEIC and EMIS the disposal group after receiving interest from potential buyers.
At 30 September 2017 the sale was not completed.
The disposal group was presented as held for sale and as a discontinued operation at and for the year ended 30 September 2017 in accordance with IFRS 5.
Judgement was required in determining whether CEIC and EMIS met the IFRS 5 criteria for classification as discontinued operations and in assessing the disposal group for impairment.
We have examined minutes of board meetings written correspondence between the Group and the potential purchasers and communications to the Groups investors.
We considered that the classification of assets and liabilities in the disposal group as held for sale and the results of the disposal group as discontinued operations is appropriate and in accordance with IFRS 5.
We performed specified audit procedures over the balances and results of the disposal group presented separately in the consolidated income statement and balance sheet at 30 September 2017 including revenue cash deferred revenue and accruals.
Furthermore the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of the disposal group has been assessed by reference to the expected sale proceeds less estimated cost to sell.
We were satisfied that the net assets of the disposal group were recoverable at 30 September 2017.
We assessed the adequacy of the disclosures in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
We considered that the disclosures are appropriate.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the industry in which they operate and the accounting processes and controls.
The consolidated financial statements are a consolidation of 87 reporting units each of which is considered to be a component.
We identified four components in the UK US and Canada that required a full scope audit due to their size.
Audit procedures over specific financial statement line items were performed at a further four components in the UK and US to give sufficient audit coverage.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the components by us as the Group audit team or component auditors within PwC UK and from other PwC network firms operating under our instruction.
Where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work at those reporting units to be able to conclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the consolidated financial statements as a whole.
We performed full scope audits in respect of Euromoney Trading Limited UK Euromoney Global Limited UK Institutional Investor
US and BCA Research Inc.
Canada which in our view required a full scope audit due to their size.
We performed specified procedures at RISI Inc.
Limited and Euromoney Canada Limited over cash and cash equivalents loan notes and borrowings and at Tipall Limited over property plant and equipment.
This ensured that sufficient and appropriate audit procedures were performed to achieve sufficient coverage over these financial statement line items.
In addition to instructing and reviewing the reporting from our component audit teams we conducted visits to our full scope components in the US and Canada which included file reviews and attendance at key meetings with local management.
We also had regular dialogue with component teams throughout the year.
The Group consolidation financial statement disclosures and corporate functions were audited by the Group audit team.
This included our work over goodwill and intangible assets acquisitions and disposals treasury postretirement benefits sharebased payments and tax.
Taken together the components and corporate functions where we conducted audit procedures accounted for approximately 76% of the Groups revenue 83% of the Groups statutory profit before tax and 91% of the Groups statutory profit before tax from continuing and discontinued operations adjusted for certain exceptional items.
This provided the evidence we needed for our opinion on the consolidated financial statements taken as a whole.
This was before considering the contribution to our audit evidence from performing audit work at the Group level including disaggregated analytical review procedures which covers certain of the Groups smaller and lower risk components that were not directly included in our Group audit scope.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
80 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall materiality 4.2m 2016 4.1m.
13.5m 2016 3.7m.
How we determined it 5% of statutory profit before tax for continuing and discontinued operations adjusted for certain exceptional items.
1% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied The Groups principal measure of earnings comprises adjusted operating profit which adjusts statutory profit for a number of income and expenditure items.
Management uses this measure as it believes that it eliminates the volatility inherent in exceptional items.
We have taken this measure into account in determining our materiality except that we have not adjusted profit before tax to add back amortisation of acquired intangible assets share of results in associates and joint ventures or net finance costs as in our view these are recurring items which do not introduce volatility to the Groups earnings.
The CEIC and EMIS businesses that are classified as discontinued operations contributed a full years results and remained part of the Group at 30 September 2017.
In our view it is therefore appropriate to continue to take the profit from discontinued operations into account when determining our materiality.
Based on our professional judgement total assets is an appropriate measure to assess the performance of the Company and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark for holding companies.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.2m and 3.9m.
Certain components were audited to local statutory audit materiality levels that were also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 200000 for the Group and Company audits 2016 200000 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the Directors statement in the financial statements whether the Directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the Directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the Directors statement relating to going concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
81 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5
Independent Auditors Report
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our Auditors Report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 September 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The Directors confirmation on page 57 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The Directors explanation on page 39 of the Annual Report how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the Directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the Directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the Directors on pages 56 and 57 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and Company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on pages 51 and 52 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The Directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
82 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Responsibilities for the nancial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement set out on pages 56 and 57 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an Auditors Report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our Auditors Report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the members on 29 January 2015 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2015.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is three years covering the years ended 30 September 2015 to 30 September 2017.
Giles Hannam Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
22 November 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
83 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 30 September 2017
Restated
CONTINUING OPERATIONS Revenue 3 386923 366062 Operating profit before acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items 3 95253 91358 Acquired intangible amortisation 12 20566 16817 Exceptional items 5 31253 37264 Operating profit 3 4 43434 37277 Share of results in associates and joint ventures 14 1890 1823 Finance income 7 3290 391 Finance expense 7 4146 2401 Net finance costs 7 856 2010 Profit before tax 3 40688 33444 Tax expense on profit 8 3390 11118 Profit for the year from continuing operations 3 37298 22326 DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS Profit for the year from discontinued operations 11 5889 8687 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 43187 31013 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 42718 30744 Equity noncontrolling interests 469 269 43187 31013 Earnings per share From continuing operations Basic 10 32.74p 17.44p Diluted 10 32.68p 17.42p From continuing and discontinued operations Basic 10 37.98p 24.31p Diluted 10 37.91p 24.29p Dividend per share including proposed dividends 9 30.60p 23.40p A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory results to the adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
Following the Groups decision to review the strategic options for the Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS these businesses have met the recognition criteria of discontinued operations under IFRS 5 Noncurrent assets held for sale and discontinued operations and are therefore presented as such throughout this report.
In order to comply with this presentation the 2016 Income Statement disclosures have been represented separating continuing and discontinued operations note 11.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
84 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 30 September 2017 Profit for the year 43187 31013 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Change in fair value of cash flow hedges 2408 9268 Transfer of lossesgains on cash flow hedges from fair value reserves to Income Statement Foreign exchange losses in total revenue 9334 819 Foreign exchange gainslosses in operating profit 72 1214 Net exchange differences on translation of net investments in overseas subsidiary undertakings 4875 86984 Net exchange differences on foreign currency loans 799 43401 Translation reserves recycled to Income Statement 285 636 Tax on items that may be reclassified 1955 1437 Items that will not be reclassified to profit or loss Actuarial losses on defined benefit pension schemes 320 7215 Tax credit on actuarial losses on defined benefit pension schemes 54 1227 Other comprehensive income for the year 3490 31161 Total comprehensive income for the year 46677 62174 Continuing operations 41364 52273 Discontinued operations 5313 9901 Total comprehensive income for the year 46677 62174 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 46399 60575 Equity noncontrolling interests 278 1599 46677 62174 Movements in cash flow hedges have been reclassified between categories in 2016 in order to ensure consistent presentation with the current year.
This reclassification has been explained in note 1.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
85 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 30 September 2017
Noncurrent assets Intangible assets Goodwill 12 399971 396105 Other intangible assets 12 193991 155034 Property plant and equipment 13 17235 10472 Investment in associates 14 26820 29810 Investment in joint ventures 14  215 Availableforsale investments 14 3546 5835 Convertible loan note 14 2503 Deferred consideration 25 1570 526 Deferred tax assets 22 1549 3886 Other noncurrent assets 929 Derivative financial instruments 19 662 9 648776 601892 Current assets Trade and other receivables 16 64483 73491 Deferred consideration 25 419 Current income tax assets 5112 7112 Group relief receivable  121 Balance with DMGT group company  73639 Cash and cash equivalents excluding bank overdrafts 4426 10561 Derivative financial instruments 19 2686 410 Total assets of businesses held for sale 11 50671 5013 127797 170347 Current liabilities Acquisition commitments 25 9904 326 Deferred consideration 25 350 480 Trade and other payables 17 28070 23866 Current income tax liabilities 16117 21905 Group relief payable 387 Accruals 67819 73375 Deferred income 18 113487 113446 Loan notes 20  185 Bank overdrafts  233 Derivative financial instruments 19 1001 9671 Provisions 21 337 353 Total liabilities of businesses held for sale 11 29998 5549 267470 249389 Net current liabilities 139673 79042 Total assets less current liabilities 509103 522850 Noncurrent liabilities Acquisition commitments 25 3221 11445 Borrowings 20 168893 Other noncurrent liabilities 486 486 Preference shares  10 Deferred income 18 3491 5340 Deferred tax liabilities 22 23431 14179 Net pension deficit 27 9954 9995 Derivative financial instruments 19 230 778 Provisions 21 2600 3116 212306 45349 Net assets 296797 477501 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
86 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as at 30 September 2017 continued
Shareholders equity Called up share capital 23 273 321 Share premium account 103147 102835 Other reserve 64981 64981 Capital redemption reserve 56 8 Own shares 21005 21005 Reserve for sharebased payments 38395 37334 Fair value reserve 23071 34741 Translation reserve 89269 95037 Retained earnings 35594 224218 Equity shareholders surplus 287639 468988 Equity attributable to noncontrolling interests 9158 8513 Total equity 296797 477501 The financial statements on pages 84 to 143 were approved by the Board of Directors on 22 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Andrew Rashbass Colin Jones
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
87 12112017 115726 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 September 2017
Share premium account
Capital redemption reserve
Reserve for share based payments
Translation reserve
Total
Non controlling interests
At 30 September tel557 64981 8 21582 37169 27506 53420 228823 438190 6754 444944 Profit for the year       30744 30744 269 31013 Other comprehensive expenseincome for the year     7235 41617 4551 29831 1330 31161 Total comprehensive expenseincome for the year     7235 41617 26193 60575 1599 62174
Noncontrolling interest recognised on acquisition         363 363 Exercise of acquisition option commitments       40 40 40 Adjustment arising from change in non controlling interest       356 356 228 128 Credit for share based payments    742   742  742 Cash dividend paid       29592 29592 391 29983 Exercise of share Tax relating to items taken directly to equity       225 225  225 At 30 September tel835 64981 8 21005 37334 34741 95037 224218 468988 8513 477501 Profit for the year       42718 42718 469 43187 Other comprehensive incomeexpense for the year     11670 5768 2221 3681 191 3490 Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year     11670 5768 40497 46399 278 46677
Noncontrolling interest recognised on acquisition         1525 1525 Adjustment arising from change in non controlling interest       234 234 560 794 Credit for share based payments    1061   1061  1061 Cash dividend paid       30200 30200 598 30798 Exercise of share options  312      312  312 Share buyback 48  48   193465 193465  193465 Tax relating to items taken directly to equity       225 225  225 At 30 September tel147 64981 56 21005 38395 23071 89269 35594 287639 9158 296797 The investment in own shares is held by the Euromoney Employees Share Ownership Trust and Euromoney Employee Share Trust.
The trusts waived the rights to receive dividends.
Interest and administrative costs are charged to the profit and loss account of the trusts as incurred.
Number
Number
Euromoney Employees Share Ownership Trust 58976 58976 Euromoney Employee Share Trust 1700777 1700777 Total 1759753 1759753 Nominal cost per share p 0.25 0.25 Historical cost per share  11.94 11.94 Market value 000 20607 19516 The other reserve represents the share premium arising on the shares issued for the purchase of Metal Bulletin plc in October 2006.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
88 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended 30 September 2017
Cash flow from operating activities Operating profit from continuing operations 3 43434 37277 Operating profit from discontinued operations 11 9200 10176 Operating profit 52634 47453 Longterm incentive expense 24 985 1198 Acquired intangible amortisation 12 20815 16733 Licences and software amortisation 12 3965 3675 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 13 3202 2806 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 15 4 Impairment charge 5 29649 28750 Recognition of deficit on defined benefit scheme 5  1249 Profit on disposal of businessesjoint ventures 5 2931 7094 Decrease in provisions 21 528 387 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 107806 94379 Decrease in receivables 3483 1719 Increase in payables 6912 7666 Cash generated from operations 118201 103764 Income taxes paid 21791 17242 Group relief tax received  549 Net cash generated from operating activities 96410 87071 Investing activities Dividends received from associate  83 Interest received 254 699 Purchase of intangible assets 12 1987 2402 Purchase of property plant and equipment 13 10928 3231 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 3 20 Purchase of subsidiary undertaking net of cash acquired 15 102700 14092 Proceeds from disposal of business 15 4217 10796 Purchase of associates and joint venture 14 553 180 Receipt of deferred consideration 25 1386 662 Payment of deferred consideration 25 833 Purchase of convertible loan note 14 2503 Proceeds from redemption of preference share capital  14370 Net cash used infrom investing activities 113644 6725 Financing activities Dividends paid 9 30200 29592 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 598 391 Interest paid 5027 1121 Issue of new share capital 23 312 279 Share buyback 193465 Increase in borrowings 178504 Purchase of additional interest in subsidiary undertakings 1266 367 Redemption of loan notes 20 185 82 DMGT financing facility receiptspayment 73618 62326 Net cash generated fromused in financing activities 21693 93600 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 4459 196 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 10328 8148 Effect of foreign exchange rate movements 515 1984 Cash and cash equivalents classified as held for sale 11 9846 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 4426 10328 Cash and cash equivalents include bank overdrafts.
This statement includes discontinued operations note 11.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
89 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Note to the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows Net debtcash At 1 October 83782 17680 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 4459 196 Increase in borrowings 178504 DMGT financing facility receiptspayment 73618 62326 Redemption of loan notes 185 82 Effect of foreign exchange rate movements 9075 3498 At 30 September 154621 83782 Net debtcash comprises Cash at bank and in hand 4426 10561 Bank overdrafts  233 Classified as held for sale 9846 Total cash and cash equivalents 14272 10328 Borrowings 168893 Balance with DMGT group company  73639 Loan notes  185 Net debtcash 154621 83782 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
90 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 1 Accounting policies General information Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC the Company is a public company limited by shares and incorporated in England and Wales United Kingdom UK.
The address of the registered office is 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX UK.
The Group financial statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and equity account the Groups interest in associates and joint ventures.
The parent Company financial statements present information about the entity and not about its Group.
The Group financial statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS adopted for use in the European Union and interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC and therefore comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
The Company has elected to prepare its parent Company financial statements in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 102.
Judgements made by the Directors in the application of those accounting policies that have a significant effect on the financial statements and estimates with a significant risk of material adjustment in the next year are discussed in note 2.
Certain changes to IFRS will be applicable to the Group financial statements in future years.
Set out below are those which are considered to be most relevant to the Group.
Relevant new standards amendments and interpretations issued but effective subsequent to the year end IFRS 9 Financial Instruments  the mandatory effective date of implementation is 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers  the mandatory effective date of implementation is 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases  subject to EU endorsement the mandatory effective date of implementation is 1 January 2019 Amendments to IAS 12 Income Taxes  the mandatory effective date of implementation is 1 January 2017 Amendments to IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows  the mandatory effective date of implementation is 1 January 2017 Other than IFRS 16 the adoption of these standards amendments and interpretations is not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
The
Directors are in the process of evaluating the impact of these standards.
The Group will adopt IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 with effect from 1 October 2018 and IFRS 16 with effect from 1 October 2019.
IFRS 9 Adopting IFRS 9 Financial Instruments will impact hedge accounting and receivables provisioning.
The basis of documentation and effectiveness testing of hedges under the new standard will be linked more closely to the risk management objectives which may generate different levels of ineffectiveness than the current testing under IAS 39.
Receivables provisioning will move from an incurred to an expected loss model.
The Groups largest exposure is trade receivables which had a gross value of 50.9m at 30 September 2017.
No material impact is anticipated for high credit quality balances settled on agreed terms.
However the new model could impact the timing and value of provision recognition on higher risk balances.
The Group has availableforsale financial assets recognised at cost and is evaluating the impact of IFRS 9 on this treatment.
IFRS 15 Management is evaluating the impact of IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers at contract level to confirm the full impact of adopting this standard.
The implementation of IFRS 15 is complex due to the Groups large number of revenue streams.
IFRS 15 could impact the timing of revenue recognition due to enhanced guidance around performance obligations and timing of revenue recognition.
Management favours the modified retrospective transition method.
This method recognises the cumulative effect of initially applying IFRS 15 as an adjustment to the opening balance sheet in the period of initial application and comparative periods would not be adjusted.
Basis of preparation The accounts have been prepared under the historical cost convention except for certain financial instruments which have been measured at fair value.
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these Group financial statements.
Having assessed the principal risks and the other matters discussed in connection with the viability statement the Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing this Annual Report.
Following the Groups decision to explore the strategic options for the Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS these businesses have met the recognition criteria of discontinued operations under IFRS 5 Noncurrent assets held for sale and discontinued operations and are therefore presented as such throughout this report.
In order to comply with this presentation the 2016 Income Statement disclosures have been represented separating continuing and discontinued operations.
Following a review of the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Group has revised 2016 comparatives to ensure consistent and appropriate classification.
This reclassification has no impact on the total comprehensive income for 2016 but increases the change in fair value of cash flow hedges by 4.1m from a loss of 5.2m to a loss of 9.3m with a corresponding adjustment to the transfer of gainslosses on cash flow hedges from fair value reserves to the Income Statement from a transfer of gains of 2.1m to a transfer of losses of 2.0m.
Advertising revenues for 2016 have been restated by 1.3m to include consulting income which was previously reported as part of delegates revenue.
The consolidated accounts incorporate the accounts of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiaries.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains and losses on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
91 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
1 Accounting policies continued The Group uses the acquisition method of accounting to account for business combinations.
The amount recognised as consideration by the Group equates to the fair value of the assets liabilities and equity acquired by the Group plus contingent consideration should there be any such arrangement.
Acquisition related costs are expensed as incurred.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at acquisition.
Non controlling interests are measured initially at their proportionate share of the acquirees identifiable net assets at the date of acquisition.
To the extent the consideration including the assumed contingent consideration provided by the acquirer is greater than the fair value of the assets and liabilities this amount is recognised as goodwill.
Goodwill also incorporates the amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the acquisition date fair value of any previous equity interest in the acquiree over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired.
If this consideration is lower than the fair value of the net assets of the subsidiary acquired the difference is recognised as negative goodwill directly in the Income Statement.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the combination occurs the Group reports provisional amounts for the items for which the accounting is incomplete.
Those provisional amounts are adjusted during the measurement period or additional asset and liabilities are recognised to reflect new information obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the date of the acquisition that if known would have affected the amounts recognised as of that date.
The measurement period is the period from the date of acquisition to the date the Group obtains complete information about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date and is a maximum of one year.
Partial acquisitions  control unaffected Where the Group acquires an additional interest in an entity in which a controlling interest is already held the consideration paid for the additional interest is reflected within movements in equity as a reduction in noncontrolling interests.
No goodwill is recognised.
Step acquisitions  control passes to the Group Where a business combination is achieved in stages at the stage at which control passes to the Group the previously held interest is treated as if it had been disposed of along with the consideration paid for the controlling interest in the subsidiary.
The fair value of the previously held interest then forms one of the components that is used to calculate goodwill along with the consideration and the noncontrolling interest less the fair value of identifiable net assets.
The consideration paid for the earlier stages of a step acquisition before control passes to the Group is treated as an investment in an associate.
Transactions with noncontrolling interests in the net assets of consolidated subsidiaries are identified separately and included in the Groups equity.
Noncontrolling interests consist of the amount of those interests at the date of the original business combination and its share of changes in equity since the date of the combination.
Total comprehensive income is attributed to noncontrolling interests even if this results in the noncontrolling interests having a deficit balance.
A joint venture is a contractual arrangement whereby the Group and other parties undertake an economic activity that is subject to joint control that is when the strategic financial and operating policy decisions relating to the activities require the unanimous consent of the parties sharing control.
An associate is an entity over which the Group has significant influence and that is neither a subsidiary nor an interest in a joint venture.
Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over those policies.
The posttax results of joint ventures and associates are incorporated in the Groups results using the equity method of accounting.
Under the equity method investments in joint ventures and associates are carried in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at cost as adjusted for post acquisition changes in the Groups share of the net assets of the joint venture and associates less any impairment in the value of the investment.
Losses of joint ventures and associates in excess of the Groups interest in that joint venture or associate are not recognised.
Additional losses are provided for and a liability is recognised only to the extent that the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of the joint venture or associate.
Any excess of the cost of acquisition over the Groups share of the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the joint venture or associate recognised at the date of acquisition is recognised as goodwill.
The goodwill is included within the carrying amount of the investment.
Noncurrent assets classified as held for sale Where the carrying value of a noncurrent asset is expected to be principally recovered through its sale the asset is classified as held for sale if it also meets the following the asset is available for sale in its current condition the sale is highly probable and the sale is expected to occur within one year.
Once classified as held for sale the asset is held at the lower of its carrying value and the fair value less cost to sell and is no longer depreciated.
Discontinued operations A discontinued operation is a component of the Groups business the operations and cash flows of which can be clearly distinguished from the rest of the Group and which represents a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographic area of operations or is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resale.
Classification as a discontinued operation occurs at the earlier of disposal or when the operation meets the criteria to be classified as heldforsale.
When an operation is classified as a discontinued operation the comparative Income Statement and other comprehensive income is represented as if the operation had been discontinued from the start of the comparative year.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
92 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 1 Accounting policies continued Foreign currencies Functional and presentation currency The functional and presentation currency of Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC and its UK subsidiaries other than Fantfoot Limited Centre for Investor Education UK Limited and Redquince Limited is sterling.
The functional currency of other subsidiaries associates joint ventures and availableforsale investments is the currency of the primary economic environment in which they operate.
Transactions and balances Transactions in foreign currencies are recorded at the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into sterling at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
Gains and losses arising on foreign currency borrowings and derivative instruments to the extent that they are used to provide a hedge against the Groups equity investments in overseas undertakings are taken to other comprehensive income together with the exchange difference arising on the net investment in those undertakings.
All other exchange differences are taken to the Income Statement.
On consolidation exchange differences arising from the translations of the net investment in foreign entities and borrowings and other currency instruments designated as hedges of such investments are taken to other comprehensive income.
The Group treats specific intercompany loan balances which are not intended to be repaid in the foreseeable future as part of its net investment.
Group companies The Income Statements of overseas operations are translated into sterling at the weighted average exchange rates for the year and their balance sheets are translated into sterling at the exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
All exchange differences arising on consolidation are taken to other comprehensive income.
In the event of the disposal of an operation the related cumulative translation differences are recognised in the Income Statement in the period of disposal.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation of property plant and equipment is provided on a straightline basis over their expected useful lives as follows Longterm leasehold premises over term of lease Shortterm leasehold premises over term of lease Plant and equipment 3  25 years Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the net fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities acquired.
Goodwill is recognised as an asset at cost and subsequently measured at cost less accumulated impairment.
For the purposes of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to those cash generating units that have benefited from the acquisition.
Assets are grouped at the lowest level for which there are separately identifiable cash flows.
The carrying value of goodwill is reviewed for impairment at least annually or where there is an indication that goodwill may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit is less than its carrying amount then the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of the goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit on a pro rata basis.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the Income Statement and may not subsequently be reversed.
On disposal of a subsidiary undertaking the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit and loss on disposal.
Goodwill arising on foreign subsidiary investments held in the Statement of Financial Position are retranslated into sterling at the applicable period end exchange rates.
Any exchange differences arising are taken directly to other comprehensive income as part of the retranslation of the net assets of the subsidiary.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions before the date of transition to IFRS has been retained at the previous UK GAAP amounts having been tested for impairment at that date.
Goodwill written off to reserves under UK GAAP before 1 October 1998 has not been reinstated and is not included in determining any subsequent profit or loss on disposal.
Internally generated intangible assets An internally generated intangible asset arising from the Groups software and systems development is recognised only if all of the following conditions are met An asset is created that can be identified such as software or a website It is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits and The development cost of the asset can be measured reliably.
Internally generated intangible assets are recognised at cost and amortised on a straightline basis over the useful lives from the date the asset becomes usable.
Where no internally generated intangible asset can be recognised development expenditure is charged to the Income Statement in the period in which it is incurred.
Other intangible assets For all other intangible assets the Group initially makes an assessment of their fair value at acquisition.
An intangible asset will be recognised as long as the asset is separable or arises from contractual or other legal rights and its fair value can be measured reliably.
Subsequent to acquisition amortisation is charged so as to write off the costs of other intangible assets over their estimated useful lives using a straightline or reducing balance method.
These intangible assets are reviewed for impairment as described below.
These intangibles are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
Amortisation
Amortisation of intangible assets is provided on a reducing balance basis or straightline basis as appropriate over their expected useful lives as follows Trademarks and brands 5  30 years Customer relationships 1  16 years Databases 1  22 years Licences and software 3  5 years Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
93 12112017 115727 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
1 Accounting policies continued Impairment of nonfinancial assets Assets that have an indefinite useful life  for example goodwill or intangible assets not ready to use  are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell or value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows cash generating units.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill that suffer impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each reporting date.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less provision for impairment.
A provision is made and charged to the Income Statement when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due in accordance to the original terms.
More information on impairment is included in the impairment of financial assets section below.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash shortterm deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less.
For the purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows cash and cash equivalents are as defined above net of outstanding bank overdrafts.
Financial assets The Group classifies its financial assets into the following categories financial assets at fair value through profit or loss loans and receivables and availableforsale financial assets.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the assets were acquired.
Management determines the classification of its assets on initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at every reporting date.
Financial assets in the following categories are classified as current assets if expected to be settled within 12 months otherwise they are classified as non current.
Classification
Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are financial assets held for trading.
A financial asset is classified in this category if acquired principally for the purpose of selling in the short term or if so designated by management.
Derivatives are also categorised as held for trading unless they are designated as hedges.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the Statement of Financial Position.
Availableforsale AFS financial assets AFS financial assets are nonderivatives that are either designated in this category or not classified in any of the other categories.
Recognition and measurement Regular purchases and sales of financial assets are recognised on the date on which the Group commits to purchase or sell the asset.
The Group derecognises financial assets when it ceases to be a party to such arrangements.
All financial assets other than those carried at fair value through profit or loss are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss Financial assets carried at fair value through profit or loss are initially recognised at fair value and transaction costs are expensed in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of the financial assets at fair value through profit or loss category are included in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income in the period in which they arise.
Dividend income from assets categorised as financial assets at fair value through profit or loss is recognised in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income as part of other income when the Groups right to receive payments is established.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Availableforsale AFS financial assets AFS financial assets are subsequently measured at fair value where it can be measured reliably.
AFS equity investments that do not have a quoted market price in an active market and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured are measured at cost less any identified impairment losses.
Offsetting financial instruments Financial assets and liabilities are offset and the net amount reported in the Statement of Financial Position when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts and there is an intention to settle on a net basis or realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Impairment of financial assets The Group assesses at each reporting period whether there is objective evidence that a financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired.
A financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired and impairment losses are incurred only if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that occurred after the initial recognition of the asset a loss event and that loss event or events has an impact on the estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or group of financial assets that can be reliably estimated.
The criteria that the Group uses to determine that there is objective evidence of an impairment loss include significant financial difficulty of the issuer or obligor a breach of contract such as a default or delinquency in interest or principal payments the Group for economic or legal reasons relating to the borrowers financial difficulty granting to the borrower a concession that the lender would not otherwise consider it becomes probable that the borrower will enter bankruptcy or other financial reorganisation the disappearance of an active market for that financial asset because of financial difficulties or Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
94 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 1 Accounting policies continued observable data indicating that there is a measurable decrease in the estimate of future cash flows from a portfolio of financial assets since the initial recognition of those assets although the decrease cannot yet be identified with the individual financial assets in the portfolio including i. ii. defaults on the assets in the portfolio.
The Group first assesses whether objective evidence of impairment exists.
The amount of the loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows excluding future credit losses that have not been incurred discounted at the financial assets original effective interest rate.
The assets carrying amount is reduced and the amount of the loss is recognised in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
If a loan has a variable interest rate the discount rate for measuring any impairment loss is the current effective interest rate determined under the contract.
If the assets carrying amount is reduced the amount of the loss is recognised in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised such as an improvement in the debtors credit rating the reversal of the previously recognised impairment loss is recognised in the profit and loss component of the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Financial liabilities
Financial liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the relevant instrument.
The Group derecognises financial liabilities when it ceases to be a party to such provisions.
Committed borrowings and bank overdrafts Interestbearing loans and overdrafts are recorded at the amounts received net of direct issue costs.
Direct issue costs are amortised over the period of the loans and overdrafts to which they relate.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption are charged to the Income Statement as incurred using the effective interest rate method and are added to the carrying value of the borrowings or overdraft to the extent they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Trade payables and accruals Trade payables and accruals are not interestbearing and are held at amortised cost.
Derivative financial instruments The Group uses various derivative financial instruments to manage its exposure to foreign exchange and interest rate risks including forward foreign currency contracts and interest rate swaps.
The Group does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes.
All derivative instruments are recorded in the Statement of Financial Position at fair value.
Changes in the fair value of derivative instruments which do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised immediately in the Income
Where the derivative instruments do qualify for hedge accounting the following treatments are applied Fair value hedges Changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument are recognised in the Income Statement for the year together with the changes in the fair value of the hedged item due to the hedged risk to the extent the hedge is effective.
When the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting hedge accounting is discontinued.
Cash flow hedges Changes in the fair value of derivative financial instruments that are designated and effective as hedges of future cash flows are recognised directly in other comprehensive income and the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Income
If a hedged firm commitment or forecast transaction results in the recognition of a nonfinancial asset or liability then at the time that the asset or liability is recognised the associated gains and losses on the derivative that had previously been recognised in equity are included in the initial measurement of the asset or liability.
For hedges that do not result in the recognition of an asset or a liability amounts deferred in equity are recognised in the Income Statement in the same period in which the hedged item affects the Income Statement.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated exercised revoked or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
At that time any cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in equity is retained in equity until the forecast transaction occurs.
If
Net investment hedges Exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign operations are recognised directly in other comprehensive income in the translation reserve.
Gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of the hedging instruments are recognised in other comprehensive income to the extent that the hedging relationship is effective.
Any ineffectiveness is recognised immediately in the Income Statement for the period.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
Gains and losses accumulated in the translation reserve are included in the Income Statement on disposal of the foreign operation.
Liabilities in respect of acquisition commitments and deferred consideration Liabilities for acquisition commitments over the remaining minority interests in subsidiaries and deferred consideration are recorded in the Statement of Financial Position at their estimated discounted present value.
These discounts are unwound and charged to the Income Statement as notional interest over the period up to the date of the potential future payment.
Taxation
The tax expense for the period comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the Income Statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
95 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
1 Accounting policies continued Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred taxation is calculated under the provisions of IAS 12 Income Tax and is recognised on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the accounts and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
No provision is made for temporary differences on unremitted earnings of foreign subsidiaries or associates where the Group has control and the reversal of the temporary difference is not foreseeable.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Income Statement except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to Statement of Comprehensive Income and equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in Statement of Comprehensive Income and equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Actual tax liabilities or refunds may differ from those anticipated due to changes in tax legislation differing interpretations of tax legislation and uncertainties surrounding the application of tax legislation.
In situations where uncertainties exist provision is made for contingent tax liabilities and assets when it is more likely than not that there will be a cash impact.
These provisions are made for each uncertainty individually on the basis of management judgement following consideration of the available relevant information.
The measurement basis adopted represents the best predictor of the resolution of the uncertainty which is usually based on the most likely cash outflow.
The
Company reviews the adequacy of these provisions at the end of each reporting period and adjusts them based on changing facts and circumstances.
The Group does not consider detection risk when making its estimates.
Provisions
A provision is recognised in the balance sheet when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
If material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Pensions
Contributions to pension schemes in respect of current and past service ex gratia pensions and cost of living adjustments to existing pensions are based on the advice of independent actuaries.
Defined contribution plans Payments to the defined contribution pension plan are charged to the Income Statement as they fall due.
Defined benefit plans Defined benefit plans define an amount of pension benefit that an employee will receive on retirement usually dependent on one or more factors such as age years of service and compensation.
The liability recognised in the Statement of Financial Position in respect of the defined benefit pension plan is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the reporting period less the fair value of plan assets.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of high quality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension obligation.
The actuarial valuations are obtained at least triennially and are updated at each balance sheet date.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in full in the Statement of Comprehensive Income in the period in which they occur.
Other movements in the net deficit are recognised in the Income Statement including the current service cost and past service cost and the effect of any curtailment or settlements.
The interest cost less the expected return of assets is also charged to the Income Statement within net finance costs.
Sharebased payments The Group makes sharebased payments to certain employees which are equity and cashsettled.
These payments are measured at their estimated fair value at the date of grant calculated using an appropriate option pricing model.
The fair value determined at the grant date is expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period based on the estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
At the end of each period the vesting assumptions are revisited and the charge associated with the fair value of these options updated.
For cashsettled sharebased payments a liability equal to the portion of the services received is recognised at the current fair value as determined at each balance sheet date.
On exercise of equity settled options the Group either issues additional shares leading to an increase in share capital and share premium or reduces the amount of own shares held.
Revenue
Revenue represents income from advertising subscriptions sponsorship and delegate fees net of value added tax.
Subscription revenues are recognised in the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the period of the subscription.
Subscription revenues contain certain items recognised on a cash basis including voting revenues where the amount paid by the customer is determined by a qualitative vote and paid in arrears for services rendered and best efforts revenues where the payments for services rendered are uncertain until received.
Advertising revenues are recognised in the Income Statement on the date of publication where applicable or in the case of an ad hoc project when the deliverable has been sent to the customer.
Advertising revenues represent the fees that customers pay to place an advertisement in one or more of the Groups publications either in print or online to commission ad hoc consulting and thought leadership projects and to purchase survey reports.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
96 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 1 Accounting policies continued Sponsorship and delegate revenues are recognised in the Income Statement over the period the event is run.
Revenues invoiced but relating to future periods are deferred and treated as deferred income in the Statement of Financial
Leased assets Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Operating lease rentals are charged to the Income Statement on a straightline basis as allowed by IAS 17 Leases.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim
Own shares held by Employees Share Ownership Trust and Employee Share Trust Transactions of the groupsponsored trusts are included in the Group financial statements.
In particular the trusts holdings of shares in the Company are debited direct to equity.
The Group provides finance to the trusts to purchase Company shares to meet the obligation to provide shares when employees exercise their options or awards.
Costs of running the trusts are charged to the Income Statement.
Shares held by the trusts are deducted from other reserves.
Earnings per share The earnings per share and diluted earnings per share calculations follow the provisions of IAS 33 Earnings Per Share.
The diluted earnings per share figure is calculated by adjusting for the dilution effect of the exercise of all ordinary share options granted by the Company but excluding the ordinary shares held by the Euromoney Employees Share Ownership Trust and Euromoney Employee Share Trust.
Exceptional items Exceptional items are items of income or expense considered by the Directors either individually or if of a similar type in aggregate as being significant and which require additional disclosure in order to provide an indication of the adjusted trading performance of the Group.
Such items could include but may not be limited to costs associated with business combinations gains and losses on the disposal of businesses and properties significant reorganisation or restructuring costs and impairment of goodwill and acquired intangible assets.
Any item classified as an exceptional item will be large and unusual not attributable to underlying operations and will be subject to specific quantitative and qualitative thresholds set by and approved by the Directors prior to being classified as exceptional.
Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Board and CEO who are responsible for strategic decisions allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments.
2 Key judgemental areas adopted in preparing these nancial statements In determining and applying accounting policies judgement is often required in respect of items where the choice of specific policy accounting estimate or assumption to be followed could materially affect the reported results or net asset position of the Group should it later be determined that a different choice would have been more appropriate.
Management considers the accounting estimates and assumptions discussed below to be its key judgemental areas and accordingly provides an explanation of each below.
Management has discussed its critical accounting estimates and judgements and associated disclosures with the Groups Audit Committee.
The discussion below should be read in conjunction with the Groups disclosure of accounting policies in note 1.
Estimates
Acquisitions
The purchase consideration for the acquisition of a subsidiary or business is allocated over the net fair value of identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired with any excess consideration representing goodwill.
Determining the fair value of assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired requires significant estimates and assumptions.
The Group recognises intangible assets acquired as part of a business at fair value at the date of acquisition.
The determination of these fair values is based upon managements judgement and includes assumptions on the timing and amount of future cash flows generated by the assets and the selection of an appropriate discount rate.
Additionally management must estimate the expected useful lives of intangibles assets and charge amortisation on the assets accordingly.
Acquisition commitments The Group is party to put and call options over the remaining noncontrolling interests in some of its subsidiaries.
IAS 32 Financial Instruments Presentation requires the discounted present value of these acquisition commitments to be recognised as a liability on the Statement of Financial Position with a corresponding decrease in reserves.
Each period end management reassesses the amount expected to be paid and any changes to the initial amount are recognised as a finance income or expense in the Income Statement.
The discounts are unwound as a notional interest charge to the Income Statement.
Key areas of estimation in calculating the discounted present value of these commitments are the expected future cash flows and earnings of the business the period remaining until the option is exercised and the discount rate.
At 30 September 2017 the discounted present value of these acquisition commitments was 13.1m 2016 11.8m.
A one percentage point increase or decrease in growth rate in estimating the expected profits results in the acquisition commitment at 30 September 2017 increasing or decreasing by 0.2m with the corresponding change to the value charged or credited to the Income Statement in future periods.
The potential undiscounted amount of all future payments that the Group could be required to make under the acquisition contingent consideration arrangements is disclosed in note 25.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
97 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
2 Key judgemental areas adopted in preparing these nancial statements continued Goodwill and other intangibles impairment Goodwill is impaired where the carrying value of goodwill is higher than the net present value of future cash flows of those cash generating units to which it relates.
Key areas of estimation in calculating the net present value are the forecast cash flows the longterm growth rate of the applicable businesses and the discount rate applied to those cash flows.
The sensitivity analysis is disclosed in note 12.
Goodwill held on the Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2017 was 400.0m 2016
Investments are impaired where the carrying value of an investment is higher than the net present value of the future cash flows.
Key areas of estimation in calculating the net present value are the forecast cash flows the longterm growth rate of the applicable businesses and the discount rate applied to those cash flows.
Investments held on the Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2017 was 30.4m 2016 35.9m of which the most significant is Dealogic of 26.2m 2016 29.0m.
The investments were tested for impairment and as a result an impairment charge of 2.3m was recognised for the Estimize availableforsale investment for the year ended 30 September 2017 note 14.
The methodology applied to Dealogics value in use calculation was based on posttax cash flows using Dealogics board approved budget for 2017 to 2021 a posttax discount rate of 9% and a longterm nominal growth rate of 2%.
Significant headroom was identified as a result of this calculation and is not sensitive to reasonably possible changes in key assumptions.
Taxation
The Groups tax expense on profit is the sum of the total current and deferred tax expense.
The calculation of the total tax charge necessarily involves a degree of estimation and judgement in respect of certain items whose tax treatment cannot be finally determined until resolution has been reached with the relevant tax authority or as appropriate through a formal legal process.
The final resolution of some of these items may give rise to material profit and loss andor cash flow variances.
The Group is a multinational with tax affairs in many geographical locations.
This inherently leads to complexity in the Groups tax structure and makes the degree of estimation and judgement challenging.
The resolution of issues is not always within the control of the Group and it is often dependent on the efficiency of the legislative processes in the relevant taxing jurisdictions in which the Group operates.
Issues can and often do take many years to resolve.
Payments in respect of tax liabilities for an accounting period include payments on account and depend on the final resolution of open items.
As a result there can be substantial differences between the tax expense in the Income Statement and tax payments.
The Group has significant open items in several tax jurisdictions and as a result the amounts recognised in the Group financial statements in respect of these items are derived from the Groups best estimation and judgement.
However the inherent uncertainty regarding the outcome of these items means eventual resolution could differ from the accounting estimates and therefore affect the Groups results and cash flows.
The Group considers each uncertain tax matter on the technical merits of the case in law taking into account all relevant evidence including the known attitude of tax authorities in making an assessment of the likelihood a matter will crystallise.
The uncertain tax provisions are calculated by determining the single most likely cash flow for each issue rather than by applying a probability threshold and this methodology has been applied consistently yearonyear.
Direct tax There are two main areas of direct tax risk within the Group as follows Permanent establishment risk the Group operates in multiple jurisdictions and has internationally mobile employees.
There is a risk that operating activities could inadvertently create a taxable presence in countries where the Group does not have an entity.
The Group proactively manages this risk and has a transfer pricing policy in place for intercompany transactions.
It held an uncertain tax provision at 30 September 2017 of 1.9m 2016 2.6m in respect of this risk.
Challenges by tax authorities where arrangements that have been adopted on the basis of professional advice are challenged by tax authorities and there is an expectation that there is more likely than not to be a cash outflow this risk is provided for.
The Group held a provision in respect of this risk at 30 September 2017 of 8.3m 2016 9.9m.
The Group had been challenged on whether certain business disposals should give rise to capital gains a number of internal financing arrangements between different jurisdictions that give rise to asymmetrical tax outcomes and whether tax deductions taken for costs arising within the Groups treasury function are permissible.
The maximum potential additional exposure for the Group in relation to challenges by tax authorities not provided for is approximately 28m if all cases were to be settled at the maximum potential liability.
These additional exposures include challenges by the Canadian Revenue Agency CRA on a foreign currency trade in 2009 which has a maximum exposure of 20m and the UKs HMRC on a shareforshare exchange related to the Groups investment in Dealogic which has a maximum exposure of 11m of which 2.8m has been provided.
On 23 October 2017 the CRA issued a Notice of Reassessment to BCA Research Inc BCA based on the CRA view that the loss sustained by BCA on an intragroup derivative transaction cannot be deducted in computing income.
Management is confident that BCA will be able to overturn these reassessments through the normal litigation process which has already begun.
Nonetheless BCA is obligated either to pay onehalf of the consequential tax owing amounting to 3.5m or to provide security for payment satisfactory to the CRA.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
98 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 2 Key judgemental areas adopted in preparing these nancial statements continued Indirect tax In 2016 an incremental provision of 7.9m in relation to open indirect tax items including interest was recognised as an exceptional item increasing the Groups provision for this exposure including interest to 9.5m.
This represented the maximum estimated liability in relation to a potential overseas sales tax exposure based on an adverse tax ruling.
In 2017 3.9m of this provision was released to exceptional items note 5 following settlement of 4.0m leaving a provision of 1.6m to cover open audit periods.
In addition the Group reviews and assesses other indirect tax exposures across the Group and a 4.4m provision is the Groups best estimate of the most probable outflow relating to these exposures.
Retirement benefit schemes The surplus or deficit in the defined benefit pension scheme that is recognised through the Statement of Comprehensive Income is subject to a number of assumptions and uncertainties.
The calculated liabilities of the scheme are based on assumptions regarding salary increases inflation rates discount rates the longterm expected return on the schemes assets and member longevity.
Details of the assumptions and related sensitivities used are shown in note 27.
Such assumptions are based on actuarial advice and are benchmarked against similar pension schemes.
The discount rate for scheme liabilities and the fair value of scheme assets reflects yields at the yearend date on highquality corporate bonds and are based on a cash flowbased yield curve calculating a single equivalent discount rate reflecting the average duration of the schemes liabilities rounded to the nearest 0.05% p.
At 30 September 2016 this methodology incorporated bonds given an AA rating from at least one of the main four rating agencies Standard and Poors Moodys Fitch and DBRS.
At 30 September 2017 the methodology reverted back to incorporated bonds given an AA rating from at least two of the four main rating agencies as used in years prior to 30 September 2016.
The impact of this change in accounting estimate is to increase the defined benefit obligation and net pension obligation reported on the Statement of Financial Position as at 30 September 2017 by 1.8m.
Judgements
Discontinued operations and disposal groups classified as held for sale Following the Groups decision to explore the strategic options for the Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS these businesses have met the recognition criteria of a discontinued operation under IFRS 5 Noncurrent assets held for sale and discontinued operations and are therefore presented as such throughout this report.
In order to comply with this presentation the 2016 Income Statement disclosures have been represented separating continuing and discontinued operations note 11.
Presentation of adjusted performance The Directors believe that the adjusted profit and earnings per share measures provide additional useful information for shareholders on evaluating the performance of the business.
These measures are consistent with how business performance is measured internally and are the basis on which executive management is incentivised.
The adjusted profit before tax measure is not a recognised profit measure under IFRS and may not be directly comparable with adjusted profit measures used by other companies.
Adjusted figures are presented before the impact of amortisation of acquired intangible assets comprising trademarks and brands databases and customer relationships exceptional items share of associates and joint ventures acquired intangibles amortisation exceptional items and tax and net movements in deferred consideration and acquisition commitments.
In respect of earnings adjusted amounts reflect a tax rate that includes the current tax effect of the goodwill and intangible assets.
Many of the Groups acquisitions particularly in the US give rise to significant tax savings as the amortisation of goodwill and intangible assets on acquisition is deductible for tax purposes.
The Group considers that the resulting adjusted effective tax rate is therefore more representative of its tax payable position.
In 2017 the Group has consistently applied this definition of adjusted measures as it has reported on its financial performance in the past and it is the Groups intention to continue to consistently apply this definition in the future. adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
Centre for Investor Education Limited CIE In April 2013 the Group acquired a 75% equity interest in CIE for a final consideration of 10.2m with a commitment to acquire the remaining 25% by early 2016.
As part of the local statutory audit of CIE for the year to September 30 2014 a number of governance and financial irregularities were identified which remain subject to legal resolution.
As a result of these irregularities the former ownermanagers of CIE were replaced and a number of adjustments were made to the Groups investment in CIE.
In October 2015 the Group filed a public statement of claim against the previous owners for breaches of warranties and other damages.
The Group in preparation of the financial statements at 30 September 2016 examined all evidence including its own management investigation and Deloitte and Touche LLP Australias findings and has made the judgement that no further amounts are payable under the share purchase agreement for CIE.
There has been no change to this judgement in 2017 and legal proceedings are continuing.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
99 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
3 Segmental analysis Segmental information is presented in respect of the Groups segments and reflects the Groups management and internal reporting structure.
The Group is organised into four segments Asset management Pricing data and market intelligence Banking and finance and Commodity events.
Asset management and pricing data and market intelligence consist primarily of subscription revenue.
Banking and finance consists mainly of both sponsorship income and delegates revenue.
Commodity events consists primarily of delegates revenue. breakdown of the Groups revenue by type is set out below.
During the year the Group sold HedgeFund Intelligence II Intelligence Euromoney Indices and LatinFinance note 15.
As a result segment information for these businesses has been reclassified as sold businesses and the comparative split of segmental revenues revenue by type operating profits acquired intangible amortisation exceptional items and depreciation and amortisation has been restated.
In addition advertising revenues for 2016 have been restated by 1.3m to include consulting income which was previously reported as part of delegates revenue.
The Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS has been classified as discontinued operations note 11 and therefore presented as such throughout this report.
The 2016 Income Statement disclosures have been represented separating continuing and discontinued operations.
These businesses are reported within the Pricing data and market intelligence segment.
Analysis of the Groups three main geographical areas is also set out to provide additional information on the trading performance of the businesses.
Intersegment sales are charged at prevailing market rates and shown in the eliminations columns.
Subscriptions and content
Sponsorship
Delegates
Other
Total revenue Revenue by segment and type Asset management 138205 14212 16109 3210 69 171805 Pricing data and market intelligence 113905 16693 14442 18996 1466 165502 Banking and finance 8852 9825 28061 21665 1361 69764 Commodity events 16 4 6025 20804 585 27434 260978 40734 64637 64675 3481 434505 Soldclosed businesses     4716 4716 Foreign exchange losses on forward contracts     10808 10808 Total revenue 260978 40734 64637 64675 2611 428413 Continuing operations 219520 40734 64637 64675 2643 386923 Discontinued operations 41458    32 41490 Total revenue 260978 40734 64637 64675 2611 428413
Advertising
Sponsorship
Delegates
Other
Total revenue Revenue by segment and type Asset management 125562 14072 14024 2988 99 156745 Pricing data and market intelligence 87165 16417 11127 15996 1426 132131 Banking and finance 8433 8375 27352 22410 1482 68052 Commodity events 45 10 5739 22902 565 29261 221205 38874 58242 64296 3572 386189 Soldclosed businesses     22141 22141 Foreign exchange losses on forward contracts     5218 5218 Total revenue 221205 38874 58242 64296 20495 403112 Continuing operations 184250 38874 58242 64296 20400 366062 Discontinued operations 36955    95 37050 Total revenue 221205 38874 58242 64296 20495 403112 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
100 12112017 115728 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 3 Segmental analysis continued United Kingdom North America Rest of World Eliminations Total Revenue by segment and source Asset management 2937 3095 166126 151883 3099 2531 357 764 171805 156745 Pricing data and market intelligence 104413 92529 32428 18722 33164 26286 4503 5406 165502 132131 Banking and finance 41072 41200 25938 22387 3360 5434 606 969 69764 68052 Commodity events 18426 20206   9008 9055   27434 29261 166848 157030 224492 192992 48631 43306 5466 7139 434505 386189 Soldclosed businesses 2429 11685 2309 10967   22 511 4716 22141 Foreign exchange losses on forward contracts 10808 5218       10808 5218 Total revenue 158469 163497 226801 203959 48631 43306 5488 7650 428413 403112 Continuing operations 154031 159038 218358 196405 20022 18269 5488 7650 386923 366062 Discontinued operations 4438 4459 8443 7554 28609 25037   41490 37050 Total revenue 158469 163497 226801 203959 48631 43306 5488 7650 428413 403112 Total revenue by destination 44620 50893 199319 183587 184474 168632   428413 403112 United Kingdom North America Rest of World Total Adjusted operating profit by segment and source Asset management 490 506 62859 54014 935 672 64284 55192 Pricing data and market intelligence 29842 29817 14432 8713 6980 5310 51254 43840 Banking and finance 5327 3003 8482 7224 30 313 13839 10540 Commodity events 6043 5466   874 2551 6917 8017 Soldclosed businesses 80 1114 85 598   5 1712 Unallocated corporate costs 25140 12386 2386 4654 1624 811 29150 17851 Operating profit 16642 27520 83302 65895 7195 8035 107139 101450 Discontinued operations 762 197 4160 3605 8488 6684 11886 10092 Continuing operations 17404 27717 79142 62290 1293 1351 95253 91358 Acquired intangible amortisation note 12 7338 6886 13126 9882 102 49 20566 16817 Exceptional items note 5 7164 31297 21414 4409 2675 1558 31253 37264 Operating profitloss 2902 10466 44602 47999 4070 256 43434 37277 Share of results in associates and joint ventures note 14 1890 1823 Finance income note 7 3290 391 Finance expense note 7 4146 2401 Profit before tax 40688 33444 Tax expense on profit note 8 3390 11118 Profit for the year from continuing operations 37298 22326 Operating profit including discontinued operations before acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory results to the adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
Acquired intangible amortisation represents amortisation of acquisitionrelated nongoodwill assets such as trademarks and brands customer relationships and databases note 12.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
101 12112017 115729 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
3 Segmental analysis continued Acquired intangible amortisation Exceptional items Depreciation and amortisation Other segmental information by segment Asset management 10725 9426 29992 3292 1806 1458 Pricing data and market intelligence 6661 3946 1582 8987 292 16 Banking and finance 235 209  280 Commodity events 2665 2186 89 13056 139 65 Soldclosed businesses  763 2930 659 1 19 Unallocated corporate costs 280 287 2520 10990 4444 4615 Continuing operations 20566 16817 31253 37264 6682 6173 Discontinued operations 249 84 2437  485 308 Total 20815 16733 33690 37264 7167 6481 United Kingdom North America Rest of World Total Noncurrent assets excluding derivative financial instruments deferred consideration and deferred tax assets by location Goodwill 103715 99751 289079 288680 7177 7674 399971 396105 Other intangible assets 61024 66519 132416 86972 551 1543 193991 155034 Property plant and equipment 5913 6894 10724 2785 598 793 17235 10472 Investments 30366 35860     30366 35860 Noncurrent assets 201018 209024 432219 378437 8326 10010 641563 597471 Additions to property plant and equipment 337 993 9834 2275 757 494 10928 3762 The Group has taken advantage of paragraph 23 of IFRS 8 Operating Segments and does not provide segmental analysis of net assets as this information is not used by the Directors in operational decision making or monitoring of business performance.
4 Operating prot
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Revenue 386923 41490 428413 366062 37050 403112 Cost of sales 96900 7678 104578 99430 8384 107814 Gross profit 290023 33812 323835 266632 28666 295298 Distribution costs 2261 51 2312 2720 49 2769 Administrative expenses 244328 24561 268889 226635 18441 245076 Operating profit 43434 9200 52634 37277 10176 47453 Administrative expenses include items separately disclosed in exceptional items from continuing operations of 31.3m 2016 37.3m and discontinued operations of 2.4m 2016 nil note 5.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
102 12112017 115729 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 4 Operating prot continued
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Profit is stated after chargingcrediting Staff costs note 6 163227 16974 180201 150922 13892 164814 Intangible amortisation Acquired intangible amortisation 20566 249 20815 16817 84 16733 Licences and software 3709 256 3965 3525 150 3675 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 2973 229 3202 2648 158 2806 Property operating lease rentals 9682 773 10455 9315 796 10111 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 16 1 15 1 5 4 Exceptional items note 5 Profit on disposal of businessesjoint ventures 2931  2931 7094  7094 Impairment charges 29649  29649 28750  28750 Releaseprovision for overseas sales tax 3868  3868 7851  7851 Recognition of deficit on defined benefit scheme   1249  1249 Restructuring and other exceptional costs 8403 2437 10840 6508  6508 Foreign exchange lossgain 69 324 393 1174 747 1921 Audit and nonaudit services relate to Group audit Fees payable for the audit of the Groups annual accounts 726 714 Fees payable for other services to the Group Audit of subsidiaries pursuant to local legislation 305 334 1031 1048 Assurance services Audit related assurance services 117 128 Nonaudit services Taxation compliance services 6 33 Other taxation advisory services  67 Other assurance services 195 Other services Total Group auditors remuneration 1393 1368 5 Exceptional items Exceptional items are items of income or expense considered by the Directors either individually or if of a similar type in aggregate as being significant and which require additional disclosure in order to provide an indication of the underlying trading performance of the Group.
Profit on disposal of businessesjoint ventures 2931 7094 Impairment charges 29649 28750 Releaseprovision for overseas sales tax 3868 7851 Recognition of deficit on defined benefit scheme  1249 Restructuring and other exceptional costs 8403 6508 Continuing operations 31253 37264 Discontinued operations 2437 Total 33690 37264 For the year ended 30 September 2017 the Group recognised a continuing operations exceptional charge of 31.3m.
The Group sold HedgeFund Intelligence loss 4k II Intelligence profit 2.2m Euromoney Indices loss 1.8m and LatinFinance profit 3.4m resulting in a net profit of 3.8m note 15.
The disposal of the joint ventures Institutional Investor Zanbato Limited and EIIZ Discovery LLC resulted in a loss of 0.9m note 14.
A goodwill impairment charge of 27.4m relates to Ned Davis Research NDR note 12.
The impairment of NDR stems from a disappointing financial performance of the business in the face of tough market conditions and management changes in the first half of 2017.
An availableforsale investment impairment of 2.3m relates to Estimize Inc note 14.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
103 12112017 115729 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
5 Exceptional items continued An element of the provision for overseas sales tax was released resulting in a credit of 3.9m following settlement of the sales tax exposure including interest.
Given that the provision was classified as exceptional in 2016 the release of the surplus provision has been consistently treated as exceptional in 2017.
Restructuring and other exceptional costs consist of professional fees associated with the placement element of the share buyback transaction with Daily Mail and General Trust plc DMGT professional fees from the legal dispute with the previous owners of Centre for Investor Education CIE incremental costs relating to the relocation of the New York office and the acquisitionrelated costs of RISI note 15.
These costs for RISI were treated as exceptional due to the significance of the acquisition.
Acquisition costs for smaller acquisitions have not been treated as exceptional.
No severance costs have been treated as exceptional items in 2017.
The Groups tax charge includes a related tax credit on the continuing operations exceptional items of 10.1m note 8.
The discontinued operations have incurred exceptional costs to engage with advisors to assist with the strategic review of the Global Markets Intelligence Division.
These exceptional costs of 2.4m have been disclosed separately note 11.
The Groups tax charge includes a related tax charge on the discontinued operations exceptional items of 1.1m note 8.
For the year ended 30 September 2016 the Group recognised a continuing operations exceptional charge of 37.3m.
The Group sold 100% of its equity shareholding of Gulf Publishing and Petroleum Economist which gave rise to a profit on disposal of 7.1m.
A goodwill impairment charge related to Mining Indaba 12.9m HFI 5.9m and Total Derivatives 8.2m.
An intangibles impairment charge of 1.7m related to Euromoney Indices.
The Group acquired a further 17% of the equity share capital of World Bulk Wine increasing the Groups equity shareholding to 57%.
The transfer from associate to a subsidiary resulted in an impairment of associate of 0.1m.
The Group recognised a provision for overseas sales tax of 7.9m following an adverse tax ruling in June 2016.
The Group recognised its share of the deficit in the Harmsworth Pension Scheme HPS a defined benefit scheme of 1.2m.
Restructuring and other exceptional costs mostly comprised costs incurred as a result of the strategic review undertaken during the year and professional fees from the CIE legal dispute.
The Groups tax charge includes a related tax credit on the continuing operations exceptional items of 5.3m note 8.
6 Staff costs i Number of staff including Directors and temporary staff
Monthly average By business segment Asset management 540 631 Pricing data and market intelligence 539 413 Banking and finance 210 293 Commodity events 76 87 Central 334 349 Continuing operations 1699 1773 Discontinued operations 488 489 Total 2187 2262
Monthly average By geographical location United Kingdom 800 867 North America 671 710 Rest of World 228 196 Continuing operations 1699 1773 Discontinued operations 488 489 Total 2187 2262 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
104 12112017 115729 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 6 Staff costs continued ii Staff costs including Directors and temporary staff
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Wages and salaries 148528 15314 163842 136380 12489 148869 Social security costs 10609 1344 11953 10280 1144 11424 Other pension costs note 27 3105 316 3421 3064 259 3323 Longterm incentive expense note 24 985  985 1198  1198 163227 16974 180201 150922 13892 164814 Details of Directors remuneration have been disclosed in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 58 to 73.
7 Finance income and expense
Finance income Interest on cash deposit with DMGT group company 137 391 Interest receivable from shortterm investments 6 Movements in acquisition commitments note 25 2970 Movements in deferred consideration note 25 177 3290 391 Finance expense Interest payable on committed borrowings with DMGT group company 152 1346 Interest payable on borrowings 3656 Net interest expense on defined benefit liability note 27 202 66 Movements in acquisition commitments note 25  601 Interest on tax 136 388 4146 2401 Continuing operations net finance costs 856 2010 Discontinued operations net finance income 33 302 Total net finance costs 823 1708
Reconciliation of net finance costs in Income Statement to adjusted net finance costs Continuing operations net finance costs in Income Statement 856 2010 Add back Movements in acquisition commitments 2970 601 Movements in deferred consideration 177 3147 601 Continuing operations adjusted net finance costs 4003 1409 Discontinued operations adjusted net finance income 33 302 Total adjusted net finance costs 3970 1107 The reconciliation of net finance costs in the Income Statement has been provided since the Directors consider it necessary in order to provide an indication of the adjusted net finance costs page 30.
Charges and credits relating to the movements in acquisition commitments and deferred consideration reflect future payments and receipts expected on historical transactions that do not directly relate to the current year results.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
105 12112017 115729 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
8 Tax expense on prot
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Current tax expense UK corporation tax expense 478 44 522 2350  2350 Foreign tax expense 13899 2193 16092 19022 1660 20682 Adjustments in respect of prior years 2193 105 2088 150 136 14 12184 2342 14526 21222 1796 23018 Deferred tax expense Current year 8543 1003 7540 11071 5 11076 Adjustments in respect of prior years 251 1 252 967  967 8794 1002 7792 10104 5 10109 Tax expense in Income Statement 3390 3344 6734 11118 1791 12909 Effective tax rate 8% 36% 13% 33% 17% 29% The adjusted effective tax rate for the year is set out below
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Reconciliation of tax expense in Income Statement to adjusted tax expense Total tax expense in Income Statement 3390 3344 6734 11118 1791 12909 Add back Tax on acquired intangible amortisation 5327 44 5371 4386 11 4397 Tax on exceptional items 10088 1065 9023 5267  5267 15415 1021 14394 9653 11 9664 Tax on goodwill and intangible amortisation 4611  4611 4210  4210 Share of tax on profits of associates and joint ventures 988  988 656  656 Adjustments in respect of prior years 2444 104 2340 817 136 953 14236 1125 13111 5282 125 5157 Adjusted tax expense 17626 2219 19845 16400 1666 18066 Adjusted profit before tax 106462 102529 Adjusted effective tax rate 19% 18% The Group presents the above adjusted effective tax rate to help users of this report better understand its tax charge.
In arriving at this rate the Group removes the tax effect of adjusting items that reconcile statutory to adjusted profit.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory results to the adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
However the current tax effect of goodwill and intangible items is not removed.
The current tax benefit of tax deductible goodwill and intangible items is recognised in the adjusted effective tax rate as the Group considers that this more accurately reflects its expected cash tax payable position as the deferred tax effect on the goodwill and intangible items is not expected to crystallise.
It would only crystallise in the event of a disposal and that is not expected.
Adjustments in respect of prior years are excluded on the basis that the adjusted tax expense should reflect the tax rate of the Group for the current year after removing exceptional items.
Share of tax on profits of associates and joint ventures is calculated on the adjusted profits of associates and joint ventures and excludes tax on exceptional items consistent with the Groups historical approach and policy.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
106 12112017 115730 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 8 Tax expense on prot continued The actual tax expense for the year is different from the UK blended rate of 19.5% of profit before tax for the reasons set out in the following reconciliation
Discontinued operations
Continuing operations
Total
Profit before tax 40688 9233 49921 33443 10479 43922 Tax at 19.5% 2016 20% 7935 1800 9735 6688 2096 8784 Factors affecting tax charge Different tax rates of subsidiaries operating in overseas jurisdictions 2814 972 3786 4827 441 4386 Share of tax on associates and joint ventures 369  369 365  365 Nontaxable income 1588  1588 400  400 Goodwill and intangibles 152  152 2591  2591 Disallowable expenditure 1381 468 1849 1964  1964 Other items deductible for tax purposes 5100  5100 5340  5340 Tax impact of consortium relief 129  129 544  544 Impact of change in rate   150  150 Adjustments in respect of prior years 2444 104 2340 817 136 953 Total tax expense for the year 3390 3344 6734 11118 1791 12909 The nontaxable income of 1.6m 2016 0.4m arises from the disposal of shares in a subsidiary.
The other items deductible for tax purposes of 5.1m 2016 5.3m arise as a result of financing arrangements that result in asymmetrical tax treatment in the territories involved primarily from debt financing provided to US affiliates.
These items are expected to recur in the short to medium term.
Goodwill and intangibles for the year ended 30 September 2017 are 0.2m.
The 2016 goodwill and intangibles of 2.6m arose as a result of nondeductible goodwill impairment for HFI and Total Derivatives.
There is no impact on 2017 as the goodwill for NDR is deductible.
Adjustments in respect of prior years of 2.3m 2016 1.0m reflect settlement of open items with tax authorities in 2017 and several small items across numerous jurisdictions that relate to changes in estimates.
In addition to the amount charged to the Income Statement the following amounts relating to tax have been directly recognised in other comprehensive income and equity Other comprehensive income Equity Deferred tax note 22 1901 2664 225 225 9 Dividends Amounts recognisable as distributable to equity holders in the year Final dividend for the year ended 30 September 2016 of 16.40p 2015 16.40p 21043 21033 Interim dividend for year ended 30 September 2017 of 8.80p 2016 7.00p 9600 8981 30643 30014 Employee share trusts dividend 443 422 30200 29592 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 30 September 23784 21043 Employee share trusts dividend 384 289 23400 20754 The proposed final dividend of 21.80p 2016 16.40p is subject to approval at the AGM on 1 February 2018 and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements in accordance with IAS 10 Events after the Reporting Period.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
107 12112017 115730 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
10 Earnings per share
Profit for the year from continuing operations 37298 22326 Noncontrolling interest 469 269 Earnings from continuing operations 36829 22057 Adjustments 39619 53409 Adjusted earnings from continuing operations 76448 75466 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 5889 8687 Adjustments note 11 3811 41 Adjusted earnings from discontinued operations 9700 8728 Total adjusted earnings 86148 84194
Number
Weighted average number of shares 114252 128280 Shares held by the employee share trusts 1760 1807 Weighted average number of shares 112492 126473 Effect of dilutive share options 213 111 Diluted weighted average number of shares 112705 126584 Pence Pence Earnings per share from continuing operations Diluted 32.68 17.42 Earnings per share from discontinued operations Basic 5.24 6.87 Diluted 5.23 6.87 Total earnings per share Diluted 37.91 24.29 Total adjusted earnings per share Diluted 76.44 66.51 The adjusted earnings per share figures have been disclosed since the Directors consider it necessary in order to give an indication of the adjusted trading performance reflecting the performance both of the Groups continuing and discontinued operations for the year ended 30 September 2017.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory results to the adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
11 Discontinued operations and disposal groups classied as held for sale Following the strategic review a number of businesses met the IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations criteria to be classified as held for sale at 30 September 2017.
These businesses are CEIC and EMIS Adhesion Group
Adhesion World Bulk Wine Exhibition S.
World Bulk Wine and II Journals.
The assets and liabilities of these businesses have been disclosed separately on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
The assets and liabilities held for sale are recorded at the lower of their carrying value and fair value less costs to sell.
No impairment of these net assets has been identified at 30 September 2017.
Following the announcement on 7 September 2017 that the Group was to explore strategic options for its Global Markets Intelligence Division CEIC and EMIS after unsolicited interest from potential buyers the Group has engaged with advisors to assess its options.
CEIC and EMIS meet the IFRS 5 criteria to be treated as discontinued operations due to their size and the fact that the businesses constitute a major line of the Groups business.
CEIC and EMIS are therefore presented as discontinued operations throughout this report and the 2016 Income Statement disclosures have been represented separating continuing and discontinued operations.
The other businesses classified as held for sale Adhesion World Bulk Wine and II Journals do not meet the IFRS 5 criteria to be treated as discontinued operations.
On 30 October 2017 the Group disposed of Adhesion and its 74% stake in World Bulk Wine to Comexposium Holding SAS for a cash consideration of 13.6m 12.0m.
The disposal has been disclosed as an event after the balance sheet date note 30.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
108 12112017 115730 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 11 Discontinued operations and disposal groups classied as held for sale continued The results of the discontinued operations are as follows Total revenue 41490 37050 Operating profit before acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items 11886 10092 Acquired intangible amortisation 249 84 Exceptional items 2437 Operating profit 9200 10176 Finance income 107 303 Finance expense 74 1 Net finance income 33 302 Profit before tax 9233 10478 Tax expense on profit 3344 1791 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 5889 8687 Reconciliation of profit for the year from discontinued operations in Income Statement to adjusted discontinued operations Profit for the year from discontinued operations 5889 8687 Add back Acquired intangible amortisation 249 84 Exceptional items 2437 Tax expense on acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items 1125 125 3811 41 Adjusted discontinued operations profit for the year 9700 8728 The impact of the discontinued operations on the cash flows is as follows Operating cash flows 10935 16907 Investing cash flows 158 203 Financing cash flows 161 216 Total cash flows 10616 16488 The main classes of assets and liabilities comprising the businesses classified as held for sale are set out in the table below.
These assets and liabilities are recorded at the lower of their carrying value and fair values less costs to sell.
CEIC and
Adhesion
World Bulk
II Journals
Goodwill 26380  463  26843 Acquired intangible assets 2081  730  2811 Licences and software 557  557 Property plant and equipment 484 30 6 520 Trade and other receivables 5286 2487 1097 271 9141 Current income tax assets 741 212  953 Cash and cash equivalents 9729 15 102  9846 Total assets of businesses held for sale 45258 2744 2398 271 50671 Trade and other payables 736 1520 73  2329 Current income tax liabilities 1104  88  1192 Accruals 7545  13 115 7673 Deferred income 12202 2040 1025 1912 17179 Deferred tax liabilities 1439 4 182  1625 Total liabilities of businesses held for sale 23026 3564 1381 2027 29998 Net assetsliabilities 22232 820 1017 1756 20673 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
109 12112017 115730 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
12 Goodwill and other intangibles assets Acquired intangible assets
Customer relationships
Total acquired intangible assets Licences and software
Goodwill
Total
Costcarrying amount At 1 October 2016 193879 116759 14773 325411 17715 980 464313 808419 Additions  474 1513  1987 Disposals  542  542 Balance at acquisition of company 26510 42161 1408 70079 1267 313 68992 140651 Transfer  726 726 Exchange differences 5460 4864 359 10683 372 56 13456 24567 Classified as held for sale 4656 3638 2121 10415 3308  52634 66357 At 30 September 2017 210273 150418 13701 374392 15960 2024 467215 859591 Amortisation and impairment At 1 October 2016 90934 75185 11030 177149 11923  68208 257280 Amortisation charge Continuing operations 9545 10294 727 20566 3709  24275 Discontinued operations 249  249 256  505 Impairment  27360 27360 Disposals  542  542 Exchange differences 2323 1726 271 4320 250  2533 7103 Classified as held for sale 2441 3279 1884 7604 2751  25791 36146 At 30 September 2017 95964 80474 9602 186040 12345  67244 265629 Net book valuecarrying amount at 30 September 2017 114309 69944 4099 188352 3615 2024 399971 593962 Acquired intangible assets
Customer relationships
Total acquired intangible assets Licences and software
Goodwill
Total
Costcarrying amount At 1 October 2015 171861 102777 12616 287254 15165  429272 731691 Additions 3834 6874 886 11594 1445 957 8919 22915 Disposals  69  69 Balance at disposal of company  33  7217 7250 Exchange differences 19387 10477 1271 31135 1207 23 45155 77520 Classified as held for sale 1203 3369  4572  11816 16388 At 30 September 2016 193879 116759 14773 325411 17715 980 464313 808419 Amortisation and impairment At 1 October 2015 73510 63147 8769 145426 7607  47279 200312 Amortisation charge Continuing operations 8040 7764 1013 16817 3525  20342 Discontinued operations 84  84 150  66 Impairment 1022 630  1652  26987 28639 Disposals  62  62 Balance at disposal of company  33  1935 1968 Exchange differences 9649 6700 1248 17597 736  3673 22006 Classified as held for sale 1203 3056  4259  7796 12055 At 30 September 2016 90934 75185 11030 177149 11923  68208 257280 Net book valuecarrying amount at 30 September 2016 102945 41574 3743 148262 5792 980 396105 551139 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
110 12112017 115730 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 12 Goodwill and other intangibles assets continued The individually material acquired intangible assets by CGU are as follows 2017 Trademarks and brands
Total acquired intangible assets CGU 000 years 000 years 000 years BCA 40388 19.0 3229 5.0  43617 RISI 21714 14.5 37047 19.5 1148 3.5 59909 62102 40276 1148 103526 2016 Trademarks and brands
Total acquired intangible assets CGU 000 years 000 years 000 years BCA 45963 20.0 4655 6.0  50618 1 The remaining useful economic life.
Intangible assets other than goodwill have a finite life and are amortised over their expected useful lives at the rates set out in the accounting policies in note 1 of this report.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the cash generating units CGU that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
During the year the goodwill in respect of each of the businesses was tested for impairment in accordance with IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
The methodology applied to most CGUs value in use calculations reflecting past experience and external sources of information included budgets by business based on pretax cash flows with a CAGR of 3% to 17% for the next three years derived from approved 2017 budgets.
Management believes these budgets to be reasonably achievable pretax discount rates between 12% and 17% derived from the Companys benchmarked weighted average cost of capital WACC of 10% adjusted for risks specific to the nature of CGUs and risks included within the cash flows themselves and longterm nominal growth rate of between 1% and 3%.
Following the impairment review the impairment losses recognised in exceptional items note 5 in respect of goodwill and intangibles are as follows CGU Reportable segment
Intangibles
Recoverable amount
NDR Asset management 27360  46114 14.2% CGU Reportable segment
Intangibles
Recoverable amount
Mining Indaba Commodity events 12941  17877 15.4% HedgeFund Intelligence Asset management 5866  4020 12.0% Total Derivatives Pricing data and market intelligence 8180  608 12.0% Euromoney Indices Asset management  1652 313 12.0% Total 26987 1652 22818 For the year ended 30 September 2017 no impairments were required to the CEIC EMIS and World Bulk Wine CGUs on a value in use basis before being transferred to held for sale.
Upon classification as held for sale the CGUs were assessed by reference to expected sale proceeds and no impairments were required.
Further disclosures in accordance with IAS 36 are provided where the Group holds an individual goodwill item relating to a CGU that is significant which the Group considers to be 15% or more of the Groups total carrying value of goodwill.
The only significant item of goodwill of 172.6m 2016 177.7m relates to BCA.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
111 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
12 Goodwill and other intangibles assets continued The remaining carrying value of goodwill and acquired intangible assets consists of a number of CGUs none of which are individually significant to the Group.
The aggregate value of goodwill for these CGUs is 227.4m 2016 218.4m.
For BCA using the above methodology a pretax discount rate of 13.6% 2016 13.7% and longterm nominal growth rate of 1.7% 2016 2% the recoverable amount exceeded the total carrying value by 130.0m 2016 175.8m.
The Directors performed a sensitivity analysis on the total carrying value of this CGU.
For the recoverable amount to fall to the carrying value the discount rate would need to be increased by seven percentage points 2016 10 percentage points or the longterm growth rate reduced by 10 percentage points 2016 16 percentage points.
For the other CGUs IAS 36 provides that if there is any reasonably possible change to a key assumption that would cause the CGUs carrying amount to exceed its recoverable amount further disclosures are required.
For NDR when using the above methodology and a pretax discount rate of 14.2% 2016 14.4% and longterm nominal growth rate of 1.7% 2016 2% the recoverable amount exceeded the total carrying value by 2.0m 2016 15.7m.
Sensitivity analysis performed around the base case assumptions has indicated that for NDR the following changes in assumptions in isolation would cause the value in use to fall below the carrying value the discount rate increased by one percentage point 2016 three percentage points the longterm growth rate reduced by one percentage point 2016 five percentage points.
The headroom has reduced due to the pressure of market conditions resulting in the impairment of NDRs goodwill in 2017 and therefore any significant decrease in the pretax cash flows would result in further impairment.
NDR is a global provider of independent research solutions to the worlds leading financial institutions.
The impairment of NDR stems from a disappointing financial performance of the business in the face of tough market conditions and management changes in the first half of 2017.
13 Property plant and equipment
Shortterm leasehold premises
Total
Cost
At 1 October 2016 1456 14305 23153 38914 Additions 295 7235 3398 10928 Disposals 41 7842 6258 14141 Balance at acquisition of new company  66 224 290 Balance at disposal of company  86 86 Exchange differences 70 193 394 657 Classified as held for sale  216 7860 8076 At 30 September 2017 1640 13355 12177 27172
At 1 October 2016 718 8562 19162 28442 Charge for the year Continuing operations 122 978 1873 2973 Discontinued operations  10 219 229 Disposals 41 7842 6240 14123 Balance at disposal of company  84 84 Exchange differences 35 288 197 56 Classified as held for sale  202 7354 7556 At 30 September 2017 764 1794 7379 9937 Net book value at 30 September 2017 876 11561 4798 17235 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
112 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 13 Property plant and equipment continued
Shortterm leasehold premises
Total
Cost
At 1 October 2015 585 12177 19412 32174 Additions 719 1065 1978 3762 Disposals 42 26 678 746 Balance at acquisition of new company  6 6 Balance at disposal of company  27 269 296 Exchange differences 194 1116 2704 4014 At 30 September 2016 1456 14305 23153 38914
At 1 October 2015 557 6630 15816 23003 Charge for the year Continuing operations 57 934 1657 2648 Discontinued operations 7 151 158 Disposals 42 17 671 730 Balance at disposal of company  27 241 268 Exchange differences 146 1035 2450 3631 At 30 September 2016 718 8562 19162 28442 Net book value at 30 September 2016 738 5743 3991 10472 Net book value at 30 September 2015 28 5547 3596 9171 There is no material difference between the property plant and equipments historical cost values as stated above and their fair value equivalents.
14 Investments
Investment
Available forsale investments
At 1 October 2015 32437 30 5835 38302 Repaymentadditions 52 180  128 Impairment note 5 111  111 Transfer to subsidiary 629  629 Exchange difference  12  12 Provision against investment losses  64  64 Share of loss after tax 1752 71  1823 Dividends 83  83 At 30 September 2016 29810 215 5835 35860 Additions 552 1 553 Impairment note 5  2289 2289 Exchange difference 2151 2  2153 Provision against investment losses  285  285 Share of loss after tax 1391 499  1890 At 30 September 2017 26820  3546 30366 All of the above investments in associates and joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method in these consolidated financial statements as set out in the Groups accounting policies in note 1.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
113 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
14 Investments continued Reconciliation of share of results in associates and joint ventures in Income Statement to adjusted share of results in associates and joint ventures Total share of results in associates and joint ventures in Income Statement 1890 1823 Add back Share of tax on profits 988 656 Share of tax on acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items 1798 1437 Share of acquired intangible amortisation 4790 4427 Share of exceptional items 1203 363 5183 4009 Adjusted share of results in associates and joint ventures 3293 2186 1 The share of exceptional items relates to restructuring and earnout costs in Dealogic.
The reconciliation of share of results in associates and joint ventures in the Income Statement has been provided since the Directors consider it necessary in order to provide an indication of the adjusted share of results in associates and joint ventures.
A detailed reconciliation of the Groups statutory results to the adjusted and underlying results is set out on pages 29 to 31.
The share of losses after tax retained includes a finance expense of 2.5m 2016 2.1m.
Information on investment in associates investment in joint ventures and availableforsale investments Principal activity
Date of acquisition
Group interest
Investment in associates Diamond TopCo Limited
Capital market software solutions 31 Dec Dec 2014 Ordinary 15.5% Dealogic Holdings Limited One New Change London EC4M 9AF United Kingdom Broadmedia Communications Limited BroadGroup Events and publishing business 30 Sep Mar 2017 Ordinary 49.0% 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Investment in joint ventures Sanostro Institutional AG
Hedge fund manager trading signals 31 Dec Dec 2014 Ordinary 50.0% Allmendstrasse 140 8041 Zurich
Availableforsale investments Estimize Inc Estimize Financial estimates platform 31 Dec Jul 2015 Ordinary 10.0% 43 West 24th Street New York NY 10010 United States Zanbato Inc Zanbato Private capital placement and workflow 31 Dec Sep 2015 Ordinary 9.9% 715 N Shoreline Boulevard Mountain View CA 94043 United States 1 On 31 March 2017 the Group acquired 49% of the equity share capital of BroadGroup for a cash consideration of 0.6m.
2 An impairment of 2.3m was recognised for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The Group interests in the above investments remained unchanged since their respective dates of acquisition.
On 26 July 2017 the Group disposed of its 50% investments in II Zanbato Limited and EIIZ Discovery LLC two joint venture entities in return for the right to purchase up to US5m of convertible notes in Zanbato at any time up to 26 July 2019.
On maturity of the notes Euromoney can either convert to shares in Zanbato at a 20% discount or demand repayment.
In addition the Group entered into a US3.25m 2.5m convertible note with Zanbato that has the same conversion features as noted above.
The Group has classified its US3.25m 2.5m convertible note receivable as a financial asset on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Financial
The disposal of the joint ventures gave rise to a loss on disposal of 0.9m after deducting disposal costs which was recognised as an exceptional item note 5 in the Income Statement.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
114 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 14 Investments continued Set out below is the summarised financial information for Dealogic as at 30 September 2017 which in the opinion of the Directors is material to the Group Summarised balance sheet Current assets 75546 58561 Noncurrent assets 476010 505380 Current liabilities 299364 280110 Noncurrent liabilities 4500 5286 Net assets 247692 278545 Summarised Statement of Comprehensive Income Revenue 125650 106193 Loss from continuing operations 13097 12960 Posttax loss from continuing operations 9124 9472 Other comprehensive income 556 294 Total comprehensive expense 8568 9178 Group share of loss after tax 1468 1726 Reconciliation of the above summarised financial information to the carrying amount of the interest in Dealogic recognised in the Consolidated Financial Statements Closing net assets 247692 278545 Proportion of the Groups ownership interest in the associate 38392 43144 Restriction of profit applied on acquisition 5862 5862 Goodwill 1041 63 Exchange differences 5298 7409 Carrying amount of the Groups interest in the associate 26191 29810 Aggregate information of associates that are not individually material Group share of profitloss from continuing operations 77 25 Aggregate carrying amount of the Groups interests in these associates 629 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
115 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
15 Acquisitions and disposals Purchase of business RISI US Holdco Inc RISI On 6 April 2017 the Group acquired 100% of the equity share capital of RISI the leading price reporting agency for the global forest products market for US124.5m 99.7m.
The acquisition of RISI is consistent with the Groups strategy to actively manage a portfolio of businesses in asset management price discovery and other sectors where information data and convening market participants are valued.
RISI is included in the pricing data and market intelligence segment.
The acquisition accounting is set out below and is provisional pending final determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired
Fair value adjustments
Net assets Intangible assets 1580 66300 67880 Property plant and equipment 290  290 Trade and other receivables 7338  7338 Trade and other payables 16027 26520 42547 Cash and cash equivalents 2462  2462 4357 39780 35423 Net assets acquired 100% 35423 Goodwill 64309 Total consideration 99732 Consideration satisfied by Cash 99497 Working capital adjustment 235 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 99732 Less cash and cash equivalent balances acquired 2462 Intangible assets represent the brand of US30.1m 24.1m customer relationships of US50.9m 40.8m and technology of US1.8m 1.4m for which amortisation of US2.5m 1.9m has been charged for the year.
The brand will be amortised over its expected useful life of 15 years.
The customer relationships will be amortised over their expected useful economic lives of 20 years.
The technology will be amortised over its expected useful life of four years.
The fair value adjustment within trade and other payables represents a deferred tax liability of US33.1m 26.5m on the acquired intangible assets.
Goodwill arises from the anticipated profitability and future operating synergies from integrating the acquired operations within the Group.
All of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
The fair value of the assets acquired includes net trade receivables of US3.8m 3.0m all of which are contracted and are expected to be collectable.
RISI contributed US16.3m 12.6m to the Groups revenue US3.4m 2.6m to the Groups operating profit and US2.8m 2.2m to the Groups profit after tax for the period between the date of acquisition and 30 September 2017.
In addition acquisition related costs of US2.1m 1.6m were incurred and recognised as an exceptional item in the Income Statement for the year ended 30 September 2017 note 5.
If the acquisition had been completed on the first day of the financial year RISI would have contributed US32.4m 25.5m to the Groups revenue and US8.5m 6.7m to the Groups operating profit excluding exceptional costs above.
Layer123 Events and Training Limited Layer123 On 13 April 2017 the Group acquired 61% of the ordinary share capital of Layer123 for a cash consideration of 6.4m and a deferred consideration of 0.7m.
Layer123 is a content and sponsorshipled events business focusing on innovation in the rapidlyevolving space of telecoms network strategy.
The acquisition is consistent with the Groups strategy and expands its presence in the telecoms markets.
Layer123 is included in the pricing data and market intelligence segment.
At the acquisition date the noncontrolling interest of 39% with a value of 1.5m is measured using the proportion of net assets method.
The remaining interest in Layer123 is subject to put and call options under an earnout agreement in three equal instalments based on the profits of Layer123 for its years ended February 2018 2019 and 2020.
The total discounted amount that the Group expects to pay under this option agreement is 5.0m note 25.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
116 12112017 115731 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 15 Acquisitions and disposals continued The acquisition accounting is set out below and is provisional pending final determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired Book value Fair value adjustments
Net assets Intangible assets  3779 3779 Property plant and equipment 3 3 Trade and other receivables 424  424 Trade and other payables 589 642 1231 Cash and cash equivalents 938  938 776 3134 3910 Net assets acquired 61% 2385 Goodwill 4683 Total consideration 7068 Consideration satisfied by Cash 6368 Deferred consideration 700 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition Cash consideration 6368 Less cash and cash equivalent balances acquired 938 Intangible assets represent the brand of 2.4m and customer relationships of 1.4m for which amortisation of 0.3m has been charged for the year.
The brand will be amortised over its expected useful life of 20 years.
The customer relationships will be amortised over their expected useful economic lives of five years.
The fair value adjustment within trade and other payables represents a deferred tax liability of 0.6m on the acquired intangible assets.
Goodwill arises from the anticipated profitability and future operating synergies from integrating the acquired operations within the Group.
All of the goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for income tax purposes.
Layer123 contributed 0.9m to the Groups revenue 0.2m to the Groups operating profit and 0.2m to the Groups profit after tax for the period between the date of acquisition and 30 September 2017.
If the acquisition had been completed on the first day of the financial year Layer123 would have contributed 2.4m to the Groups revenue and 1.1m to the Groups operating profit.
Increase in equity holdings Euromoney Consortium Limited On 8 December 2016 the Group acquired 0.3% of the equity of Euromoney Consortium Limited for a cash consideration of 0.7m.
This transaction was enacted by purchasing 7258408 Ordinary Class B shares of 0.10 each from DMG Charles Limited.
The
Groups equity shareholding in Euromoney Consortium Limited increased to 100%.
World Bulk Wine Exhibition S.
World Bulk Wine On 3 May 2017 the Group acquired a further 17% of the equity share capital of World Bulk Wine increasing the Groups equity shareholding to 74% for a consideration of 0.6m 0.5m.
Sale of businesses HFI Media Limited HedgeFund Intelligence On 30 December 2016 the Group sold 100% of the equity share capital of HedgeFund Intelligence part of the asset management segment for a consideration of 2.2m offset by a working capital settlement of 0.1m.
At the date of disposal deferred consideration receivable of 1.9m was recognised which included the working capital settlement of 0.1m note 25.
The disposal of HedgeFund Intelligence gave rise to a loss on disposal of 4k after deducting disposal costs incurred which was recognised as an exceptional item note 5 in the Income Statement.
Institutional Investor Intelligence II Intelligence On 30 December 2016 the Group completed the sale of the assets of II Intelligence part of the asset management segment for a consideration of US0.9m 0.7m.
Deferred consideration receivable of US0.5m 0.4m was recognised note 25.
The disposal gave rise to a profit on disposal of US2.7m 2.2m after deducting disposal costs incurred which was recognised as an exceptional item note 5 in the Income Statement.
Euromoney Indices On 13 March 2017 the Group completed the sale of the Euromoney Indices business part of the asset management segment for a consideration of 1.9m offset by a working capital settlement of 0.1m.
Deferred consideration receivable of 0.4m was recognised note 25.
The disposal of Euromoney Indices gave rise to a loss on disposal of 1.8m after deducting disposal costs incurred which include the costs associated with the transitional service agreement.
The loss on disposal was recognised as an exceptional item note 5 in the Income Statement.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
117 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
15 Acquisitions and disposals continued Latin American Financial Publications Inc.
LatinFinance
On 31 March 2017 the Group sold 100% of the equity share capital of LatinFinance which formed part of the banking and finance segment.
The consideration for this transaction was US3.9m 3.1m offset by a working capital adjustment of US1.1m 0.9m note 25.
The disposal of LatinFinance gave rise to a profit on disposal of US4.3m 3.4m after deducting disposal costs incurred which were recognised as an exceptional item note 5 in the Income Statement.
The assets and liabilities of the businesses held for sale and disclosed separately on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position for the year ended 30 September 2016 included HedgeFund Intelligence II Intelligence and Euromoney Indices.
The net assets of the businesses at the date of disposal were as follows
Intelligence
II
Intelligence
Euromoney
Indices
Latin
Finance
Total
Net assetsliabilities Goodwill 4020  4020 Intangible assets  294  294 Property plant and equipment  2 2 Trade and other receivables 389  443 374 1206 Cash at bank and in handbank overdraft 46  76 30 Trade and other payables 100  90 158 348 Deferred income 2232 1495 449 1097 5273 2123 1495 198 955 129 Net assetsliabilities disposed 2123 1495 198 955 129 Directly attributable costs 60 50 3444 32 3586 Recycled cumulative translation differences  285 285 Lossprofit on disposal note 5 4 2166 1847 3435 3750 Total consideration 2179 721 1795 2227 6922 Consideration satisfied by Cash 250 321 1500 3086 5157 Deferred consideration 1929 400 350  2679 Working capital adjustments  55 859 914 2179 721 1795 2227 6922 Net cash inflow arising on disposal Cash consideration net of directly attributable costs paid and working capital adjustments 190 271 1531 2195 4187 Cash and cash equivalent balances disposed 46  531 2271 4217 16 Trade and other receivables Amounts falling due within one year Trade receivables 50863 58501 Less provision for impairment of trade receivables 3688 5270 Trade receivables  net of provision 47175 53231 Other debtors 5977 7585 Prepayments 9610 10213 Accrued income 1721 2462 64483 73491 The average credit period on sales of goods and services is 30 days.
Trade receivables beyond 60 days overdue are provided for based on estimated irrecoverable amounts from the sale of goods and services determined by reference to past default experience.
Credit terms for customers are determined in individual territories.
There are no customers who represent more than 5% of the total balance of trade receivables.
As at 30 September 2017 trade receivables of 25.2m 2016 28.0m were not yet due.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
118 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 16 Trade and other receivables continued Ageing of past due but not impaired trade receivables Past due less than a month 10093 12265 Past due more than a month but less than two months 2956 4608 Past due more than two months but less than three months 1846 2981 Past due more than three months 1665 3998 16560 23852 The Group has not provided for these trade receivables as there has been no significant change in their credit quality and the amounts are still considered recoverable.
These relate to a number of independent customers for whom there is no recent history of default.
The average age of these receivables is 66 days 2016 73 days.
The Group does not hold any collateral over these balances.
Ageing of trade receivables impaired and partially provided for Past due less than a month 1557 998 Past due more than a month but less than two months 1929 917 Past due more than two months but less than three months 1472 883 Past due more than three months 4107 3882 9065 6680 The amount of the provision for impaired trade receivables was 3.7m 2016 5.3m.
It was assessed that a portion of the receivables is expected to be recovered.
Movements on the Group provision for impairment of trade receivables are as follows At 1 October 5270 5441 Impairment losses recognised 5074 4089 Impairment losses reversed 3941 3493 Amounts written off as uncollectible 1220 1047 Disposals  99 Exchange differences 62 377 Classified as held for sale 1433 2 At 30 September 3688 5270 In determining the recoverability of a trade receivable the Group considers any change in the credit quality of the trade receivable from the date credit was initially granted up to the reporting date.
The concentration of credit risk is limited due to the customer base being large and unrelated.
Accordingly the Directors believe that there is no further credit risk provision required in excess of the allowance for doubtful debts.
The allowance for doubtful debts does not include individually impaired trade receivables which have been placed under liquidation as these trade receivables are written off directly to the Income Statement.
17 Trade and other payables Trade creditors 3073 4834 Amounts owed to DMGT group undertakings  3 Liability for cashsettled options  527 Other creditors 24997 18502 28070 23866 The Directors consider the carrying amounts of trade and other payables approximate their fair values.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
119 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
18 Deferred income Deferred subscription income 92605 93518 Other deferred income 24373 25268 116978 118786 Within one year 113487 113446 In more than one year 3491 5340 116978 118786 19 Financial instruments and risk management Derivative financial instruments The derivative financial assetsliabilities at 30 September comprised 2017 2016
Liabilities
Assets
Liabilities
Current
Forward foreign exchange contracts  cash flow hedge 2448 1001 410 9671 Forward foreign exchange contracts fair value through profit and loss 238 2686 1001 410 9671
Forward foreign exchange contracts cash flow hedge 381 41 9 778 Interest rate swaps cash flow hedge 281 189 3348 1231 419 10449 Financial risk management objectives The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including currency risk interest rate risk and price risk credit risk and liquidity risk arising in the normal course of business.
Derivative financial instruments are used to manage exposures to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates but are not employed for speculative purposes.
Full details of the objectives policies and strategies pursued by the Group in relation to financial risk management are set out in this note and on page 95 of the accounting policies.
The Groups Tax and Treasury Committee is responsible for recommending policy to the Board.
The Groups treasury policies are directed to giving greater certainty of future costs and revenues and ensuring that the Group has adequate liquidity for working capital and debt capacity for funding acquisitions.
The treasury department does not act as a profit centre nor does it undertake any speculative trading activity and it operates within policies and procedures approved by the Board.
Interest rate swaps are used to manage the Groups exposure to fluctuations in interest rates on its floating rate borrowings.
Further details are set out in the interest rate risk section page 123.
Forward contracts are used to manage the Groups exposure to fluctuations in exchange rate movements on foreign currency transactions.
Further details are set out in the foreign exchange rate risk section page 122.
Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that entities in the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of the debt and equity balance.
The Groups overall strategy remains unchanged from 2016.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt which includes the borrowings disclosed in note 20 cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders comprising share capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the Statement of Changes in Equity.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
120 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 19 Financial instruments and risk management continued Net cashdebt to adjusted EBITDA ratio The Groups Tax and Treasury Committee reviews the Groups capital structure at least twice a year.
Committed bank facilities available to the Group until December 2021 contain covenants based on a maximum 3.0 times net debt to adjusted EBITDA and a minimum interest cover ratio of 3.0 times.
The amounts and foreign exchange rates used in the covenant calculations are subject to adjustments as defined under the terms of the arrangement.
Management regularly monitors the covenants and prepares detailed cash flow forecasts to ensure that sufficient headroom is available and that the covenants are not close or potentially close to breach.
Additionally the Group arranges its currency borrowings in order that they are in proportion to the ratio of earnings in that particular currency to total Group earnings.
The bank covenant ratio uses an average exchange rate in the calculation of net debt.
The resultant net debtcash to adjusted EBITDA ratio is 1.24 times 2016 0.74 times.
Using a closing rate basis for the valuation of net debtcash the ratio was 1.23 times 2016 0.74 times.
Categories of financial instruments The Groups financial assets and liabilities at 30 September are as follows Financial assets Derivative instruments in designated hedge accounting relationships 3110 419 Derivative instruments recognised at fair value through profit and loss 238 Availableforsale investments note 14 3546 5835 Convertible loan note  fair value through profit and loss 2503 Deferred consideration note 25  loans and receivables 1989 526 Loans and receivables including cash at bank and shortterm deposits 59299 147478 Classified as held for sale loans and receivables including cash at bank and shortterm deposits 18987 680 89672 154938 Financial liabilities Derivative instruments in designated hedge accounting relationships 1231 10449 Deferred consideration note 25  borrowings and payables 350 480 Acquisition commitments note 25  fair value through profit and loss 286 Acquisition commitments note 25  borrowings and payables 12839 11771 Borrowings and payables including bank overdrafts 264782 97659 Classified as held for sale borrowings and payables including bank overdrafts 10002 1000 289490 121359 Derivative instruments are classified as level 2 in the fair value hierarchy and acquisition commitments held at fair value through the profit and loss are classified as level 3.
Availableforsale investments are held at cost less any identified impairments as they do not have a quoted market price in an active market and the fair value cannot be reliably measured.
No other financial assets or liabilities are held at fair value.
The Directors consider that the carrying value amounts of financial assets and liabilities are equal to their fair value.
The Group has derivative assets of 3.3m 2016 0.4m and derivative liabilities of 1.2m 2016 10.4m with a number of banks that do not meet the offsetting criteria of IAS 32 but which the Group has the right to setoff same currency cash flows settled on the same date.
Consequently the gross amount of the derivative assets and the gross amount of the derivative liabilities are presented separately in the Groups Statement of Financial Position.
The convertible loan note is a fair value through profit and loss financial asset held at cost as it contains an embedded derivative of nonquoted equity for which the Group is unable to accurately determine a fair value.
The acquisition commitments for Reinsurance Security Consultancy. and revenue of the business and are therefore remeasured at fair value through the profit and loss note 25.
The Group has entered into an omnibus guarantee and setoff agreement with Lloyds Banking Group plc with a right to setoff outstanding credit balances against cash balances.
Cash and cash equivalents included gross overdrafts of 0.2m 2016 nil which are offset under the cash pooling arrangements.
This agreement meets the offsetting criteria of IAS 32.
Market price risk is the possibility that changes in currency exchange rates interest rates or commodity prices will adversely affect the value of the Groups financial assets liabilities or expected future cash flows.
The Groups primary market risks are interest rate fluctuations and exchange rate movements.
Derivatives are used to hedge or reduce the risks of interest rate and exchange rate movements and are not entered into unless such risks exist.
Derivatives used by the Group for hedging a particular risk are not specialised and are generally available from numerous sources.
The fair values of forward exchange contracts are set out in this note and represent the value for which an asset could be sold or liability settled between knowledgeable willing parties in an arms length transaction calculated using the market rates of interest and exchange at 30 September 2017.
The Group has no other material market price risks.
Market risk exposures are measured using sensitivity analysis.
There has been no change to the Groups exposure to market risks or the manner in which it manages and measures the risks during the year.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
121 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
19 Financial instruments and risk management continued ii Foreign exchange rate risk The Groups principal foreign exchange exposure is to the US dollar.
The Group generates approximately twothirds of its revenues in US dollars including approximately 40% of the revenues in its UKbased businesses and approximately 80% of its operating profits are US dollardenominated.
The Group is therefore exposed to foreign exchange risk on the US dollar revenues in its UK businesses the translation of results of foreign subsidiaries and external loans as well as loans to foreign operations within the Group where the denomination of the loan is not in the functional currency of the lenderborrower.
The Group does not hedge the translation of the results of foreign subsidiaries.
Fluctuations in the value of sterling versus foreign currencies could materially affect the amount of these items in the consolidated financial statements even if their values have not changed in their original currency.
The Group does endeavour to match foreign currency borrowings to investments in order to provide a natural hedge for the translation of the net assets of overseas subsidiaries.
The carrying amounts of the Groups US dollardenominated monetary assets and monetary liabilities at the reporting date are as follows Assets Liabilities US dollar 62742 55910 319446 347444 Subsidiaries normally do not hedge transactions in foreign currencies into the functional currency of their own operations.
However at a group level a series of US dollar and euro forward contracts are put in place to sell forward surplus US dollars and euros so as to hedge 80% of the Groups UK based US dollar and euro revenues for the coming 12 months and 50% of the Groups UK based US dollar and euro revenues for the subsequent six months.
The timing and value of these forward contracts is based on managements estimate of its future US dollar and euro revenues over an 18 month period and is regularly reviewed and revised with any changes in estimates resulting in either additional forward contracts being taken out or existing contracts maturity dates being moved forward or back.
If management materially underestimate the Groups future US dollar and euro denominated revenues this would lead to too few forward contracts being in place and the Group being more exposed to swings in US dollar and euro to sterling exchange rates.
An overestimate of the Groups US dollar and euro denominated revenues would lead to associated costs in unwinding the excess forward contracts.
The Group also has a significant operation in Canada whose revenues are mainly in US dollars.
At a group level a series of forward contracts are put in place up to 18 months forward to hedge the operations Canadian dollar cost base.
In addition each subsidiary is encouraged to invoice sales in its local functional currency where possible.
Forward exchange contracts are gross settled at maturity.
Impact of 10% strengthening of sterling against US dollar The following table details the Groups sensitivity to a 10% increase and decrease in sterling against US dollar.
A 10% sensitivity has been determined by the Board as the sensitivity rate appropriate when reporting an estimated foreign currency risk internally and represents managements assessment of a reasonably possible change in foreign exchange rates at the reporting date.
The sensitivity analysis includes only outstanding foreign currency denominated monetary items and adjusts their translation at the period end for a 10% change in foreign currency rates.
The sensitivity analysis includes external loans as well as loans to foreign operations within the Group where the denomination of the loan is not in the functional currency of the lenderborrower.
Where sterling strengthens 10% against the relevant currency a negative number below indicates a decrease in profit and equity.
For a 10% weakening of sterling against the relevant currency there would be an equal and opposite impact on the profit and other comprehensive income and the balances below would be positive.
Change in profit for the year in Income Statement US net assets in UK companies 838 79 Change in other comprehensive income derivative financial instruments 6545 6811 Change in other comprehensive income loans tofrom foreign operations 17751 29139 The increase in the loss from the sensitivity analysis is due to an increase in the working capital assets.
The decrease in other comprehensive income from 6.8m to 6.5m from the sensitivity analysis is due to the decrease in the notional value of the derivative financial instruments.
The change in other comprehensive income from a 10% change in sterling against US dollars in relation to the translation of loans tofrom foreign operations within the Group where the denomination of the loan is not in the functional currency of the lender borrower would result in a change of 17.8m 2016 29.1m.
However the change in other comprehensive income is completely offset by the change in value of the foreign operations net assets from their translation into sterling.
The Group is also exposed to the translation of the results of its US dollardenominated businesses although the Group does not hedge the translation of these results.
Consequently fluctuations in the value of sterling versus other currencies could materially affect the translation of these results in the consolidated financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
122 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 19 Financial instruments and risk management continued Forward foreign exchange contracts It is the policy of the Group to enter into forward foreign exchange contracts to cover specific foreign currency payments and receipts.
A series of US dollar and euro forward contracts are put in place to sell forward surplus US dollars and euros so as to hedge 80% of the Groups UKbased US dollar and euro revenues for the coming 12 months and 50% for the subsequent six months.
In addition at a group level a series of US dollar forward contracts is put in place up to 18 months forward to hedge the subsidiarys Canadian cost base.
In the past the Group had also entered into a number of shortdated South African Rand forward contracts to hedge future UKbased ZAR payments.
Average exchange rate Foreign currency Contract value Fair valuetel
US000
Fair value through profit and loss Sell USD buy GBP Less than a year 1.290  8230  6380  238 Cash Flow Hedges Sell USD buy GBP Less than a year 1.302 1.499 64450 63850 49502 42602 1659 6425 More than a year but less than two years 1.329 1.363 17100 16700 12868 12254 260 466 Sell USD buy CAD Less than a year 1.309 1.320 11221 12743 8759 9853 410 72 More than a year but less than two years 1.270 1.299 3700 4200 2804 3195 53 20 Sell EUR buy GBP Less than a year 1.165 1.334 22400 24650 19230 18478 622 2926 More than a year but less than two years 1.114 1.200 6550 7200 5880 6002 27 283 Sell GBP buy ZAR R000 R000 000 000 000 000 Less than a year  18.962  6447  340  18 2025 10030 Rate used for conversion from CAD to GBP is 1.6767 2016 1.7072.
As at 30 September 2017 the aggregate amount of unrealised gains under forward foreign exchange contracts deferred in the fair value reserve relating to future revenue transactions is 1.8m 2016 10.0m loss.
It is anticipated that the transactions will take place over the next 18 months at which stage the amount deferred in equity will be released to the Income Statement.
As at 30 September 2017 there were no ineffective cash flow hedges in place 2016 nil.
The Groups borrowings are in both sterling and US dollars with the related interest tied to LIBOR.
This results in the Groups interest charge being at risk to fluctuations in interest rates.
It is the Groups policy to hedge approximately 80% of its term loan interest exposure converting its floating rate debt into fixed debt by means of interest rate swaps.
The predictability of interest costs is deemed to be more important than the possible opportunity cost foregone of achieving lower interest rates.
The Group has interest rate swap protection on principal amounts of US80.0m and 32.0m to swap outstanding borrowings from floating to fixed rates at rates of 1.972% and 0.760% respectively until December 2021.
As at 30 September 2017 the aggregate amount of unrealised gains on interest rate swaps deferred in the fair value reserve relating to future interest cash flows is 0.1m 2016 nil.
It is anticipated that the future interest cash flows will take place over the next 45 years at which stage the amount deferred in equity will be released to the Income Statement.
No ineffectiveness was recognised in the Income Statement 2016 nil.
The Groups exposures to interest rates on financial assets and financial liabilities are detailed in the liquidity risk section on page 124.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
123 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
19 Financial instruments and risk management continued Interest rate sensitivity analysis The sensitivity analysis has been determined based on the exposure to interest rates for both derivative and nonderivative instruments at the balance sheet date.
For floating rate instruments the analysis is prepared assuming the amount outstanding at the balance sheet date was outstanding for the whole year.
A 100 basis point increase or decrease is used when reporting interest rate risk internally to key management personnel and represents the Directors assessment of a reasonably possible change in interest rates at the reporting date.
If interest rates had been 100 basis points higher or lower and all other variables were held constant the Groups profit for the year ended 30 September 2017 would decrease or increase by 0.8m 2016 0.8m.
This is mainly attributable to the Groups exposure to interest rates on its variable rate borrowings and cash deposits.
Fair value equity reserves would decrease or increase by 3.4m mainly as a result of the changes in fair value of interest rate swaps.
Credit risk refers to the risk that a counterparty will default on its contractual obligations resulting in financial loss to the Group.
The Group seeks to limit interest rate and foreign currency risks described above by the use of financial instruments and as a result have a credit risk from the potential nonperformance by the counterparties to these financial instruments which are unsecured.
The amount of this credit risk is normally restricted to the amounts of any hedge gain and not the principal amount being hedged.
The Group also has a credit exposure to counterparties for the full principal amount of cash and cash equivalents.
Credit risks are controlled by monitoring the amounts outstanding with and the credit quality of these counterparties.
For the Groups cash and cash equivalents these are principally licensed commercial banks and investment banks with strong longterm credit ratings.
Treasury policies in place do not allow concentrations of risk with individual counterparties and do not allow significant treasury exposures with counterparties which are rated below investment grade.
The Group also has credit risk with respect to trade and other receivables prepayments and accrued income.
The concentration of credit risk from trade receivables is limited due to the Groups large and broad customer base.
Trade receivable exposures are managed locally in the business units where they arise.
Allowance is made for bad and doubtful debts based on managements assessment of the risk of nonpayment taking into account the ageing profile experience and circumstance.
The maximum exposure to credit risk is represented by the carrying amount of each financial asset including derivative financial instruments recorded in the Statement of Financial Position.
The Group does not have any significant credit risk exposure to any single counterparty or any group of counterparties having similar characteristics.
The Group defines counterparties as having similar characteristics if they are related entities.
Concentration of credit risk did not exceed 5% of gross monetary assets at any time during the year.
Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as and when they fall due.
To manage this risk the Group has readily accessible funding arrangements in place and seeks to optimise Group liquidity through cash pooling arrangements.
The Groups principal source of borrowings are provided through committed bank facilities available to the Group until December 2021.
These syndicated facilities include a 130m multicurrency revolving credit facility which was drawn down by 55.2m at 30 September 2017.
In 2016 the Group had access to a committed multicurrency credit facility from DMGT.
This facility was terminated in December 2016 as part of the share buyback transaction along with a deposit agreement for placing excess operating funds on deposit with
The Groups strategy is to use excess operating cash to pay down its drawings under the revolving credit facility.
The Group generally has an annual cash conversion rate the percentage by which cash generated from operations covers adjusted operating profit before acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items of 100% or more due to much of its subscription sponsorship and delegate revenue being paid in advance.
The Groups operating cash conversion rate based on adjusted operating profit was 110%.
The Groups forecasts and projections looking out to September 2022 and taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group should be able to operate within the level and covenants of its current and available borrowing facilities.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
124 12112017 115732 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 19 Financial instruments and risk management continued This table has been drawn up based on the undiscounted contractual cash flows of the financial liabilities including both interest and principal cash flows.
To the extent that the interest rates are floating the undiscounted amount is derived from interest rate curves at 30 September 2017.
The contractual maturity is based on the earliest date on which the Group may be required to settle.
Weighted % Less than 1 year 13 years 35 years
Variable rate borrowings 2.28 5125 11915 177191 194231 Deferred consideration  350  350 Acquisition commitments 9.50 9904 3221  13125 Noninterest bearing liabilities trade and other payables and accruals  70551  70551 85930 15136 177191 278257
Less than 1 year 13 years
Variable rate borrowings  185  185 Deferred consideration  480  480 Acquisition commitments 9.40 326 11445 11771 Noninterest bearing liabilities trade and other payables and accruals  97474  97474 98465 11445 109910 At 30 September 2017 108.7m of borrowings are denominated in US dollars and 61.2m denominated in sterling.
The following table details the Groups remaining contractual maturity for its nonderivative financial assets mainly trade and other receivables and equity noncontrolling interests.
This table has been drawn up based on the undiscounted contractual maturities of the financial assets including interest that will be earned on those assets except where the Group anticipates that the cash flow will occur in a different period.
Weighted average effective interest rate % Less than 1 year 13 years
Variable interest rate instruments cash at bank and short term deposits including cash from assets held for sale 0.59 14272  14272 Deferred consideration 5.50 419 1570 1989 Noninterest bearing assets trade and other receivables excluding prepayments  64014  64014 78705 1570 80275
Less than 1 year 13 years
Variable interest rate instruments cash at bank and short term deposits 1.14 84200  84200 Deferred consideration  526 526 Noninterest bearing assets trade and other receivables excluding prepayments  63958  63958 148158 526 148684 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
125 12112017 115733 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
19 Financial instruments and risk management continued The following table details the Groups liquidity analysis for its derivative financial instruments.
The table has been drawn up based on the undiscounted net cash inflows and outflows on those derivatives that settle on a net basis and the undiscounted gross inflows and outflows on those derivatives that require gross settlement.
When the amount payable or receivable is not fixed the amount disclosed has been determined by reference to the projected interest rates as represented by the yield curves existing at the reporting date.
Less than 3 months 3 months to 1 year 13 years 35 years
Net settled Interest rate swaps 139 122 250 447 436 Gross settled Foreign exchange forward contracts inflows 26458 57413 21551  105422 Foreign exchange forward contracts outflows 26505 55862 21299  103666 186 1429 502 447 2192 Less than 3 months 3 months to 1 year 13 years 35 years
Foreign exchange forward contracts inflows 19473 51121 21452  92046 Foreign exchange forward contracts outflows 22647 57144 22280  102071 3174 6023 828  10025 Fair value of financial instruments The fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities are determined in accordance with IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement as follows Level 1 The fair value of financial assets and financial liabilities with standard terms and conditions and traded on active liquid markets is determined with reference to quoted market prices.
Level 2 The fair value of other financial assets and financial liabilities excluding derivative instruments is determined in accordance with generally accepted pricing models based on discounted cash flow analysis using prices from observable current market transactions and dealer quotes for similar instruments.
Foreign currency forward contracts are measured using quoted forward exchange rates and yield curves derived from quoted interest rates matching maturities of the contracts.
Interest rate swaps are measured at the present value of future cash flows estimated and discounted based on the applicable yield curve derived from quoted interest rates.
Level 3 If one or more significant inputs are not based on observable market date the instrument is included in level 3.
As at 30 September 2017 and the prior year all the resulting fair value estimates have been included in level 2 other than the Groups contingent considerations which are classified as level 3.
Other financial instruments not recorded at fair value The Directors consider that the carrying amounts of financial assets and financial liabilities recorded at amortised cost in the financial statements approximate their fair values.
Such financial assets and financial liabilities include cash and cash equivalents receivables payables and loans.
20 Loans Loan notes  current liabilities  185 Borrowings  noncurrent liabilities 168893 Undrawn committed facilities 74768 122954 Loan notes Loan notes were issued in October and November 2006 to fund the purchase of Metal Bulletin plc.
Interest was payable on these loan notes at a variable rate of 0.75% below LIBOR payable in June and December.
The remaining loan notes were redeemed in full on 30 December 2016.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
126 12112017 115733 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 20 Loans continued Committed borrowing facilities The Groups principal source of borrowings is provided through committed bank facilities available until December 2021.
These syndicated facilities include two fiveyear termloans of US100m and 40m total 114.6m and a 130m multicurrency revolving credit facility which was drawn down by 55.2m at 30 September 2017.
There is a further accordion facility of 130m should the Group wish to request it.
The termloans and drawings under the revolving credit facility bear interest charged at LIBOR plus a margin the applicable margin being based on the Groups ratio of adjusted net debt to EBITDA.
These facilities contain covenants based on a maximum 3.0 times adjusted net debt to EBITDA and a minimum interest cover ratio of 3.0 times.
The amounts and foreign exchange rates used in the covenant calculations are subject to adjustments as defined under the terms of the arrangement.
On this basis at 30 September 2017 the Groups adjusted net debt to EBITDA was 1.24 times.
Management regularly monitors the covenants and prepares detailed cash flow forecasts to ensure that sufficient headroom is available and that the covenants are not close or potentially close to breach.
In 2016 the Group had access to a committed multicurrency credit facility from DMGT.
This facility was terminated in December 2016 as part of the share buyback transaction.
The Groups strategy is to use excess operating cash to pay down its drawings under the revolving credit facility.
The Group generally has an annual cash conversion rate the percentage by which cash generated from operations covers adjusted operating profit before acquired intangible amortisation and exceptional items of 100% or more due to much of its subscription sponsorship and delegate revenue being paid in advance.
The Groups operating cash conversion rate based on adjusted operating profit was 110%.
21 Provisions
Other
Total
At 1 October 2016 657 2812 3469 Provision in the year  147 147 Used in the year 376 299 675 Exchange differences 7 3 4 At 30 September 2017 274 2663 2937 Maturity profile of provisions Within one year included in current liabilities 337 353 Between one and two years included in noncurrent liabilities 92 493 Between two and five years included in noncurrent liabilities 2508 2623 2937 3469 Onerous lease provision The onerous lease provision relates to certain buildings within the property portfolio which either at acquisition were rented at non market rates or are no longer occupied by the Group.
Other provisions The provision consists of social security costs arising on share option liabilities and dilapidations on leasehold properties. dilapidation provision of 2.1m 2016 2.1m is held in respect of the Groups main London offices.
The leases which expire in 2029 do not contain any break clauses.
As such it is unlikely that the provisions will be utilised before the expiry date of the leases.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
127 12112017 115733 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
22 Deferred taxation The net deferred tax liability at 30 September 2017 comprised
Tax losses
Financial instruments
Accelerated capital allowances
Total
Deferred tax asset 22269 5304 4947 1703 1698 540 11963 3886 Deferred tax liability 12822  1158 2515 14179 At 30 September 2016 35091 5304 4947 1703 1698 1698 9448 10293 Chargecredit to income statement Continuing operations 12226 1322 751  61 157 2957 8794 Discontinued operations 60  1062 1002 Creditcharge to other comprehensive income  1955 54  1901 Creditcharge to equity 263  38 225 Acquisitions and disposals 27162 1683  5192 20287 Exchange differences 1923 29 183  304 1407 Classified as held for sale 556  1069 1625 At 30 September 2017 47751 5636 5515 252 1691 1855 11424 21882 Deferred tax asset 6122 3388  241 1691 656 2177 1549 Deferred tax liability 41629 2248 5515 11  1199 9247 23431 There is a deferred tax asset held in relation to UK losses of 1.5m 2016 1.4m that is expected to reverse in the shortterm.
There is a deferred tax liability in relation to remitted earnings of 1.1m 2016 nil that is expected to reverse in the shortterm.
At the balance sheet date the Group has unused US tax losses available for offset against future profits.
At 30 September the deferred tax asset recognised in relation to these losses is analysed as follows UK 1899 3248 US 2248 2056 Europe 1489 5636 5304 The Directors are of the opinion that based on recent and forecast trading it is probable that the level of profits in future years is sufficient to enable the above assets to be recovered.
The US losses can be carried forward for a period of 20 years from the date they arose and have expiry dates between 2017 and 2037.
There is no expiry date on the other losses.
The movement in net deferred tax liabilities since last yearend is largely attributable to the acquisition of RISI note 15 partly offset by the impact of the NDR goodwill impairment note 5.
No deferred tax liability is recognised on temporary differences of 300.0m 2016 266.0m relating to the unremitted earnings of overseas subsidiaries as the Group is able to control the timing of the reversal of these temporary differences and it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The temporary differences at 30 September 2017 represent the unremitted earnings of those overseas subsidiaries where remittance to the UK of those earnings may still result in a tax liability principally as a result of dividend withholding taxes levied by the overseas tax jurisdictions in which these subsidiaries operate.
23 Called up share capital Allotted called up and fully paid 109101608 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 2016 128313356 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 273 321 During the year 35425 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 2016 64462 ordinary shares with an aggregate nominal value of 88 2016 161 were issued following the exercise of share options granted under the Companys share option schemes for a cash consideration of 311658 2016 278608.
On 6 January 2017 the Group completed the purchase for cancellation of 19247173 ordinary shares from its then majority shareholder DMG Charles Limited a DMGT group company.
The aggregate nominal value of the shares cancelled was 48118.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
128 12112017 115733 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 24 Sharebased payments The Groups longterm incentive expense at 30 September comprised Equitysettled options SAYE 139 157 CAP 2010 65 15 Buyout award 450 477 1061 742 Cashsettled options CAP 2010 76 4 Buyout award  460 985 1198 The total carrying value of cashsettled options at 30 September included in the Statement of Financial Position is Current liabilities  527 Equitysettled options The options set out below are outstanding at 30 September and are options to subscribe for new ordinary shares of 0.25p each in the Company.
The total charge recognised in the year from equitysettled options was 1.1m representing 100% of the Groups long term incentive charge partly offset by the credit for cashsettled options 2016 0.7m 62%.
Number of ordinary shares under option 2017
Exercised during year
Option
Weighted average market price at date of exercise Period during which option may be exercised
Between 1 February 2017 and 31 July 2017 27369  24445 2924  9.17 10.86 Between 1 February 2018 and 31 July 2018 99719  8054 15654 76011 8.15 11.15 Between 1 February 2019 and 31 July 2019 114342  2926 23776 87640 7.47 11.07 Between 1 February 2020 and 31 July 2020  107181  8940 98241 8.25 CAP 2010 Before 30 September 2020 tranche 2 15526  7222 8304 0.0025 CAP 2014 Before 30 September 2023 2097363  2097363  0.0025 CSOP 2014 Before 30 September 2023 UK 400512  400512  11.16 Before 30 September 2023 Canada 116519  116519  11.16
Before 30 September 2019  157809   157809 Before 30 September 2021  167419   167419 Before 30 September 2025 159269   159269 Buyout award Before 30 September 2025 132607   132607 3163226 432409 35425 2672910 887300 Weighted average exercise price  2.43 2.04 8.80 2.31 2.35 The options outstanding at 30 September 2017 had a weighted average remaining contractual life of 4.34 years.
There were no share options exercisable at 30 September 2017 2016 nil.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
129 12112017 115733 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
24 Sharebased payments continued Number of ordinary shares under option 2016
Exercised during year
Option
Weighted average market price at date of exercise Period during which option may be exercised
Between 1 February 2016 and 31 July 2016 44056  39709 4347  6.39 9.14 Between 1 February 2017 and 31 July 2017 46982  276 19337 27369 9.17 9.97 Between 1 February 2018 and 31 July 2018 130557  2734 28104 99719 8.15 9.89 Between 1 February 2019 and 31 July 2019  127440  13098 114342 7.47 CAP 2010 Before 30 September 2020 tranche 2 40933  21743 3664 15526 0.0025 9.68 CAP 2014 Before 30 September 2023 2097363  2097363 0.0025 CSOP 2014 Before 30 September 2023 UK 400512  400512 11.16 Before 30 September 2023 Canada 116519  116519 11.16
Before 30 September 2025  159269  159269 Buyout award Before 30 September 2025  221011 88404  132607  11.09 2876922 507720 152866 68550 3163226 Weighted average exercise price  2.62 1.88 1.82 7.76 2.43 The options outstanding at 30 September 2016 had a weighted average remaining contractual life of 6.81 years.
Cashsettled options The Group has liabilities in respect of two share option schemes that are classified by IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments as cash settled.
These consist of the cash element of the CAP 2010 and the CAP 2014 scheme.
Share Option Schemes The Company has four share option schemes for which an IFRS 2 Sharebased Payments charge has been recognised.
Details of these schemes are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 58 to 73.
The fair value per option granted and the assumptions used in the calculation are shown below.
Save as You Earn SAYE options
Date of grant 22 Dec 5 Jan 23 Dec Market value at date of grant p 1019 934 1031 Option price p 815 747 825 Option life years 3.5 3.5 3.5 Expected term of option grant to exercise years 3.0 3.0 3.0 Exercise price p 815 747 825 Riskfree rate 0.61% 0.59% 0.18% Dividend yield 2.29% 2.13% 2.19% Volatility 24% 22% 22% Fair value per option  2.34 2.03 2.17 The Group operates a SAYE scheme in which all employees including Directors employed in the UK are eligible to participate.
Participants save a fixed monthly amount of up to 500 for three years and are then able to buy shares in the Company at a price set at a 20% discount to the market value at the start of the savings period.
In line with market practice no performance conditions attach to options granted under this plan.
The SAYE options were valued using the BlackScholes optionpricing model.
Expected volatility was determined by calculating the historical volatility of the Groups share price over a period of three years.
The expected term of the option used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
130 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 24 Sharebased payments continued Capital Appreciation Plan CAP and Company Share Option Plan CSOP CAP 2010 CAP 2014 CSOP 2014 Date of grant Tranche 2 30 Mar Tranche 1 20 Jun Tranche 2 20 Jun Tranche 3 20 Jun
20 Jun
20 Jun Market value at date of grant p 501 1115.67 1115.67 1115.67 1115.67 1115.67 Option price p 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1115.67 1115.67 Option life years 10 9.28 9.28 9.28 9.28 9.28 Expected term of option grant to exercise years 54 5 644 Exercise price p 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25 1115.67 1115.67 Riskfree rate 2.75% 1.50% 1.90% 2.30% 1.50% 1.50% Dividend growth 7.00% 8.43% 8.43% 8.43% 8.43% 8.43% Fair value per option  4.20 9.89 9.57 9.19 9.89 9.89 Exercise price excludes the effect of the funding award.
The CAP 2010 executive share option scheme was approved by shareholders on 21 January 2010.
Each CAP 2010 award comprises two equal elements an option to subscribe for ordinary shares of 0.25 pence each in the Company at an exercise price of 0.25 pence per ordinary share and a right to receive a cash payment.
The award pool comprised 3500992 ordinary shares with an option value of 15.0m and cash of 15.0m limiting the total accounting cost to 30.0m over its life.
The awards vest in two equal tranches.
The first tranche of awards became exercisable in February 2013 on satisfaction of the primary performance condition in 2012 and there are no options outstanding.
The second tranche became exercisable in February 2014 in which the primary performance condition was again satisfied.
The remaining balance of the second tranche is subject to an additional performance condition applicable for the vesting of the second tranche of awards which requires the profits of each business in the subsequent vesting period be at least 75% of that achieved in the year the first tranche of awards became exercisable.
The options lapse to the extent unexercised by 30 September 2020.
The remaining CAP 2010 share options are unlikely to vest and the charge has been released in 2017.
The CAP 2014 was approved by shareholders on 30 January 2014 as a replacement for CAP 2010.
Each CAP 2014 award comprises two equal instalments an option to subscribe for ordinary shares of 0.25 pence each in the Company for nil consideration and a right to receive a cash payment.
The value of the awards is linked directly to the growth in profits over the performance period.
The award pool comprises a maximum of 3.5m shares and cash of 7.6m limiting the cost of the scheme to 41.0m over its life.
Awards will vest in three equal tranches subject to the performance conditions and lapse to the extent unexercised by 30 September 2023.
The minimum performance target under CAP 2014 was not achieved and the options have lapsed in 2017.
No costs were amortised in 2017 2016 nil.
Performance Share Plan PSP The PSP was approved by shareholders on 1 June 2015.
Under the PSP each award of nilcost options has a maximum life of 10 years.
The maximum award is shares with a market value of 200% of annualised basic salary.
These awards will not normally vest until the respective three or five years after the award and provided the performance conditions have been met.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 two grants which have either a three or fiveyear vesting periods were made under the PSP in the form of nilcost options.
A share award was made to A Rashbass of 141857 and CR Jones of 25562.
The actual number of award shares which vest will depend on the extent to which performance conditions have been satisfied over a fiveyear period ending on 30 September 2021.
The other share award was made to Divisional Directors totalling 157809 award shares whereby vesting will depend on the extent to which performance conditions have been satisfied over a threeyear period ending on 30 September 2019.
For the year ended 30 September 2016 the only grant under this scheme was to A Rashbass for 159269 share awards with a fair value of 1.5m.
The share price used to determine the number of shares awarded under the PSP grants is the average of the middle market quotations of an Ordinary Share as derived from the Daily Official List for the five dealing days preceding the date of grant.
Further details are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report.
PSP
Date of grant 18 Dec 19 Dec 19 Dec Market value at date of grant and fair value per option p 942.18 1057.40 1057.40 Option price p Number of options shares 159269 167419 157809 Option life years 10 10 10 Expected term of option grant to exercise years 5 53 Exercise price p 0.25 0.25 0.25 Buyout award A buyout award was issued to A Rashbass on 1 October 2015.
Further detail is provided in the Directors Remuneration Report.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
131 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
25 Acquisition commitments and deferred consideration The Group is party to contingent consideration arrangements in the form of acquisition commitments acquisition deferred consideration payments and deferred consideration receipts on disposal.
The Group recognises the discounted present value of the contingent consideration.
This discount is unwound as a notional interest charge to the Income Statement.
The Group regularly performs a review of the underlying businesses to assess the impact on the fair value of the contingent consideration.
Any resultant change in these fair values is reported as a finance income or expense in the Income Statement.
Acquisition commitments Deferred consideration payments Deferred consideration receipts At 1 October 11771 9171 480  526 589 Additions from acquisitions during the year note 15 4997 665 700 480 Additions from disposals during the year     2679 450 Paymentreceipt during the year   833  1386 662 Exercise of commitments 540 239 Net movements in finance income and expense during the year note 7 2970 601 3  180 Exchange differences to reserves 133 1573   10 149 At 30 September 13125 11771 350 480 1989 526 Within one year 9904 326 350 480 419 In more than one year 3221 11445   1570 526 13125 11771 350 480 1989 526 The acquisition commitment addition of 5.0m relates to Layer123.
The remaining interest in Layer123 is subject to put and call options under an earnout agreement in three equal instalments based on the profits of Layer123 for its years ended February 2018 2019 and 2020 note 15.
Exchange differences to reserves were recorded within net exchange differences on translation of net investments in overseas subsidiary undertakings in the Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Reconciliation of finance income and expense note 7
Deferred consideration payments Deferred consideration receipts Remeasurement during the year 4136 258 3  79 Imputed interest 1166 859   101 Net movements in finance income and expense during the year 2970 601 3  180 The noncontrolling interest of Ned Davis Research NDR has exercised its put options over the remaining 15% stake in NDR.
The liability has been remeasured using the contractual mechanism which has resulted in a credit to the Income Statement of 3.3m.
The discounted present value of the acquisition commitment relating to NDR at 30 September 2017 was 8.5m and will be settled in January 2018.
The value of the acquisition commitments acquisition deferred consideration payments and deferred consideration receipts on disposal is subject to a number of assumptions.
The potential undiscounted amount of all future payments that the Group could be required to make under the acquisition contingent consideration arrangements is as follows 2017 2016
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
NDR 8758 8758 46314 World Bulk Wine 15662  672 FastMarkets  480 ReSec 286 Layer123 19047 43753 8758 47466 On 30 October 2017 the Group disposed of its 74% stake in World Bulk Wine to Comexposium Holding SAS for a cash consideration of 13.6m 12.0m note 11.
The discounted present value of the acquisition commitment relating to World Bulk Wine at 30 September 2017 was 0.3m.
The disposal has been disclosed as an event after the balance sheet date note 30.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
132 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 25 Acquisition commitments and deferred consideration continued The potential undiscounted amount of all future receipts that the Group could receive under the disposal deferred consideration arrangements is as follows 2017 2016
Minimum
Maximum
Minimum
II Newsletters   142 Gulf Publishing 302 302 312 Petroleum Economist 72 72 72 HFI 1250 1250 II Searches 69 69 Euromoney Indices 350 350 2043 2043 526 The discounted acquisition commitments acquisition deferred consideration payments and deferred consideration receipts on disposal are based on predetermined multiples of future profits of the businesses and have been estimated on a transaction by transaction basis using available performance forecasts.
The Directors derive their estimates from internal business plans and financial due diligence.
At 30 September 2017 the weighted average growth rates used in estimating the expected profits range was 5%.
A one percentage point increase or decrease in growth rate in estimating the expected profits results in the acquisition commitment at 30 September 2017 increasing or decreasing by 0.2m with the corresponding change to the value charged or credited to the Income Statement in future periods.
26 Operating lease commitments At 30 September the Group had committed to make the following payments in respect of operating leases on land and buildings
Within one year 8161 7685 Between one and five years 28500 19993 After five years 45496 23303 Continuing operations 82157 50981 Discontinued operations 2169 3443 Total 84326 54424 The Groups operating leases do not include any significant leasing terms or conditions.
In December 2016 Institutional Investor LLC entered into a lease agreement for offices in New York.
This lease expires in April 2033 and does not include a break clause.
The lease was rent free during the year to 30 September 2017.
The future operating lease commitments are 47.2m.
At 30 September the Group had contracted with tenants to receive the following payments in respect of operating leases on land and buildings Within one year 989 949 Between one and five years 1638 2164 After five years 304 709 2931 3822 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
133 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
27 Retirement benet schemes The Group operates a number of pension schemes under which contributions are paid by the employer and employees.
The total net pension costs from continuing operations of the Group for the year ended 30 September 2017 were 3.1m 2016 3.1m.
Defined contribution schemes The Group operates the following defined contribution schemes DMGT PensionSaver Euromoney PensionSaver and the Metal Bulletin Group Personal Pension Plan in the UK and 401k savings and investment plan in the US.
In compliance with the Pension Act 2008 the Group operated a defined contribution plan DMGT PensionSaver up to 30 June 2017 and thereafter the Euromoney PensionSaver into which relevant employees are automatically enrolled.
The pension charge in respect of defined contribution schemes for the year ended 30 September comprised
DMGT and Euromoney PensionSaver 2048 2059 Metal Bulletin Group Personal Pension Plan 14 15 Private schemes 966 889 Harmsworth Pension Scheme  11 3028 2974 DMGT and Euromoney PensionSaver Both schemes operate as group personal pension plan under the same terms.
The Euromoney PensionSaver is the principal pension arrangement offered to employees of the Group.
Employees are able to contribute a minimum of 2% of salary with an equal company contribution in the first three years of employment and thereafter at twice the employee contribution rate up to a maximum employer contribution of 10% of salary.
Assets are invested in funds selected by members and held independently from the Companys finances.
The investment and administration is undertaken by Fidelity Pension Management.
Metal Bulletin Group Personal Pension Plan The Metal Bulletin Group Personal Pension Plan is a defined contribution arrangement under which contributions are paid by the employer and employees.
The scheme is closed to new members.
The plans assets are invested under trust in funds selected by members and held independently from the Companys finances.
The investment and administration of the plan is undertaken by Skandia Life Group.
Private schemes Institutional Investor LLC contributes to a 401k savings and investment plan for its employees which is administered by an independent investment provider.
Employees are able to contribute up to 50% of salary maximum of US52000 a year with the Company matching up to 50% of the employee contributions up to 6% of salary.
Defined benefit schemes The Group operates the Metal Bulletin plc Pension Scheme MBPS and participates in the Harmsworth Pension Scheme HPS which is a scheme operated by DMGT both of which are now closed to new entrants.
In 2016 due to a change in DMGTs policy to allocate the assets and liabilities of DMGT groups defined benefit plan on a buyout basis the Groups share of HPSs liability was recognised at 30 September 2016 which was treated as an exceptional item as shown in note 5.
Harmsworth Pension Scheme HPS is a multiemployer defined benefit scheme operated by DMGT and closed to further accrual.
A full actuarial valuation of the scheme is carried out triennially by the scheme actuary.
Prior to its closure to future accrual on 1 January 2016 DMGT made annual contributions of 12% or 18% of members basic pay depending on membership section to HPS.
Following the results of the latest triennial valuation as at 31 March 2016 DMGT agreed a Recovery Plan involving annual funding payments of 13.0m on 5 October 2016 to 2018 16.2m on 5 October 2019 to 2025 and 76.2m on 5 October 2026.
DMGT considers that these contribution rates are sufficient to eliminate the deficit over the agreed period.
This Recovery Plan will be reviewed at the next triennial valuation due to be completed with an effective date of 31 March 2019.
In February 2014 DMGT agreed with the Trustees that should it continue its share buyback programme it would make additional contributions to its schemes amounting to 20% of the value of shares purchased.
No contributions relating to this agreement were made in the year to 30 September 2017.
DMGT enabled the Trustees of HPS scheme to acquire a beneficial interest in a Limited Partnership investment vehicle LP.
The
LP has been designed to facilitate payment of 10.8m as part of the deficit funding payments described above over the period to 2026.
In addition the LP is required to make a final payment to the scheme of 149.9m or the funding deficit within the scheme on an ongoing actuarial valuation basis at the end of the period to 2026 if this is less.
For funding purposes HPSs interest in the LP is treated as an asset of the scheme and reduces the actuarial deficit within the scheme.
However under IAS 19 Employee Benefits the LP is not included as an asset of the scheme and therefore is not included in the disclosures below.
DMGT also has a defined benefit obligation relating to the DMGT AVC Plan the Plan which is closed to further member contributions.
Following the results of the most recent actuarial valuation of the Plan carried out with an effective date of 31 March 2017 the Trustees and DMGT have agreed that no further contributions are required from DMGT.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
134 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 27 Retirement benet schemes continued DMGT expects to contribute approximately 13.0m to the schemes during the year to 30 September 2017 including the deficit funding payments described above.
The Euromoney Group did not contribute to the scheme in 2017 and expects to contribute 0.1m in 2018.
Northcliffe Trustees Limited the Trustee has been appointed by DMGT as an independent trustee to administer and manage the HPS on behalf of the members in accordance with the terms of the HPS Trust Deed and Rules and relevant legislation principally the Pension Schemes Act 1993 the Pensions Act 1995 and the Pensions Act 2004.
Metal Bulletin Pension Scheme A full actuarial valuation of the defined benefit scheme is carried out triennially by the Scheme Actuary.
The latest valuation of the MBPS was completed as at 1 June 2016.
As a result of the 2016 valuation the Company agreed to make annual contributions of 38.9% per annum of pensionable salaries plus 55900 per month to the scheme over the period to 2022.
The Group considers that the contributions set at the last valuation date are sufficient to eliminate the deficit and that regular contributions which are based on service costs will not increase significantly.
The Group expects to contribute approximately 0.7m to the MBPS during the year to 30 September 2018.
Pension Legacy Trustees Limited the Trustee has been appointed by Euromoney Global Limited as an independent trustee to administer and manage the MBPS on behalf of the members in accordance with the terms of the MBPS Trust Deed and Rules and relevant legislation principally the Pension Schemes Act 1993 the Pensions Act 1995 and the Pensions Act 2004.
The International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee in its document IFRIC 14 has interpreted the extent to which a company can recognise a pension surplus on its Statement of Financial Position.
Having taken account of the rules of the schemes the Group considers that recognition of surpluses in the schemes on its Statement of Financial Position would be in accordance with the interpretation of IFRIC 14.
A reconciliation of the net pension deficit reported in the Statement of Financial Position is shown in the following table Present value of defined benefit obligation 74781 71174 Fair value of plan assets 64827 61179 Deficit reported in the Statement of Financial Position 9954 9995 The deficit for the year excludes a related deferred tax asset of 1.7m 2016 asset 1.7m.
The movements in the defined benefit liability over the year is as follows
Fair value of plan assets Net defined benefit liability At 30 September 2016 71174 61179 9995 Current service cost 77  77 Interest expenseincome 1089 887 202 Total charge recognised in Income Statement 1166 887 279
Return on plan assets excluding amounts in interest expenseincome  3153 3153 Gain due to change in financial assumptions 824  824 Loss due to change in demographic assumptions 4249  4249 Experience loss 48  48 Total losses recognised in Statement of Comprehensive Income 3473 3153 320 Contributions  employers  640 640 Contributions  plan participants 8 8 Payments from the plans  benefit payments 1040 1040 At 30 September 2017 74781 64827 9954 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
135 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
27 Retirement benet schemes continued
Fair value of plan assets Net defined benefit liability At 30 September 2015 34452 32479 1973 Current service cost 90  90 Interest expenseincome 1264 1198 66 Total charge recognised in Income Statement 1354 1198 156
Return on plan assets excluding amounts in interest expenseincome  3589 3589 Gain due to change in financial assumptions 10804  10804 Total losses recognised in Statement of Comprehensive Income 10804 3589 7215 Contributions  employers  598 598 Contributions  plan participants 10 10 Payments from the plans  benefit payments 710 710 Recognition due to change in accounting policy for HPS 25264 24015 1249 At 30 September 2016 71174 61179 9995 The major categories and fair values of plan assets are as follows Equities 25231 23609 Bonds 32752 31535 Property 3835 2846 With profits policy 2583 2734 Cash and cash equivalents 426 455 64827 61179 Equities include hedge funds and infrastructure funds.
All the assets listed above excluding property and cash and cash equivalents have a quoted market price in an active market.
The assets do not include any of the Groups own financial instruments nor any property occupied by or other assets used by the Group.
The actual return on plan assets was 4.0m 2016 4.8m.
The key financial assumptions adopted are as follows MBPS HPS % % % % Discount rate 2.55 2.40 2.60 2.40 Price inflation 3.10 2.95 3.20 2.95 Salary increases 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 Pension increases 3.00 2.80 3.00 2.80 The discount rate for both scheme liabilities and the fair value of scheme assets reflects yields at the yearend date on highquality corporate bonds and are based on a cash flowbased yield curve calculating a single equivalent discount rate reflecting the average duration of the schemes liabilities rounded to the nearest 0.05% p.
At 30 September 2016 this methodology incorporated bonds given an AA rating from at least one of the main four rating agencies Standard and Poors Moodys Fitch and DBRS.
At
30 September 2017 the methodology reverted back to incorporated bonds given an AA rating from at least two of the four main rating agencies as used in years prior to 30 September 2016.
The impact of this change in accounting estimate is to increase the defined benefit obligation and net pension obligation reported on the Statement of Financial Position as at 30 September 2017 by 1.8m.
RPI inflation is derived in a similar way to the discount rate but with reference to the Bank of England spot curve at the duration of the schemes weighted average duration with an appropriate allowance for inflation risk premium MBPS 0.30% p.
HPS 0.20% p.
The nominal and real spot curves provided by the Bank of England were extrapolated up to 50 years using a bootstrapping method which uses gilt price information provided by the UK Debt Management Office.
Mortality assumptions take account of scheme experience and also allow for further improvements in life expectancy based on the Continuous Mortality Investigation CMI projections but with a longterm rate of improvement in future mortality rates of 1.25% p.
Allowance is made for the extent to which employees have chosen to commute part of their pension for cash at retirement.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
136 12112017 115734 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 27 Retirement benet schemes continued The average duration of the defined benefit obligation at the end of the year is approximately 16 years for MBPS 2016 20 years and 20 years for HPS 2016 20 years.
MBPS HPStel 2016 Assumed life expectancy in years on retirement Retiring at the end of the reporting year Retiring 20 years after the end of the reporting year 1 MBPS  62 years HPS  60 years Pension costs and the size of any pension surplus or deficit are sensitive to the assumptions adopted.
The sensitivity of the defined obligation to changes in the weighted principal assumptions is
Change in assumption Change in liabilities Discount rate Increase by 0.1% Decrease by 0.9% Inflation rate Increase by 0.1% Increase by 0.8% Salary increases Increase by 0.25% Increase by 0.7% Life expectancy Increase by one year Increase by 3.4% The above sensitivity analyses are based on a change in an assumption while holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice this is unlikely to occur and changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
The sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to significant actuarial assumptions has been estimated by projecting the results of the last full actuarial valuation as at 1 June 2016 forward to 30 September 2019.
The methods and types of assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity analysis did not change compared to the previous period.
These are the significant risks in connection with running defined benefit schemes and the key risks are detailed below Discount rate risk The present value of the defined benefit obligation is calculated using a discount rate set with reference to highquality corporate bond yields.
A decrease in corporate bond yields will increase the present value of the defined benefit obligation although this will be partially offset by an increase in the value of corporate bonds held by the schemes.
Inflation rate risk A significant proportion of the defined benefit obligation is linked to inflation therefore increased inflation will result in a higher defined benefit obligation.
The Trustees have sought to acquire certain assets with exposure to inflationary uplifts in order to negate a proportion of this risk.
Life expectancy risk The present value of the defined benefit obligation is calculated with reference to the best estimate of the mortality of scheme members.
An increase in assumed life expectancy will result in an increase in the defined benefit obligation.
Regular reviews of mortality experience are performed to ensure life expectancy assumptions remain appropriate.
Investment risk This is a measure of the uncertainty that the return on the schemes assets keeps pace with the discount rate.
The schemes hold a significant proportion of equities and similar growth assets which are expected to outperform the discount rate in the long term.
28 Contingent liabilities Claims in Malaysia Four writs claiming damages for libel were issued in Malaysia against the Company and three of its employees in respect of an article published in one of the Companys magazines International Commercial Litigation in November 1995.
The writs were served on the Company on 22 October 1996.
Two of these writs have been discontinued.
The total outstanding amount claimed on the two remaining writs is Malaysian ringgit 83.1m 14.7m.
No provision has been made for these claims in these financial statements as the Directors do not believe the Company has any material liability in respect of these writs.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
137 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
29 Related party transactions The Group has taken advantage of the exemption allowed under IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures not to disclose transactions and balances between group companies that have been eliminated on consolidation.
Other related party transactions and balances are detailed below The Group had borrowings under a US160m multicurrency facility with Daily Mail and General Holdings Limited DMGH a Daily Mail and General Trust plc DMGT group company Fees on the available facility for the year 153 525 This facility was terminated on 29 December 2016.
Deposits  73639 This agreement was terminated on 6 January 2017.
Services expensed 379 960 From January 2017 the services expensed include a charge under the transitional service agreement with DMGT signed on 3 January 2017.
During the year DMGT group companies surrendered tax losses to Euromoney Consortium Limited under an agreement between the two groups.
These tax losses are relievable against UK taxable profits of the Group under HMRCs consortium relief rules Amounts payable 387 1633 Tax losses with tax value 516 2177 Amounts owed toby DMGT group at end of year 387 121 On 8 December 2016 the Group acquired 0.3% of the equity of Euromoney Consortium Limited from DMG Charles Limited for a cash consideration of 0.7m.
Refer to the increase in equity holdings section in note 15.
On 6 January 2017 the Group completed the offmarket purchase of 19247173 ordinary shares from the DMGT group for cancellation at a price of 9.75 per share.
The transaction was approved by shareholders at the Companys general meeting held on 29 December 2016.
The Group participates in the Harmsworth Pension Scheme HPS a defined benefit scheme operated by DMGT which up to 30 September 2016 was accounted for as a defined contribution scheme.
The Groups share of the HPS deficit is Surplusdeficit on defined benefit scheme 26 1249 viii During the year the Group provided services to Risk Management Solutions Ltd a DMGT subsidiary for HKD1046608 2016 HKDnil.
During the year no dividend was received from associate undertakings.
For 2016 a dividend of 83000 was received from World Bulk Wine.
During the year Ned Davis Research NDR a subsidiary undertaking leased office space at market rates from a separate entity Bird Bay Properties LLC which is owned by a minority shareholder of NDR.
The amount paid was US0.6m 2016 paid
NF Osborn served as an advisor to the Boards of both DMG Events and dmgi which were fellow group companies.
NF Osborn resigned from the Companys Board of Directors on 28 January 2016.
He did not receive a fee for the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 US23250.
The Directors who served during the year received dividends of 0.2m 2016 0.2m in respect of ordinary shares held in the
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
138 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 29 Related party transactions continued xiii Gulf and PE were disposed of during the year ended 30 September 2016 for 10.8m to Gulf Publishing Holdings LLC in which the former president of Gulf and PE John Royall held equity interest of 11%.
The compensation paid or payable for key management is set out below.
Key management includes the Executive and Non Executive Directors as set out in the Directors Remuneration Report and other key divisional Directors who are not on the
Key management compensation Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 7884 9672 NonExecutive Directors fees 455 343 Postemployment benefits 285 319 Other longterm benefits all sharebased 524 992 9148 11326 Of which Executive Directors 3126 4512 NonExecutive Directors 455 343 Divisional Directors 5567 6471 9148 11326 Details of the remuneration of Directors are given in the Directors Remuneration Report.
30 Events after the balance sheet date The Directors propose a final dividend of 21.80p per share 2016 16.40p totalling 23.4m 2016 20.8m for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The dividend will be submitted for approval by shareholders at the AGM to be held on 1 February 2018.
In accordance with IAS 10 Events after the Reporting Period these financial statements do not reflect this dividend payable which will be accounted for in shareholders equity as an appropriation of retained earnings in the year ending 30 September 2018.
On 30 October 2017 the Group disposed of Adhesion Group S.
Adhesion and its 74% stake in World Bulk Wine Exhibition S.
World Bulk Wine to Comexposium Holding SAS for a cash consideration of 13.6m 12.0m.
Given that the IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations criteria to be classified as held for sale have been met at 30 September 2017 the assets and liabilities of Adhesion and World Bulk Wine have been disclosed separately on the face of the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Adhesion and World Bulk Wine contributed 9.1m 7.8m to the Groups revenue for the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 10.3m 7.9m and 0.4m 0.3m to the Groups operating profit for the year ended 30 September 2017 2016 2.4m 1.8m.
On 22 November 2017 the Group announced that it had reached a binding agreement to sell its 15.5% share in Diamond TopCo Limited Dealogic to Ion Investment Group for approximately US135m.
Completion of the sale is subject to regulatory approvals and it is expected to take approximately six weeks to complete.
There were no other events after the balance sheet date.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
139 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
31 List of Subsidiaries In accordance with section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of subsidiaries and partnerships the registered office and the effective percentage of equity owned included in these consolidated financial statements at 30 September 2017 are disclosed below.
Company
Proportion held Principal activity and operation Registered office Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC na Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom ABF1 Limited 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom ABF2 Limited 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Adhesion Asia Limited 100% Dormant 38F Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Wanchai Hong Kong Adhesion Group S.
100% Events 35 37 Rue Des Abondances 92513 Boulogne Billancourt Cedex France Asia Business Forum Singapore Pte Ltd 100% Dormant 38 Beach Road 2911 South Beach Tower  Singapore Asia Business Forum Thailand Limited 100% Dormant No.
19378 Lake Rajada Building 19th Floor Rajadapisek Road Klongtoey district and Klongtoey subdistrict Bangkok 10110 Thailand Asia Business Forum SDN.
BHD 100% Dormant Suite 30C 3rd Floor Wisma TCL 470 Jalan Ipoh 51200 3rd Mile Kuala Lumpur Malaysia BCA Research Inc.
100% Research and data services 1002 Sherbrook Street West Montreal Qubec H3A 3L6
Benchmark Financials Ltd 100% Dormant Street 93 N 1527 7th Floor Bogota Colombia BPR Holdings Ltd BVI 100% Dormant Street 93 N 1527 7th Floor Bogota Colombia BPR Benchmark Limitada 100% Dormant Street 93 N 1527 7th Floor Bogota Colombia Bright Milestone Limited 100% Investment holding company 38F Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Wanchai Hong Kong Business Forum Group Holdings Ltd 100% Dormant No.
19378 Lake Rajada Building 19th Floor Rajadapisek Road Klongtoey district and Klongtoey subdistrict Bangkok 10110 Thailand Centre for Investor Education UK
75% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Centre for Investor Education Pty Limited 75% Events Level 8 168 Lonsdale Street Melbourne VIC 3000 Australia EII Ventures Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom EII Holdings Inc.
100% Investment holding company Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States EII US Inc.
100% Investment holding company Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States EIMN LLC 100% Events Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Euromoney BML Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Canada Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Charles Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Consortium 2 Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Consortium Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney ESOP Trustee Ltd 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Global Limited 100% Publishing and events 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Guarantee Limited 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Holdings Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Euromoney Holdings US Inc 100% Investment holding company Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Euromoney Institutional Investor Jersey
100%
15 Esplanade St Helier JE1 1RB Jersey Euromoney Institutional Investor Shanghai Ltd 100% Publishing training and events Unit 305C 3F Azia Center 1233 Lujiazui Ring Road Shanghai China Euromoney Jersey Limited 100%
15 Esplanade St Helier JE1 1RB Jersey Euromoney Luxembourg S.
100% Investment holding company 295 rue de Neudorf L220 Luxembourg Grand Duchy of Luxembourg Luxembourg Euromoney Partnership LLP 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
140 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 31 List of Subsidiaries continued
Proportion held Principal activity and operation Registered office Euromoney Publications Jersey Limited 100% Investment holding company 15 Esplanade St Helier JE1 1RB Jersey Euromoney Services Inc 100% Research and data services Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Euromoney Singapore Pte Limited 100% Events 8 Marina Boulevard 0502 Marina Bay Financial Centre Singapore  Singapore Euromoney Trading Limited 100% Publishing training and events 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Fantfoot Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom FOEX Limited 100% Research and data services Mannerheimintie 40 D 85 00100 Helsinki Finland Fastmarkets Limited 100% Publishing 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Fastmarkets Pte Limited 100% Publishing 600 North Bridge Road 2301 Parkview Square
Fastmarkets Inc 100% Publishing 310 Alder Road PO Box 841 Dover Kent DE 19904 United
GGA Pte.
Limited 100% Events 8 Marina Boulevard 0502 Marina Bay Financial Centre
Glenprint Limited 100% Publishing 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Global Commodities Group Sarl 100% Events Rue Boulevard de SaintGeorges 72 1205 Geneva
Insider Publishing Limited 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Institutional Investor Networks Inc 100% Publishing and events Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Institutional Investor LLC 100% Publishing and events Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Institutional Investor Networks UK
100% Information services 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Internet Securities BVI Ltd 100% Dormant Romasco Place Wickhams Cay 1 P.
O.
Box 3140 Road Town Tortola VG1110 British Virgin Islands Internet Securities Egypt Ltd 100% Dormant 3 El Badia Street Off Al Thawra Street Heliopolis Cairo Egypt Internet Securities Inc.
100% Information services Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Layer123 Events and Training Limited 61% Events 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Metal Bulletin Holdings LLC 100% Investment holding company Corporation Service Company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington DE 19808 United States Ned Davis Research Inc.
85% Research and data services 600 Bird Bay Drive West Venice FL 34285 United States PL Holdings LLC 100% Research and data services National Registered Agents Inc.
160 Greentree Drive Ste 101 Dover DE 19904 United States Redquince Limited 100% Investment holding company 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Reinsurance Security Consultancy.
Limited
83% Publishing 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom RISI Asia Hong Kong Limited 100% Research and data services Room 909 9F.
Wayson Commercial Building 28 Connaught Road West Sheung Wan Hong Kong RISI Consulting Beijing Co Ltd 100% Research and data services Room 1561Unit 0106 Floor 15 Section A Building 9 Dongdaqiao Road Chaoyang Beijing China RISI Consultoria em Productos Florestais 100% Research and data services Rua Bernadino de Campos n 98 Sobreloja Bairro Paraso CEP 04004040 So Paulo Brazil RISI Inc 100% Research and data services National Registered Agents Inc.
160 Greentree Drive Ste 101 Dover DE 19904 United States RISI US Holdco Inc 100% Research and data services National Registered Agents Inc.
160 Greentree Drive Ste 101 Dover DE 19904 United States RISI Sprl 100% Research and data services Avenue Louise 523 1050 Brussels Belgium Shanghai Leadway Ecommerce Co Ltd 100% Research and data services Room 907 No.
388 West Nanjing Road Huangpu District Shanghai China Steel First Limited 100% Dormant 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Storas Holdings Pte Ltd 100% Dormant 38 Beach Road 2911 South Beach Tower  Singapore Tipall Limited 100% Property holding 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom World Bulk Wine Exhibition S.
74% Events Morago 7 Bajo 13200 Manzanares Spain 100% preference shares held in addition.
Euromoney Institutional Investor Jersey Limiteds principal country of operation is Hong Kong.
Euromoney Jersey Limiteds principal country of operation is United Kingdom.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
141 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
31 List of Subsidiaries continued The below subsidiaries have been disclosed as discontinued operations note 11
Proportion held Principal activity and operation Registered office CEIC Data  Internet Securities Japan
100% Information services 706 Aios Ginza 8175 Ginza Chuoku Tokyo 1040061
CEIC Data SG Pte Ltd 100% Information services 180B Bencoolen Street 0603 The Bencoolen
CEIC Data Shanghai Co Ltd 100% Information services Unit K32F No.588 Pudong South Road Pudong Shanghai
CEIC Data Co Ltd 100% Information services 38F Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Wanchai Hong Kong CEIC Data Thailand Co Ltd 100% Information services 19378 Lake Rajada Office 19F Ratchadapisek Rd Klongtoey Bangkok 10110 Thailand CEIC Data Korea Limited 100% Information services 5th Fl.
Yulchon Bldg YeouidoDong 20 GukjegeumyungRo Yeongdeungpogu Seoul Korea Republic of Korea CEIC Holdings Limited 100% Information services 38F Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Wanchaisite Malaysia Sdn Bhd 100% Information services Unit 3001 Level 30 Tower A Vertical Business Suite Avenue 3 Bangsar South No.
8 Jalan Kerinchi 59200 Kuala Lumpur
Euromoney Polska SP Zoo 100% Information services
Jerozolimskie 123a 02017 Warszawa Poland Internet Data Services I Pvt Ltd 100% Information services 124 Mittal Court C Wing Nariman Point Mumbai 400 021
Internet Securities Argentina S.
100% Dormant Suipacha 1111 Piso 11 Buenos Aires Argentina Internet Securities do Brazil Ltda 100% Information services Rua Tabapu 422 Suite 43  44 Itaim Bibi So Paulo 04533 001 Brazil Internet Securities Bulgaria EOOD 100% Information services 3840 Osogovo Str.
Floor 8 Office 8.1 Sofia 1303 Bulgaria Internet Securities de Chile Ltda 100% Information services Herfanos 1055 oficina 503 Santiago Chile Internet Securities Hong Kong Ltd 100% Information services 38F Hopewell Centre 183 Queens Road East Wanchai Hong Kong Internet Securities Limited 100% Information services 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX United Kingdom Internet Securities LLC 100% Investment holding company 251 Little Falls Drive Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 United States Internet Securities Shanghai Limited 100% Information services Room 205D 6th Building NO.1147 Kang Ding Road Jingan District Shanghai China ISI Emerging Markets Colombia SAS.
100% Information services Street 93 N 1527 7th Floor Bogota Colombia PT CEIC Data Indonesia 100% Information services Menara Thamrin 3Af Suite 3A07 Jl M. hamrin Kav.
Kel.
Kampung Bali Kec.
Tanah Abang Jakarta Pusat 10340
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
142 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 5 31 List of Subsidiaries continued All holdings are of ordinary shares.
In addition the Group has a small number of branches outside the United Kingdom.
The dormant companies listed above are exempt from preparing individual accounts and from filing with the registrar individual accounts by virtue of section 394A and 448A of Companies Act 2006 respectively.
A list of associates joint ventures and joint arrangements is disclosed in note 14.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 the following subsidiary undertakings of the Group were exempt from the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 relating to the audit of individual accounts by virtue of section 479A of the Companies Act 2006
Company registration number Euromoney Charles Limited EII Ventures Limited Euromoney Partnership LLP OC Internet Securities Limited Redquince Limited Steel First Limited Insider Publishing Limited Reinsurance Security Consultancy. o.
K Limited Euromoney Consortium Limited Euromoney Consortium 2 Limited FastMarkets Limited Glenprint Limited Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
143 12112017 115735 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Company Balance Sheet as at 30 September 2017
Fixed assets Tangible assets 5 402 471 Investments 6 1086904 1214757 Debtors 7 152026 1239332 1215228 Current assets Debtors 7 104259 26951 Cash at bank and in hand 941 506 105200 27457 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year 8 103 2693 Net current assets 105097 24764 Total assets less current liabilities 1344429 1239992 Creditors Amounts falling due after more than one year 8 214073 306801 Net assets 1130356 933191 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 10 273 321 Share premium account 103147 102835 Other reserve 64981 64981 Capital redemption reserve 56 8 Capital reserve 1842 1842 Own shares 21005 21005 Reserve for sharebased payments 38395 37334 Fair value reserve 1358 1358 Profit and loss account 941309 745517 Total shareholders funds 1130356 933191 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC registered number  has taken advantage of section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 and has not included its own profit and loss account in these accounts.
The profit after taxation of Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC included in the Group profit for the year is 419.5m 2016 92.9m.
The financial statements on pages 144 to 149 were approved by the Board of Directors on 22 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Andrew Rashbass Colin Jones
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
144 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Company Statement of Changes in Equity as at 30 September 2017
Share premium account
Capital redemption reserve
Own
Reserve for share based payments
Profit and loss account
At 30 September tel557 64981 8 1842 21582 37169 1358 682204 868857 Profit for the year  92904 92904 Credit for sharebased payments  742  742 Cash dividends paid  29591 29591 Exercise of share At 30 September tel835 64981 8 1842 21005 37334 1358 745517 933191 Profit for the year         419457 419457 Own shares acquired in the year 48   48     193465 193465 Credit for sharebased payments       1061   1061 Cash dividends paid 30200 30200 Exercise of share options  312        312 At 30 September tel147 64981 56 1842 21005 38395 1358 941309 1130356 1 Refer to the Group financial statements note 9.
The investment in own shares is held by the Euromoney Employees Share Ownership Trust and Euromoney Employee Share Trust.
The trusts waived the rights to receive dividends.
Interest and administrative costs are charged to the profit and loss account of the trusts as incurred.
Number
Number
Euromoney Employees Share Ownership Trust 58976 58976 Euromoney Employee Share Trust 1700777 1700777 Total 1759753 1759753 Nominal cost per share p 0.25 0.25 Historical cost per share  11.94 11.94 Market value 000 20607 19516 The other reserve represents the share premium arising on the shares issued for the purchase of Metal Bulletin plc in October 2006.
Of the reserves above a total of 66.2m is distributable to equity shareholders of the Company comprising the sharebased payments reserve of 38.4m and 48.8m of the profit and loss account less 21.0m in relation to own shares by virtue of section 381 Companies Act 2006.
The remaining balance of the profit and loss account of 892.5m is not distributable.
There were insufficient distributable profits in EII Ventures Limited EIIV to support the dividend of 2.7m received from EIIV in the prior year.
The dividend received has been reversed in the current year.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
145 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Notes to the Company Accounts 1 Accounting policies Basis of preparation These financial statements have been prepared in compliance with United Kingdom Accounting Standards including Financial Reporting Standard 102 The Financial Reporting Standard Applicable in the UK and Republic of Ireland FRS 102 and the Companies Act 2006.
The accounts have been prepared under the historical cost convention except for financial instruments which have been measured at fair value and in accordance with applicable United Kingdom accounting standards and the United Kingdom Companies Act 2006.
The accounting policies set out below have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently throughout the current and prior year.
The going concern basis has been applied in these accounts.
No operating segments have been disclosed as the Company operates as one operating segment.
Disclosure exemptions The Company satisfies the criteria of being a qualifying entity as defined in FRS 102.
Its financial statements are consolidated into the financial statements of the Group.
As such advantage has been taken of the following disclosure exemptions available under FRS 102 in relation to sharebased payments financial instruments presentation of a cash flow statement certain related party transactions and the effect of future accounting standards not yet adopted.
Leased assets Operating lease rentals are charged to the profit and loss account on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Tangible fixed assets Tangible fixed assets are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Depreciation of tangible fixed assets is provided on a straightline basis over their expected useful lives at the following rates per year Shortterm leasehold premises over term of lease
Current tax including UK corporation tax and foreign tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax arises from timing differences that are differences between taxable profits and total comprehensive income as stated in the financial statements.
These timing differences arise from the inclusion of income and expenses in tax assessments in periods different from those in which they are recognised in financial statements.
Deferred tax is recognised on all timing differences at the reporting date except for certain exceptions.
Unrelieved tax losses and other deferred tax assets are only recognised when it is probable that they will be recovered against the reversal of deferred tax liabilities or other future taxable profits.
Deferred tax is measured using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the period end and that are expected to apply to the reversal of the timing difference.
Subsidiaries
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost less impairment.
Cost is adjusted to reflect amendments from contingent consideration.
Cost also includes directly attributable cost of investment.
Interest in associates Investments in associates are held at historical cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Trade and other debtors Trade receivables are recognised and carried at original invoice amount less provision for impairment.
A provision is made and charged to the profit and loss account when there is objective evidence that the Company will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms.
Cash at bank and in hand Cash at bank and in hand includes cash shortterm deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised as an expense in the period in which they are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim
Provisions
A provision is recognised in the balance sheet when the Company has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
If material provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and where appropriate the risks specific to the liability.
Sharebased payments The Company makes sharebased payments to certain employees which are equitysettled.
These payments are measured at their estimated fair value at the date of grant calculated using an appropriate option pricing model.
The fair value determined at the grant date is expensed on a straight line basis over the vesting period based on the estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
At the period end the vesting assumptions are revisited and the charge associated with the fair value of these options updated.
In accordance with the transitional provisions FRS 102 section 26 Share based Payments has been applied to all grants of options after 7 November 2002 that were unvested at 1 October 2004 the date of application of FRS 20.
The Company operates the Groups PSP and other Group sharebased payment schemes details of which can be found in note 24 to the Group accounts.
Own shares held by Employees Share Ownership Trust and Employees Share Trust Transactions of the groupsponsored trusts are included in the Group financial statements.
In particular the trusts holdings of shares in the Company are debited direct to equity.
The Group provides finance to the trusts to purchase Company shares to meet the obligation to provide shares when employees exercise their options or awards.
Costs of running the trusts are charged to the Income Statement.
Shares held by the trusts are deducted from other reserves.
2 Key judgemental areas adopted in preparing these nancial statements
Investments are impaired where the carrying value of an investment is higher than the net present value of the future cash flows.
An impairment of 113.2m was recognised in 2016 note 6.
Key areas of judgement in calculating the net present value are the forecast cash flows the longterm growth rate of the applicable businesses and the discount rate applied to those cash flows.
Investments held in the Statement of Financial Position at 30 September 2017 were 1087m 2016 1215m.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
146 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 3 Staff costs Details of Directors remuneration are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 58 to 73 and in note 6 to the Group accounts.
The Executive Directors do not receive emoluments specifically for their services to this Company.
There are no employees remunerated by this Company 2016 nil.
4 Remuneration of auditor Fees payable for the audit of the Companys annual accounts 16 16 5 Tangible assets
Cost
At 1 October 2016 and at 30 September 2017 701
At 1 October 2016 230 Charge for the year 69 At 30 September 2017 299 Net book value at 30 September 2017 402 Net book value at 30 September 2016 471 6 Investments 2017 2016
Investments
Total
Subsidiaries
Investments
Total
At 1 October 1182802 31955 1214757 965155 31955 997110 Additions    330897  330897 Disposal 95898 31955 127853 Impairment    113250  113250 At 30 September 1086904  1086904 1182802 31955 1214757 On 9 December 2016 the Company sold its shareholding in CEIC Holdings Ltd and Diamond Topco Limited to Euromoney Publications Jersey Ltd a subsidiary of the Company for a consideration of US159m.
For the financial year ended 2016 the Company subscribed to 1000 new ordinary shares of HK1 each in CEIC Holdings Ltd for a total consideration of US148m and subscribed to 43 new ordinary shares of 1 each in Euromoney Canada Ltd for a total consideration of 235m.
In addition a review of the Companys investments was undertaken to ensure that their carrying book values were supported by their expected future profits.
It was found that the carrying value of the investment in Euromoney Jersey Limited could no longer be supported.
As a result an impairment was made to fully write down the value of the investment resulting in a charge of 113.2m.
Details of the principal subsidiary and associated undertakings of the Company at 30 September 2017 can be found in note 31 to the Group accounts.
7 Debtors Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed by Group undertakings 101072 25777 Other debtors 572 Corporate tax 2615 1174 104259 26951 Amounts owed by Group undertakings include loans totalling 27.3m 2016 20.1m with interest rates from 2.93% to 3.98% 2016 4.82% and repayable in September 2018.
The remaining balance of 73.8m 2016 5.7m is interest free and repayable on demand.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
147 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Notes to the Company Accounts continued 7 Debtors continued Amounts falling due after more than one year Amounts owed by Group undertakings 151097 Other debtors 929 Amounts owed by Group undertakings include a loan of 151.1m 2016 nil with a floating interest rate of 2.76% and repayable in September 2022.
8 Creditors Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings  2487 Provisions note 9 62 Loan notes  185 Accruals and deferred income 41 21 103 2693 Amounts falling due after more than one year Amounts owed to Group undertakings 213221 306041 Provisions note 9 366 274 Other creditors 486 486 214073 306801 Amounts owed to Group undertakings include three loans totalling 213.2m 2016 four loans of 306.0m with interest rates from 1.60% to 4.5% 2016 1.98% to 4.50% and repayable between February 2019 and December 2021.
9 Provisions
Other
Total
At 1 October 2016 274  274 Provision in the year  154 154 At 30 September 2017 274tel Maturity profile of provisions Within one year 62 Between one and five years 36telThe other provision consists of social security costs arising on share option liabilities.
The dilapidation provision represents the Directors best estimate of the amount likely to be payable on expiry of the Companys property leases.
10 Called up share capital Allotted called up and fully paid 109101608 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 2016 128313356 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 273 321 During the year 35425 ordinary shares of 0.25p each 2016 64462 ordinary shares with an aggregate nominal value of 88 2016 161 were issued following the exercise of share options granted under the Companys share option schemes for a cash consideration of 311658 2016 278608.
On 6 January 2017 the Group completed the purchase for cancellation of 19247173 ordinary shares from its then majority shareholder DMG Charles Limited a DMGT group company.
The aggregate nominal value of the shares cancelled was 48118.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
148 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 11 Commitments and contingent liability At 30 September the Company has committed to make the following payments in respect of operating leases on land and buildings Within one year 647 692 Between one and five years 61 706 Over five years 708 1398 The operating lease cost is charged to the profit or loss account of a fellow Group company.
Crossguarantee
The Company and certain other companies in the Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Group have given an unlimited cross guarantee in favour of its bankers.
12 Related party transactions Related party transactions and balances are detailed below The Company had a US160m multicurrency facility with Daily Mail and General Holdings Limited DMGH a fellow Group company note 20 to the Group accounts Fees on the available facility for the year 153 525 This facility was terminated on 29 December 2016.
Deposits  73639 This agreement was terminated on 6 January 2017.
Guarantee fee  1192 Licence fee  4787 Management fee 643 934 643 5045 Amounts due under current account 6289 5720 iv In accordance with section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 a full list of subsidiaries and partnerships the registered office and the effective percentage of equity owned are disclosed in note 31 to the Group accounts.
13 Post balance sheet event The Directors propose a final dividend of 21.80p per share 2016 16.40p totalling 23.4m 2016 20.8m for the year ended 30 September 2017 subject to approval at the AGM to be held on 1 February 2018.
These financial statements do not reflect this dividend payable but will be accounted for in shareholders equity as an appropriation of retained earnings in the year ending 30 September 2018.
There were no other events after the balance sheet date.
Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
149 12112017 115736 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Five Year Record Consolidated Income Statement Extracts
Restated
Restated
Restated
CONTINUING OPERATIONS Revenue 368325 372443 368612 366062 386923 Operating profit before acquired intangible amortisation long term incentive expensecredit and exceptional items 114033 112351 97986 91358 95253 Acquired intangible amortisation 15686 16559 16543 16817 20566 Longterm incentive expensecredit 1586 1980 2490 Exceptional items 1925 2630 34184 37264 31253 Operating profit 98686 96442 118117 37277 43434 Share of results in associates and joint ventures 284 264 381 1823 1890 Net finance costsincome 10625 2304 281 2010 856 Profit before tax 88345 94402 118017 33444 40688 Tax expense on profit 18928 24185 15634 11118 3390 Profit for the year from continuing operations 69417 70217 102383 22326 37298 DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS Profit for the year from discontinued operations 3608 5648 3303 8687 5889 PROFIT FOR THE YEAR 73025 75865 105686 31013 43187 Attributable to Equity holders of the parent 72623 75264 105444 30744 42718 Equity noncontrolling interests 40tel469 73025 75865 105686 31013 43187 Basic earnings per share 57.88p 59.49p 83.42p 24.31p 37.98p Diluted earnings per share 56.70p 59.15p 83.38p 24.29p 37.91p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 70.96p 70.60p 70.12p 66.51p 76.44p Diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares 128077588 127236311 126460787 126584778 112704904 Dividend per share 22.75p 23.00p 23.40p 23.40p 30.60p Adjusted profit before tax 116527 116155 107810 102529 106462 Adjusted profit after tax 91286 90433 88920 84463 86617 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Extracts Intangible assets 505613 545443 531379 551139 593962 Noncurrent assets 23255 18707 47760 50753 53885 Accruals 48381 47973 55743 73375 67819 Deferred income 106051 109842 112129 118786 116978 Other net current assets 5371 34933 66902 107779 42562 Noncurrent liabilities 46048 84745 33225 40009 208815 Net assets 333759 356523 444944 477501 296797 The five year record does not form part of the audited financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
150 12112017 115737 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Shareholder Notes Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
151 12112017 115737 AM 25610  11 December 2017 1143 AM  Proof 4 Shareholder Notes Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney AR2017 FinancialsProof 6.
152 12112017 115737 AM Shareholder Information Financial calendar 2017 final results announcement Wednesday 22 November 2017 Final dividend exdividend date Thursday 30 November 2017 Final dividend record date Friday 1 December 2017 Trading update Thursday 1 February 2018 2018 AGM approval of final dividend Thursday 1 February 2018 Payment of final dividend Thursday 15 February 2018 2018 interim results announcement Thursday 17 May 2018 Interim dividend exdividend date Thursday 24 May 2018 Interim dividend record date Friday 25 May 2018 Payment of 2018 interim dividend Thursday 21 June 2018 2018 final results announcement Thursday 22 November 2018 Provisional dates and subject to change Company Secretary and registered ofce Tim Bratton 8 Bouverie Street
EC4Y 8AX England registered number Shareholder enquiries Administrative enquiries about a holding of Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC shares should be directed in the first instance to the Companys registrars Equiniti Telephonetel Lines are open 830am to 530pm UK time Monday to Friday excluding English public holidays.
Overseas Telephone 00 44tel A number of facilities are available to shareholders through the secure online site site
Independent Auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 1 Embankment Place London WC2N 6RH
UBS
5 Broadgate London EC2M 2QS
Cameron McKenna Nabarro Olswang LLP 78 Cannon Street London EC4N 6AF
Equiniti
Aspect House Spencer Road Lancing West Sussex BN99 6DA Production by Designed by MerchantCantos site Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Financial statements Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
145 12112017 121157 PM Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Euromoney Institutional Investor PLC 8 Bouverie Street London EC4Y 8AX site Euromoney AR2017 CoverProof 6.
