12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Innovative Technology Solutions Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
3 13122017 094603 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 About Sanderson Sanderson is a publiclyowned UK provider of software solutions and IT services.
We supply innovative marketfocused solutions to the retail manufacturing wholesale distribution and logistics sectors.
Highly experienced in the markets we serve we forge longterm relationships with our customers.
This allows us to consistently deliver real business benefit and help our customers achieve rapid return on their investment in IT.
Established in 1983 Sanderson has a multimillion pound turnover and a track record of profitable trading.
We strive to be the best in our chosen fields and achieve market leadership through the quality of our products people and services.
Contents
Our Business Highlights 01 At a glance 02 Chairmans statement 03 Group Chief Executives business review 05 Digital Retail 08 Enterprise  Manufacturing 09 Enterprise  Wholesale Distribution and Logistics 10 Strategic report 11 Senior team and recent appointments 14 Our Governance Board of directors 16 Governance statement 17 Directors report 19 Our Financials Independent auditors report to the members of Sanderson Group plc 21 Consolidated income statement 27 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 28 Consolidated statement of financial position 29 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 30 Consolidated statement of cash flows 31 Notes to the consolidated financial statements 32 Company statement of financial position 58 Company statement of cash flows 59 Company statement of changes in equity 60 Notes to the Company financial statements 61 Group information IBC Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
4 13122017 094605 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12
Financial
Revenue increased to 21.56 million 2016 21.32 million.
Precontracted recurring revenues increased to 11.18 million 2016 10.75 million representing 52% of total revenue in the period 2016 50%.
Operating profit increased to 3.90 million 2016 3.69 million.
Continued strong cash generation with net cash balance at 30 September of 6.18 million 2016 4.34 million well ahead of market expectations.
Proposed increased final dividend up 11% to 1.55 pence per share 2016 1.4 pence making total dividend for the year 2.65 pence 2016 2.4 pence.
Basic earnings per share increased 18% to 5.2 pence per share 2016 4.4 pence.
12% to 13.69 million 2016 12.26 million 6% to 3.90 million 2016 3.69 million 10% to 2.65 pence 2016 2.40 pence
Sales order intake increased 12% to 13.69 million 2016 12.26 million.
Order book at 30 September stood at 5.79 million 2016 3.02 million which includes a significant new order from an existing customer for delivery over next two financial years.
Appointment of Richard Mogg as Group Finance Director post yearend.
Post yearend acquisition of Anisa Consolidated Holdings Limited valued at 12 million a worldclass integrated supply chain and enterprise resource planning solutions specialist.
Order Intake Operating Profit Total Dividend Operating profit is stated after adjusting for amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles sharebased payment charges and oneoff nonrecurring items the latter totalling 0.49 million.
Interim and declared final dividend in respect of the financial year.
01 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
1 13122017 094606 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 At a glance Digital Retail Enterprise OmniChannel Retail Technology Sanderson helps retailers bridge the gap between online and in store shopping to offer the seamless joinedup experience their customers now demand.
Solutions include instore technology backoffice systems for processing sales and fulfilling orders and mobile and ecommerce solutions to underpin online operations.
Our systems allow retailers to keep pace with new devices technologies and channels driving consumer engagement retention and increased sales.
Manufacturing
Enterprise Resource Planning ERP software for modern manufacturing in general manufacturing engineering and food and drink processing businesses.
Streamlines processes and drives growth.
Wholesale Distribution Industryspecific software and warehouse management systems.
Delivering sales growth and profitability efficiency and control across wholesale distribution cash and carry fulfilment and logistics businesses.
Sanderson Group plc is a wellestablished and profitable software and IT services business specialising in the retail manufacturing wholesale distribution and logistics sectors.
Operating primarily in the UK and Ireland the Group provides its customers with enterprise systems designed to help them run their businesses efficiently and profitably.
A robust and resilient business 550 customers and c.
230 employees IT solutions provider with extensive software IPR and expert knowledge of target markets Strong market position driven by innovation Substantial recurring revenues Longterm customer relationships built on high quality service and support Sales and Marketing
Finance and Admin
Customers
Predominantly small and medium enterprises
Strong market position driven by innovation Wellestablished UKowned provider of IT solutions Substantial software IPR and expert knowledge of target markets
Sanderson serves customers nationwide from six locations around the UK Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 02 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
2 13122017 094608 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12
Chairmans statement
Sanderson Group plc Sanderson or the Group is a software and IT services business specialising in digital retail technology and enterprise software for businesses operating in the manufacturing wholesale distribution and logistics sectors.
Financial results The Groups trading results for the year ended 30 September 2017 show revenue of 21.56 million 2016 21.32 million and operating profit of 3.90 million 2016 3.69 million after adjusting for the amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles oneoff nonrecurring items and sharebased payment charges.
The oneoff nonrecurring items totalling 0.49 million include costs relating to potential acquisitions during the year the consolidation of office premises with internal reorganisation as well as the costs incurred in changing the Group Finance Director.
Mitigating and offsetting these costs was the receipt in full of a licence fee from a former customer who had been disputing payment relating to their access of the Groups software.
Overall gross margin remains high at 82% 2016 84% and though slightly lower than the prior year the continuing high gross margin reflects the continued emphasis and focus upon the supply of Sanderson proprietary software and services.
Recurring revenue which is revenue derived from pre contracted software licence fees and ongoing support services increased to 11.18 million 2016 10.75 million representing 52% of total revenue in the period 2016 50%.
Sales order intake grew by 12% to 13.69 million 2016 12.26 million.
The
Group order book at 30 September 2017 was 5.79 million 2016 3.02 million and includes a significant new order from an existing customer which is scheduled to be delivered over the course of the next two financial years.
Sanderson has a strong cashgenerative business model which has resulted in a cash balance at 30 September 2017 of 6.18 million 2016 4.34 million well ahead of market expectations.
This balance is stated after the increased payment of 1.38 million 2016 1.21 million in dividends to shareholders during the year.
Dividend
The Groups continuing strong cash generation enables the Board to maintain a progressive dividend policy whilst continuing to invest in the further development of the Groups businesses.
Subject to the approval of shareholders at the Annual General Meeting scheduled to be held at 11am on Thursday 15 February 2018 the Board is proposing an increase of 11% in the final dividend to 1.55 pence per ordinary share 2016 1.4 pence.
This makes the total dividend paid in the year of 2.65 pence per ordinary share and represents an increase of 10% over the prior year 2016 2.4 pence.
The final dividend if approved will be paid on 16 March 2018 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 2 March 2018.
Post period end event
On Friday 24 November the Group announced the acquisition of Anisa Consolidated Holdings Limited for an enterprise value of 12 million.
Anisa specialises in the delivery of world class integrated supply chain and enterprise resource planning solutions and has around 250 customers who are provided with twentyfour hour support on a worldwide basis throughout the year.
Anisa employs over 90 staff and operates from office locations in London Runcorn Liverpool and Solihull within the UK and from smaller support operations in Singapore and
Anisa complements the Enterprise Division of Sanderson and the enlarged merged business is expected to provide and develop incremental and synergistic market opportunities.
The managed services hosting services and cloud delivery services which have been developed by Anisa represent an exciting and enhanced service delivery option for existing Sanderson customers.
Commenting on the acquisition Group Chief Executive Ian Newcombe said We are delighted to welcome the Anisa team led by Ross Telford David Renshaw and Lionel Moore together with their Anisa colleagues to Sanderson and we are excited by the prospect of combining our two strong wellpositioned businesses and by the opportunities that will arise from working closely together in the future.
The Groups continuing strong cash generation enables the Board to maintain a progressive dividend policy whilst continuing to invest in the further development of the Groups business.
Christopher Winn
03 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
3 13122017 094609 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8
Chairmans statement
The acquisition of supply chain and ERP solutions specialist Anisa provides incremental opportunities Anisa and Sanderson have known each other for many years and though this transaction is a Sanderson acquisition it feels more like a merger.
Whilst Anisa and Sanderson have rarely competed in their respective target markets they are very complementary in terms of their ethos and business model providing costeffective solutions supported by providing quality service to customers thereby building and developing longterm relationships.
The strategy of the combined business is to continue to develop the existing range of products and services delivered to existing customers to further invest and develop the Anisa relationships with strategic partners and to provide additional investment in order to accelerate growth opportunities by attracting even more new customers.
Our enlarged Group provides a great opportunity to further build shareholder returns and shareholder value and we value and appreciate the confidence shown by the Anisa team in agreeing to hold their new Sanderson shares for at least a period of three years.
We believe that our enlarged Group provides a great opportunity to further increase returns and value for Sanderson shareholders.
Strategy
The strategy of the Board is to achieve sustained growth by continuing to build and to develop the Sanderson business.
Whilst investment is planned across all of the Groups businesses particular emphasis will again be placed on enhancing the range of mobile and ecommerce solutions in Digital Retail where digital transformation is an active market opportunity.
Mobileenabled solutions continue to be developed to address all of the Groups target markets.
The Group will further strengthen its proposition to customers in the Enterprise Division especially in providing solutions for food and drink processing as well as investing in the further development of products covering the logistics fulfilment and supply chain areas.
Sanderson has enjoyed considerable success building a strong reputation over a number of years within the wholesale distribution market and further investment is planned developing a new suite of digital based solutions.
In order to augment organic growth selective complementary acquisitions are under continuous consideration.
We are pleased that Anisa is now part of the Group and a number of potential opportunities have been and are being considered.
Sanderson management endeavours to adopt a careful and measured approach to acquisition opportunities and cautiously considers any risks which might be involved.
The Board remains focused upon further increasing shareholder value by continuing to deliver both organic and acquisitive growth achieving on target results increasing earnings thereby achieving strong cash generation and maintaining a robust balance sheet.
This enables the Board to maintain progressive dividend returns to shareholders.
Management and staff At 30 September 2017 Sanderson employed almost 230 staff who have a high level of experience and specialist expertise in the market sectors in which the Group operates.
Following the acquisition of Anisa the Group now has over 300 employees.
The commitment of staff is crucial to achieving further progress and on behalf of the Board I would again like to express our appreciation and thank everyone for their hard work support dedication and contribution to the ongoing development of the Group.
Adrian Frost who had served as Group Finance Director since 2005 left Sanderson in September and we wish Adrian every success with his new employer.
Richard
Mogg joined Sanderson as Group Finance Director in October from Capita where latterly he worked in the Capita Education Software Services business.
Richards considerable commercial financial and business experience will further enhance the management team and we are very much looking forward to working together over the years to come.
Christopher Winn
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 04 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
4 13122017 094612 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12
Group Chief Executives business review
More rapid growth available via Digital Retail and renewed impetus for growth from the Enterprise business is expected to enable the Group to meet its strategic targets.
Ian Newcombe Group Chief Executive The target market for Sanderson products and services primarily comprises of SMEs small and mediumsized enterprises.
The
Groups welldeveloped business model is to foster longterm customer relationships which result in a high proportion of sales arising from precontracted recurring revenue complemented by incremental sales to its strong wellestablished and growing customer base.
This robust business stream usually accounts for around 50% of Group revenues.
Sanderson proprietary software is developed in anticipation of technological developments and often in conjunction collaboration and partnership with its large customer base.
Sanderson proprietary software is marketed and sold under a right to use licence with all sales marketing delivery support and services being carried out by the Groups own expert staff.
Group business solutions are developed and marketed in order to provide customers with value for money IT systems designed to offer cost effective timely and tangible business benefits.
These solutions typically enable customers to increase revenue whilst also achieving additional efficiencies by making and maintaining cost savings both often within twelve months of implementation.
Such robust and agile systems will be key to help customers remain competitive in challenging market times.
The Group continues to invest in the development of its software products and services as well as in increasing its sales and marketing capacity and capability.
Particular emphasis has been placed on the Group businesses specialising in the UK food and drink processing and wholesale distribution sectors and especially in the market for digital retail solutions with the continued development of mobile and ecommerce solutions.
These solutions enable retailers to capitalise on the significant growth opportunities arising from the widespread adoption of smartphones and tablets and to exploit mobile as a sales channel that is becoming fully integrated with existing business systems.
At the core of the Groups welldeveloped business model is Sanderson proprietary software with both onpremise as well as cloudbased solutions being offered to customers on an ongoing annual contractual basis together with the accompanying consultancy support and maintenance services.
In the year ended 30 September 2017 these precontracted recurring revenues amounted to 11.18 million 2016 10.75 million representing 52% of total revenues 2016 50%.
The gross margin from recurring revenues covered 67% of total Group overheads in the financial year 2016 63%.
Reflecting both prior and continuing investment in the Groups sales and marketing function Sanderson continued to achieve a significantly improved level of order intake during the year up 12% to 13.69 million compared with 12.26 million in the prior year.
During the year thirteen new customers contributed orders to the value of 1.60 million 2016 22 new customers generated orders to the value of 3.83 million.
The financial year ending 30 September 2016 had been exceptional in terms of new sales orders from new customers.
New customer orders for the financial year ending 30 September 2017 are in line with the longer term fouryear average.
The development of opportunities from new customers and prospects remains a key focus for the business.
Review of Digital Retail Sanderson provides comprehensive IT solutions to businesses operating in the ecommerce mobile commerce and retail sectors of the UK.
Mobile solutions instore technology and the digital experience continue to be key business drivers in this very active and rapidly developing market.
The Digital Retail Division which works with leading retailers such as JD Sports and Superdry continued to make good progress achieving double digit revenue growth of 13.8% to 7.28 million 2016 6.40 million.
Operating profits grew by a third to 1.18 million adjusted for amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles sharebased payment charges and oneoff nonrecurring items 2016 0.89 million.
The Group continues to invest in product innovation and delivery capacity in order to address this rapidly expanding market.
The leadership team was further strengthened during the year and the business undertook a consolidation to a single location in order to generate additional efficiencies going forward.
We previously reported that a large new retail customer had been gained towards the end of the financial year ended 30 September 2016.
This was the very highly rated home entertainment retailer Richer Sounds confirmed by the Which organisation as the Best High Street Shop 2017.
With a high level of effort and teamwork both from the excellent Richer Sounds team 05 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
5 13122017 094613 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8
Group Chief Executives business review
Digital Retail is continuing to experience increased levels of sales activity as well as from our own support team the Sanderson solution was successfully installed and implemented on time and on budget during the financial year ending 30 September 2017.
Large orders from existing customers included Axminster Tool Centre Limited The Savile Row Company and QUIZ plc.
Digital Retail is continuing to experience increased levels of sales activity.
A significant order was received from an existing customer which is scheduled to be delivered over the course of the next two financial years.
In addition following receipt of an initial order worth over 200000 from a leading global fashion brand a large pilot scheme is now underway with this new customer.
The yearend order book was 3.99 million 2016 0.92 million and included the large order to be delivered over the next two years which is mentioned above.
With a number of developing sales prospects active pilot projects and strengthening partnerships with existing customers the Digital Retail business is wellpositioned to take advantage of the growth in this market.
Review of Enterprise The Enterprise Division of Sanderson comprises two marketfocused businesses which operate in the manufacturing and in the wholesale distribution and logistics sectors.
The Enterprise Division has achieved a solid trading performance.
Sales prospects are good but sales cycles have been protracted with the timing of the receipt of sales orders as ever being critical to business performance.
We have not yet perceived any market effect which might be caused by any uncertainty relating to
A restructure and strengthening of management took place across the Division and this should improve the prospects for the Groups Enterprise businesses in the future.
Divisional revenue was 14.28 million 2016 14.92 million following an exceptional performance in the prior financial year.
Operating profit adjusted for amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles share based payment charges and oneoff non recurring items was 2.71 million 2016 2.80 million.
The Group continues to invest in product development and in its sales and marketing capability.
The Enterprise Division optimised delivery during the year reflected in the order book which at the financial yearend was valued at 1.81 million 2016 2.10 million.
Enterprise  Manufacturing Businesses in the engineering plastics aerospace electronics print general manufacturing and food and drink processing sectors represent the main areas of specialisation for Sanderson in manufacturing markets.
The Groups manufacturing business is very much driven by activity in the food and drink industry with the Sanderson business addressing this sector outperforming market growth.
Traceability of ingredients through the supply chain and compliance with the latest regulatory standards are key requirements for food and drink businesses and are strong features of the Groups solution.
Overall
Sugars Limited with large orders from existing customers including The Burger Manufacturing Company Limited.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 06 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
6 13122017 094615 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Traceability and regulatory compliance are strong features of the Groups food solution The Groups manufacturing business is driven by activity in the food and drink industry with the business addressing this sector outperforming market growth.
Enterprise  Wholesale Distribution and Logistics Sanderson activities in wholesale distribution and logistics are now extended into the specialist warehousing logistics and supply chain markets which augment the solutions provided to the wholesale cash and carry and fulfilment sectors.
Six new customers were gained during the year at an average initial order value of 89000 2016 160000 and this compares with thirteen new customers in the prior year.
Across the Division sales prospects are strong and ahead of this time last year. delivery and distribution businesses.
Major sales orders were gained from a number of existing customers including Tottenham Hotspur Football Club and the Kitwave Wholesale Group.
During the year the Group has invested in some post acquisition restructuring and has built a new management team in the specialist warehousing and logistics business.
Improved levels of growth and profit are now anticipated.
Following the theme of increased digital transformation in the retail market the Sanderson business operating in the wholesale distribution and cash and carry sector has further invested in software development recently launching a new suite of digital solutions which further capitalise on the growing use of mobile devices.
Product innovation together with the Groups track record in the wholesale industry positions the business well for further growth in the coming financial year ending 30 September 2018.
Outlook
The Board has an ongoing business plan which is to accelerate the Groups growth and development both organically as well as by making selective acquisitions in order to further increase profitability and dividends thereby enhancing shareholder value.
The acquisition of Anisa is the result of considerable work from both the Anisa and Sanderson management teams and provides the Group with an enlarged and stronger platform from which to operate.
Further acquisitions are being considered and developed.
The Board will continue to invest in its digital retail solutions and in its enterprise software businesses in order to ensure that product offerings continue to both attract new customers as well as to maximise and to encourage additional investment in system enhancements and new technological developments from existing customers.
The combination of more rapid growth available via the Digital Retail Division and renewed impetus for growth from the Enterprise business is expected to enable the Group to meet its strategic targets over the course of the coming years.
Whilst the Group has not yet detected any major loss of confidence from either existing or prospective customers the Board and senior management continue to carefully monitor market conditions customer confidence as well as the development of sales prospects and the progression of these sales prospects into customers.
Sanderson has maintained a strong balance sheet resulting from a robust business model which is built upon longterm customer relationships thereby generating strong recurring revenues.
The Board believes that the Group which now includes the Anisa business is well positioned in its target markets.
A healthy order book and good sales prospects provide the Board with a good level of confidence that at this relatively early stage of the new financial year the Group will make further progress and deliver trading results which are at least in line with market expectations for the year ending 30 September 2018.
Ian Newcombe Group Chief Executive 07 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
7 13122017 094618 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Digital Retail The iPad solution is improving the customer experience and instore sales.
The iPads are proving increasingly popular amongst sales assistants and customers are leaving happy.
QUIZ
Creating seamless shopping The Internet and mobile technology have changed the way people shop.
Keeping the customer happy used to be relatively straightforward but todays new techsavvy shopper has high expectations.
Digital retail is the application of new and emerging technologies in particular mobile and social to connect and transform the shopping experience and give customers what they want when and where they want it.
Online shopping is easy and convenient.
Open 247 the customer can shop anywhere anytime.
Internet retailers can offer great discounts flash sales and use the data they hold to market to customers personalise communication and meet needs at the right time.
But there remains a place for the High Street consumers still love to browse and the majority of retail sales are still storebased.
Whats key for retailers is to bridge the gap between online and instore and offer the seamless joinedup shopping experience their customers now demand.
Retailers who fail to provide their customers with a fully connected shopping journey risk missing out on huge sales opportunities and the chance to create a retail experience where shoppers want to spend time and money.
Those who do bridge the gap and utilise instore technology such as transactional kiosks and assistedselling iPads can sell beyond what is simply on the shelf.
They can showcase their entire range upsell avoid lost sales by allowing customers to order outofstock items for next day delivery or use home delivery so customers dont have to carry heavy bags around.
Similarly online retailers can provide joinedup shopping.
For example offering click and collect giving shoppers the option to complete a transaction started online instore or returning an item to a convenient location.
Our digital retail proposition Digital retail is an active and fast developing market.
Technology is having a major impact and Sanderson is well positioned in the sector.
As a longstanding supplier of software and services to retail mail order catalogue fulfilment wholesale and online businesses we have a unique understanding of omnichannel sales and offer a comprehensive range of IT solutions to meet the needs of organisations in this industry.
Our One iota business is at the forefront of retail technology working with many of the UKs leading retail brands to create and implement exceptional shopping experiences using online instore and interactive solutions.
Sanderson provides integrated instore technology the backoffice systems which are so crucial to processing sales and fulfilling customer orders efficiently and mobile and ecommerce systems which underpin online operations.
Our solutions help retailers keep pace with new devices technologies and channels and include desktop solutions mobile web mobile apps instore till EPoS apps assisted selling iPads kiosk deployments mobile payments such as Apple and Android Pay interactive digital signage and beacon technology which allows retailers to communicate with customers mobile devices for marketing.
Working with our retail customers we help them transform the shopping experience driving consumer engagement retention and increased sales.
A Sanderson solution was successfully installed at Richer Sounds Which Best High Street Shop 2017 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 08 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
8 13122017 094621 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Enterprise  Manufacturing Burger Manufacturing Company have invested in Sanderson food ERP technology to power their new 4 million factory.
The cloudbased software will improve productivity across the companys operations.
ERP solutions boosting efficiency and profit Sanderson has been helping UK manufacturers succeed with IT for over 30 years delivering proven software and long term value.
Our latest business systems ERP Enterprise Resource Planning software and cloudbased solutions support many sectors and types of manufacturing and are specifically developed for the markets they address  discrete manufacturing food and drink processing print and distribution.
Designed for modern manufacturing our software helps manufacturers improve processes manage the supply chain and provide excellent customer service.
Whilst our range of Green IT and Factory and Warehouse Automation solutions improve efficiency in manufacturing and bring many cost saving benefits to customers.
Specialist software for food and drink processing Our specialist ERP software is the software of choice for the UKs fastgrowing food and beverage processors.
Most other ERP suppliers try to serve multiple industries leaving food and drink manufacturers with gaps they have to fill with addon systems.
Not so Sanderson with its purposedesigned solution which allows processors to manage their recipes production supply chain and new product development along with sales finance regulatory compliance traceability and reporting.
Just some of the reasons why wellknown food and drink manufacturers nationwide choose Sanderson.
Strong position in the UKs largest manufacturing sector Fuelled by growing food sales and new product development as consumer tastes and shopping habits change food and drink processors are investing in technology to run their businesses more efficiently and manage the complexities of their tightly regulated industry.
Whilst some manufacturing sectors are more volatile and susceptible to economic uncertainty the UK food sector has remained relatively recession proof.
Although the industry is facing enormous cost pressures particularly after the EU referendum there are efficiency gains and cost savings to be had from implementing new systems and Sanderson is well positioned to deliver them.
Recipe weighing software assures product quality and minimises wastage Our Business 09 Stock code SND site Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
9 13122017 094626 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Enterprise  Wholesale Distribution and Logistics We do our best business with companies and individuals who are of a similar mindset to ourselves  focused ambitious flexible and passionate.
The Sanderson team is all of these things.
JW Filshill Wholesale Digital solutions providing growth for wholesalers The wholesale distribution sector is a vital sector linking manufacturers with all types of food and nonfood retailers and foodservice businesses.
As the retail arena has developed sophisticated methods to attract sales offer more shopping channels and retain customers with higher levels of service and increased convenience so the use of technology and data is picking up pace in the wholesale industry.
Wholesale businesses are reappraising the way their customers want to buy from them and the use of technology is instrumental in achieving success in this area.
Its paying off with double digit growth being reported for wholesalers adopting technology according to IGD the global food and grocery experts.
In light of this move to embrace new technology Sanderson has invested in product development and is first to launch in the wholesale market an innovative suite of digital solutions to drive wholesalers future growth and prosperity.
Industryspecific software for wholesale distribution Sanderson has been supplying wholesale specific solutions to the market for more than 20 years and our innovative software is a key element of the continued success being achieved by over 120 wholesale businesses across the UK and Republic of Ireland.
We combine extensive knowledge of the industry with innovative IT solutions to increase sales profitability and control for our wholesale customers.
Our solutions support wholesalers financial and operational needs delivering significant cost savings improved efficiency a fast return on investment and business growth.
Increased IT in logistics The logistics and fulfilment sector employs one in twelve people in the UK and contributes 1 trillion to the economy.
Fuelled by an increase in delivery options together with a rise in orders due to mobile and online ordering logistics is fast becoming the new retail.
Technology is driving competitive advantage as retail activity shifts from shop to warehouse with growth in fulfilment centres rather than stores.
75% of operators in the sector expect increased capex in IT to drive efficiency and productivity according to the UK Logistics Confidence Index.
Intelligent fulfilment and warehouse management For any fulfilment or logistics business it is important to develop a service to satisfy customers delivery expectations plan appropriate flexibility to meet seasonal peaks and ensure sophisticated returns management.
Sanderson fulfilment and logistics solutions enable all of this and more.
Sanderson is a proven supplier of fulfilment logistics and warehouse management systems which cover the entire supply chain.
From procurement to warehouse management and from forecasting to logistics our solutions automate operations and manage the smooth and fast fulfilment of omnichannel sales orders.
We nurture longterm partnerships with businesses that seek to continually improve their performance through the intelligent use of technology people and processes.
During the year we successfully implemented a major new system at DPD one of the UKs leading delivery and distribution businesses.
The post periodend acquisition of integrated supply chain and ERP solutions provider Anisa will enlarge and complement the
The merged business is expected to provide additional synergistic opportunities.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 10 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
10 13122017 094627 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Strategic report Richard Mogg Finance Director Following further invest ment in management and a year of excellent cash generation the Group is well positioned to deliver future growth both organic and acquisitive.
Trading results The Groups strategy is to achieve growth by continuing to build upon and to further develop the Groups businesses operating within the digital retail and enterprise software markets.
Organic growth will be augmented by earningsenhancing acquisitions that can be identified as complementing the Groups existing operations whilst retaining a strong balance sheet.
Revenue increased by 1% to 21.56 million 2016 21.32 million following an exceptional sales year in 2016 compared with prior years.
Whilst the Group continues to operate in competitive markets the Board remains confident of future growth in our chosen markets particularly in Digital Retail having seen 13.8% revenue growth in 2017.
As such the Group continues to invest to ensure solutions offered to customers are modern and functionally rich whilst also ensuring the Sanderson profile remains prominent in the Groups chosen markets.
Operating profit stated before the amortisation of acquisition related intangibles sharebased payment charges and oneoff nonrecurring items increased by 5.7% to 3.90 million 2016 3.69 million in a year where the Group has made senior management changes in two businesses to better position them for future growth whilst also investing considerable time and expense in the year to progress the acquisition of Anisa Consolidated Holdings Limited which has subsequently completed in November 2017.
The Group also incurred costs associated with replacing the Group Finance Director.
Consequently reflecting the additional cost incurred in relation to these items unadjusted profit from operating activities is 2.88 million 2016 3.03 million.
A more detailed review of the financial year is provided in the Chairmans statement and Group Chief Executives business review.
Statement of financial position The Sanderson Board remains committed to pursuing a growth strategy based upon a conservative financing policy the cornerstone of which is a strong balance sheet.
The Group has an established history of converting substantially all of its profit to cash.
At 30 September 2017 after the payment of 83000 deferred consideration in respect of acquired businesses the Group has no debt and a net cash balance of 6.18 million 2016 4.34 million.
The Group continues to invest in product development to ensure the solutions marketed by Sanderson remain modern and competitive whilst at the same time adopting a conservative accounting policy in respect of the treatment of such development expenditure that ensures a significant proportion of the annual development spend is expensed in line with revenues generated.
During the year expenditure totalling 3.21 million 2016 2.99 million was incurred of which 2.21 million 2016 2.11 million was expensed against operating profit.
Treasury
The Group manages its treasury function as part of the central finance department.
Whilst substantially all of the Groups operations are UKbased approximately 900000 of revenue was denominated in euros rather than sterling and an equivalent balancing value of purchases were denominated in US dollars.
Consequently these trading flows have successfully acted as a natural hedge against adverse exchange movements during the year ended 30 September 2017.
Whilst currency markets are expected to remain volatile for the foreseeable future the Group will continue to review its strategy in this area.
At 30 September 2017 cash balances were 6.18 million of which approximately 270000 was held in euros 200000 in USD and 100000 in ZAR.
The Board has reviewed the Groups mediumterm strategy and believes that key strategic developments are achievable whilst retaining a strong balance sheet.
42% to 6.18 million 2016 4.34 million
11 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
11 13122017 094628 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Strategic report continued Key performance indicators KPIs The following KPIs are some of the tools used by management to monitor the performance of the operating businesses within the Group in addition to the more traditional income statement statement of financial position and cash flow analysis reviewed at regular Board meetings.
Indicator 2017 2016 Revenue per employee 95000 92000 Operating profit as a percentage of revenue 13.4% 14.2% Operating profit as a percentage of revenue 18.1% 17.3% Order intake 13.69m 12.26m Debtors more than 30 days overdue as percentage of total debtors 6.2% 10.5% Dividend cover 2.38 2.29 stated before amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles sharebased payment charges and oneoff nonre curring costs Revenue per employee is used as a broad measure of efficiency.
The Group has set a target of 100000 for revenue per employee and has continued to make good progress towards this target during the year.
Operating profit stated before the amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles sharebased payment charges and oneoff nonrecurring items as a percentage of revenue has predominantly increased due to lower sales costs and greater efficiency arising from internal restructuring during the year.
Whereas as a result of the additional costs incurred in delivering some of the oneoff nonrecurring initiatives operating profit as a percentage of revenue has decreased.
Revenue and operating profit have increased by approximately 1% and 6% respectively.
This indicator together with the revenue per employee measure are useful in assessing efficiency levels within the business.
The
Board however remains conscious of the need to invest in technical sales and marketing and management in order to protect and enhance the longer term prospects for the business.
The regular monitoring of order intake is an important indicator of likely trading performance in the shortterm as well as providing an indication as to confidence levels within the customer community.
Whilst the figures presented above show annual order intake management monitors this measure on a monthly basis.
The measure is monitored in conjunction with the value of the order book as a strong order book enables the Group to continue to trade profitably when a temporary downturn in order intake is experienced.
Order
September 2017 including a larger order in the Digital Retail Division to be delivered during the next two years.
With over 12% of the order intake derived from new customers contracting with Sanderson for the first time the Board believes this demonstrates that the Group continues to be well positioned in its target markets.
Following the progress made in 2016 there has been a further marked improvement in overdue debt levels during the course of 2017 resulting in what is now considered to be a far more satisfactory profile of aged debt for the Group.
These improvements have largely arisen from maintaining a stable and strong credit control function through the year with high levels of accountability for debt levels in each division.
Dividend cover compares adjusted diluted earnings per share to the dividend per share declared for the financial year which is subject to approval at the Annual General Meeting due to be held on 15 February 2018.
The Board intends to pursue a progressive dividend policy as trading results continue to improve.
The dividend cover measure provides an indication as to the proportion of overall earnings paid as dividends.
Principal risks and uncertainties Risk management is an important part of the management process throughout the Group.
Regular reviews are undertaken to assess the nature of risks faced the magnitude of the risk presented to business performance and the manner in which the risk may be mitigated.
Where controls are in place their adequacy is regularly monitored.
The Group continues to invest in product development to ensure its solutions remain competitive 2016 2017 Dividend for financial year Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 Our Business 12 Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
12 13122017 094630 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 The risks considered to be particularly important at the current time are set out below Risk category Potential impact Mitigation Economic As a supplier to the digital retail and enterprise software markets a downturn in the economic climate affecting these sectors may lead to a reduced spend on IT systems and services by customers and prospective customers.
In addition the uncertainty surrounding Brexit may lead to further slow down in customer decisionmaking and increased costs.
The Group strives to offer solutions that provide a demonstrable return on investment for both existing as well as new customers as a strategy to capture more of our customers budgeted IT spend.
Forwardlooking indicators such as order intake are regularly reviewed to identify potential deterioration in market conditions.
Product development The Group operates in dynamic markets and must ensure the solutions it offers remain competitive.
Failure to do so may lead to a loss of business with customers and prospective customers obtaining more relevant solutions from elsewhere.
Sanderson regularly discusses business requirements with customers and prospective customers.
Approximately 75% of product development is in response to specific requirements ensuring new product offerings accurately reflect the needs of the markets served.
People An experienced and knowledgeable workforce is required to develop technically complex products and to deliver the services required to enable customers to deploy Sanderson solutions in their businesses.
The market for skilled staff remains competitive and a failure to recruit and retain experienced staff could impact on the Groups ability to develop and deliver solutions.
Providing existing staff with relevant training and career progression opportunities is a key priority for the business.
Recruiting and developing new employees when required is undertaken by experienced staff to ensure the correct calibre of individual is identified.
The Group also offers share options to senior members of staff to mitigate the risk of key personnel leaving.
Project delivery Significant revenue is generated from projects that require the delivery of software and services over extended timescales.
Project failure could result in contracts being cancelled impacting on profitability and cash collection.
Established procedures are used in the delivery and management of projects.
Financial Inaccurate financial information may result in sub optimal decisions being taken by management and staff.
Inadequate internal controls may fail to prevent the Group suffering a financial loss.
The systems of internal control deployed within the Group are designed to prevent financial loss.
Controls are strongest in areas where management considers the potential exposure to the Group of material loss to be at its greatest such as contract management and credit control.
The adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls are reviewed by management.
Acquisition risk The Group will consider complementary and earnings enhancing acquisitions as part of its overall growth strategy.
Acquisitions may not always realise the benefits expected at the time of completion.
A failure to successfully integrate acquisitions may impact on Group profitability.
Due diligence appropriate to the size and nature of the acquisition will be undertaken and warranties and indemnities will be sought from vendors wherever possible.
An integration plan will be formulated as part of the due diligence process and executed as rapidly as is appropriate to the nature of the business acquired.
Reputational The quality of references obtained from existing users of Sanderson software is an important part of the decision making process for a potential customer seeking to appoint Sanderson as a new supplier.
Similarly existing customers are more likely to extend the use of current solutions and purchase new products when they are confident solutions will be delivered on time and to budget.
Poor performance or the provision of sub standard products may therefore result in customer disputes as well as a negative impact on solution sales.
Sanderson strives to maintain its reputation as a supplier of highly functional value for money solutions.
Quality control is an important part of the product development process and senior staff are involved in managing project delivery to ensure wherever possible solutions are delivered on time and to budget.
Approved on behalf of the Board Richard Mogg
27 November 2017 Sanderson Group plc Sanderson House Manor Road Coventry CV1 2GF 13 Stock code SND site Our Business Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
13 13122017 094630 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Some of our senior team and recent appointments Craig Lovat Operations Director Proteus Craig joined the Wholesale Distribution and Logistics Division of Sanderson in February 2017.
Working closely with customers as Operations Director he is responsible for the delivery and quality of the Groups specialist warehouse management software WMS implementations.
For the last 10 years Craig has worked in large and small IT companies and software vendors predominantly with ERP applications helping customers implement their projects.
Prior to this Craig was the IT manager for a national home improvements business.
Cath Sebok Product Director Food and Drink Cath has been at Sanderson for over 25 years.
Starting as a developer she has vast experience in the food and drink industry.
Instrumental in developing the Groups food ERP solution Cath has delivered improved processes and benefits to customers especially in the areas of Factory Floor Data Collection Quality Assurance New Product Development and Recipe Management.
After holding various management roles she is now responsible for operations covering delivery development and support and manages the development of many of the Groups largest food customers.
Paul Aspden Operations Director One iota Paul joined the Groups One iota business in 2014.
In his role as Operations Director he manages the creative support and projects teams supporting them in delivering rich omnichannel shopping experiences that revolutionise the way top retailers and brands engage with their customers.
Paul is a developer digital planner and strategist who prior to Sanderson ran one of the first digital media agencies working with global business to consumer and business to business brands.
Anthony Kelly General Manager Food and Drink A graduate of Nottingham University Anthony worked in the retail and healthcare industries before joining Sanderson in 2002.
He has held a number of senior roles within the Manufacturing Division more recently heading up the operations team where he was responsible for all elements of delivery support and development.
In August 2017 Anthony was promoted to General Manager of the Groups Food and Drink software business.
His remit is to spearhead the Groups continued expansion in the food and drink ERP space.
Christian Brooks Managing Director One iota Christian joined One iota the Groups cloud based retail technology specialist in 2016.
He has understanding of the retail sector having worked for WHSmith and through subsequent experience in the technology industry selling into retail with companies such as Torex Retail QAS Quantiv and
A graduate with a BSc in Business and Management Christian has a proven track record in growing businesses and inspiring teams.
His focus at Sanderson is on working with the team to accelerate One iotas growth.
Mark Adamson Divisional MD Wholesale Distribution Mark is a Chartered Accountant with a degree in pure mathematics.
He was previously Group Finance Director of a large independent group of bus companies then becoming Group FD of an AIM listed medical devices manufacturing and distribution business.
In both these roles Mark had overall responsibility for IT strategy.
Mark originally joined Sanderson as FD of the multichannel and manufacturing divisions before taking up his current role.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 14 Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
14 13122017 094640 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 The Digital Retail Division achieved doubledigit growth and the Group continues to invest in product innovation and delivery capacity in order to address this rapidly expanding market.
Investing in people Our employees are one of our most significant assets.
They have detailed knowledge not only of the IT industry but also of the markets in which we operate.
This means they can develop implement and support solutions which add real value to our customers businesses.
We continually invest in the technology skills and business knowhow of our staff.
Because we develop our own software we offer outstanding opportunities to define the technology roadmap for our solutions.
Our people are passionate about digital and emerging technologies in ecommerce and mobile working at the cutting edge of retail technology and logistics with some of the UKs biggest retailers distributors and brands.
Whilst in manufacturing our experienced staff help customers manage complex and stringent regulatory demands along with driving profitability and efficiency.
Engaging with our community The Sanderson marketing team reengaged with local charity Tiny Tims Childrens Centre to deliver additional support to them in their 20th birthday year.
Tiny
Tims provides free treatments to children and young people with disabilities health problems and special needs.
They offer treatments either not available or limited on the NHS or not affordable to families via the private sector.
Care is the highest priority for staff at the Centre so marketing often slips to the bottom of the pile despite being so important for reaching eligible children as well as attracting donations.
Our marketing team spent time putting their skills to good use.
They worked on social media marketing and promotional ideas to increase visitor numbers to the soft play area that raises valuable funds for the Centre as well as a customer survey and PR to generate much needed publicity for the charitys work.
Sanderson Groups One iota is a passionate team of omnichannel retail technology specialists The Groups marketing team discuss ideas for childrens charity Tiny Tims.
15 Stock code SND site Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
15 13122017 094641 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Board of directors John Paterson NonExecutive Director aged 71 John has extensive City experience as an investment analyst.
He was Managing Director of Albert E Sharp Securities stockbrokers from 1993 until the acquisition of Albert E Sharp by Old Mutual in 1998 and he was instrumental in setting up Arden Partners in 2002 where he was a Director until November 2004.
John is Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
David Gutteridge NonExecutive Director aged 66 David has considerable business experience including with Financial Objects plc Cyan Technology plc and Sanderson Group plc as a nonexecutive director between IPO in 2004 up until 2012.
David was Chairman of Tinglobal Group plc until May 2014 when he led a successful trade sale to Singapore Listed Declout Plc.
David is Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Christopher Winn Chairman aged 67 Following graduation from Nottingham University BA Honours in History Christopher worked for British Olivetti until 1974 when he joined the ACT Group the second UK IT company to be listed on the London Stock Exchange in 1979.
He served on the ACT Group plc Board between 1983 and 1994 undertaking a number of senior roles.
In
1995 he joined the former Sanderson Group becoming Group Chief Executive later that year.
In
1999 Christopher led a take private of the former Sanderson Group with the support and backing of the Alchemy Plan.
Following restructuring and the demerger of the original Group the business focused primarily on UK commercial markets which retained the Sanderson name gained admission to the London Stock Exchange AIM market in December 2004.
Ian Newcombe
Chief Executive Officer aged 62
Ian was appointed to the Board in 2013 and to the position of Chief Executive in June 2015.
Ian
Beginning his career in electronics he moved into the computer industry in 1979 when he joined ACT Group plc where as a local board member he helped establish an international IT support and software services business.
In 1996 Ian joined Mitsubishi Electric of Japan and as International Project Director he was instrumental in the formation of an ISP Internet Service Provider and online financial services business successfully launching a range of innovative projects in the UK and Europe.
In 1999 he was appointed Consulting Director of Talgentra Limited where he developed a new consulting services business which rapidly expanded overseas.
In
2005 Ian became Managing Director of what is now the enlarged multichannel retail division of Sanderson and has since driven the growth of the division.
Richard Mogg Finance Director aged 41 Richard joined the Board in October 2017 bringing significant commercial and finance experience predominantly from software and IT services businesses.
After graduating from the University of Plymouth Richard worked for RM plc where he trained to become a Chartered Management Accountant and undertook various financial management roles across the business.
In 2003 Richard joined Capita plc and in 2005 was appointed as Finance Director of Service
He moved to Capitas IT services business as Finance Director in 2008 and undertook a number of acquisitions leading to promotion to Divisional Finance Director of Capitas IT Services Consulting Division.
In 2012 Richard left to become Commercial Finance Director at Pattonair before rejoining Capita in 2015 where most recently he was Chief Operations Officer for Education Software Services.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 16 Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
16 13122017 094643 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12
Governance statement
As the Companys shares are traded on AIM the Company has chosen not to fully comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code nor is it required to.
However the Company is committed to high standards of corporate governance and draws upon best practice available including those aspects of the Code considered appropriate.
Board of directors The Board is broadly balanced with three executive and two nonexecutive directors.
All executive directors are subject to election by shareholders at the first opportunity after their appointment and to reelection at regular intervals thereafter.
The Board meets on a monthly basis and retains full and effective control of the Group.
Additional meetings are arranged as appropriate to consider Group strategy acquisition and disposal strategies internal controls and risk analysis and the annual budget.
Daytoday management of the Group is delegated to the executive directors and senior management team.
Board committees The Board has established three committees each consisting of as a minimum the two nonexecutive directors.
Each committee has defined terms of reference.
The Audit Committee is chaired by David Gutteridge and meets at least twice a year with the executive directors and representatives of the external auditor in attendance.
The Committees duties include the review of interim and preliminary announcements compliance with accounting standards consideration of the Annual Report and Accounts prior to submission to the Board for approval the appointment and remuneration of the external auditor together with their scope of work and consideration of their findings and the review of internal controls.
The Remuneration Committee is chaired by John Paterson and is referred to below.
The Nominations Committee comprises the nonexecutive directors and Christopher Winn and is responsible for making recommendations on the appointment of additional directors and for reviewing the composition of the Board and the Board committees.
It is chaired by Christopher Winn.
Shareholder communication The directors seek to visit institutional shareholders at least twice a year.
In addition all shareholders are welcome to attend the Annual General Meeting where there is an opportunity to question the directors as part of the agenda or more informally after the meeting.
Communication with shareholders is seen as an important part of the Boards responsibilities and care is taken to ensure that all price sensitive information is made available to all shareholders at the same time.
Funding
At the financial yearend the Group reported cash balances of 6.18 million.
The Groups mediumterm strategy is to maintain a strong balance sheet with positive cash balances.
The Board believes strategic objectives regarding the development of existing businesses and complementary acquisitions are achievable whilst retaining a positive cash balance.
The Group remains profitable and cash generative.
Accordingly the directors have prepared the accounts on a going concern basis.
Directors remuneration The Company adheres to the principles of good governance when deciding remuneration strategy and has delegated responsibility for the remuneration policy to the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee meets at least once a year and its broad responsibility is to ensure the remuneration packages of the executive directors and senior management are competitive and designed to attract retain and motivate individuals of high quality.
The Remuneration Committee is made up of the two nonexecutive directors and is chaired by John
The policy of the Group on directors remuneration is to provide competitive packages that reward Group and individual performance.
Remuneration packages comprise a basic salary an annual performancerelated bonus measured against targets set each year by the Remuneration Committee pension contributions and other benefits.
Where appropriate participation in share incentive plans is also offered.
17 Stock code SND site Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
17 13122017 094643 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Details of directors remuneration are provided in note 8 to the accounts.
Details of options to purchase ordinary shares in the Company that have been granted to directors of the Company are set out below In issue at year end
Exercise price
Earliest exercise date
Adrian Frost 215579 2005 56p Yes 01.10.2007 15.12.2017 Ian Newcombe 300000 2010 23p Yes 21.05.2013 21.05.2020 Ian Newcombe 35000 2011 27.50p No 05.04.2014 05.01.2021 Ian Newcombe 118750 2011 30p No 29.06.2014 29.06.2018 Ian Newcombe 31250 2011 30p No 29.06.2014 29.06.2018 Ian Newcombe 200000 2012 45.75p No 27.11.2015 27.11.2019 Ian Newcombe 200000 2013 71p No 13.12.2016 13.12.2023 Ian Newcombe 123000 2017 72p No 17.01.2020 17.01.2024 Internal control The Board is responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of internal controls.
Control systems are designed to meet the particular needs of the Group and to address the risks to which the Group is exposed.
By their nature internal control systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate risk and can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The
Board has adopted a policy of continuous improvement by regular review for assessing the adequacy of internal controls.
Governance statement continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 18 Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
18 13122017 094643 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Directors report The directors present their report and the audited financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2017.
Business review
A comprehensive analysis of the Groups development and performance is contained in the Chairmans statement Chief Executives business review and Strategic report.
Information on the financial risk management strategy of the Group and of the exposure of the Group to currency risk interest rate risk credit risk and liquidity risk is set out in note 26 to the accounts.
Details of the key performance indicators used by management are set out in the Strategic report.
Dividend
A final dividend of 1.40 pence per share was paid on 14 March 2017 2016 1.20 pence relating to the financial year ended 30 September 2016.
An interim dividend of 1.10 pence per ordinary share was paid on 15 August 2017 2016 1.00 pence per share in respect of the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
The directors propose the payment of a final dividend in respect of the year ended 30 September 2017 of 1.55 pence per ordinary share.
The final dividend is subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting expected to be held on 15 February 2018 and if approved will be paid on 16 March 2018 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 2 March 2018.
Employees
The Groups policy of providing employees with information about the Group has continued and regular meetings are held between management and employees to allow exchanges of information and ideas.
The Group continues to consider ways to encourage the involvement of employees in the Groups performance.
The Group gives every consideration to applications for employment by disabled persons where the requirements of the job may be adequately filled by a disabled person.
Where existing employees become disabled it is the Groups policy wherever practicable to provide continuing employment under similar terms and conditions and to provide training career development and promotion wherever appropriate.
Directors and directors interests Adrian Frost resigned as Group Finance Director on 1 September 2017.
All other directors served throughout the year.
The directors who held office at the end of the financial year are set out below together with their interests in the ordinary shares of the Company according to the register of directors interests Interest at end of year Interest at start of year Ordinary shares of 10 pence Christopher Winn 11786924 11786924 Ian Newcombe 112500 112500 John Paterson 90000 90000 David Gutteridge 575000 575000 Denotes nonexecutive directors.
Details of options to purchase ordinary shares in the Company granted to the executive directors are set out in the Governance statement.
All directors benefit from qualifying third party indemnity provisions in place during the financial year and at the date of this report.
None of the directors who held office at the end of the financial year had any other disclosable interest in the shares of Sanderson Group plc or any other Group companies.
Substantial shareholdings The Company has been advised of the following notifiable interests in more than 3% of its ordinary share capital as at 22 November 2017.
These shareholdings do not incorporate the share issue disclosed in note 30.
Number of shares % Christopher Winn 11786924 21.4 Canaccord Genuity 5036095 9.1 Living Bridge 4818257 8.8 Miton Asset Management 4401022 8.0 Brooks Macdonald Asset Management 2972200 5.4 Unicorn Asset Management 2407572 4.4 Alto Invest 1681717 3.1 19 Stock code SND site Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
19 13122017 094644 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Research and development The Group undertakes a continuous programme of development expenditure both as part of a longterm development programme and in response to specific customer or market requirements.
Development expenditure is capitalised only when the end product is technically and commercially feasible and when sufficient resource is available to complete the development.
All other development expenditure including projects on which revenue of an amount equal to or greater than the cost of development has been generated in the same period as that in which the cost is incurred is recognised in the income statement as an expense.
Statement of directors responsibilities in respect of the Directors report and the financial statements The directors are responsible for preparing the Strategic report Directors report Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have elected to prepare Group and parent company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group and of the profit or loss of the Company and the Group for the period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRS have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors confirm that so far as each director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is not aware and the directors have taken all steps that they ought to have taken as directors in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Auditor
Grant Thornton UK LLP is willing to continue in office.
In accordance with s of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution for their reappointment will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
On behalf of the Board Richard Mogg
27 November 2017 Sanderson Group plc Sanderson House Manor Road Coventry CV1 2GF Directors report continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 20 Our Governance Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
20 13122017 094644 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Independent auditors report to the members of Sanderson Group plc
Our opinion on the financial statements is unmodified.
We have audited the financial statements of Sanderson Group plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 30 September 2017 which comprise the Consolidated income statement the Consolidated statement of comprehensive income the Consolidated and Company statements of financial position the Consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity the Consolidated and Company cash flow statements and Notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Who we are reporting to This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Overview of our audit approach Overall materiality 186000 which represents 4.75% of Groups profit before tax excluding net interest on defined benefit pension scheme deficit sharebased payment charge amortisation of acquired intangible assets and oneoff nonrecurring costs.
Key audit matters were identified as revenue recognition impairment of intangible assets goodwill and valuation of defined benefit pension scheme for the Group.
We performed fullscope procedures on United Kingdom based operations.
We performed analytical procedures over Sanderson Australia pty.
21 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
21 13122017 094644 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Key audit matters The graph below depicts the audit risks identified and their relative significance based on the extent of the financial statement impact and the extent of management judgement.
Potential nancial statement impact Extent of management judgement Valuation of dened benet pension scheme
Impairment of intangible assets
Impairment
Intangibles
Revenue not recorded in the correct period
Low
High Low Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those that had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Key Audit Matter How the matter was addressed in the audit  Group Risk 1 Revenue recognition Revenue is recognised to the extent that economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
Revenue is a key driver of the business and judgement is involved in determining when contractual obligations have been performed and to the extent that the right to consideration has been earned.
In cases where a single contractual arrangement involves the sale of licences support maintenance and services judgement is also involved in allocating the consideration received to the components of the arrangements on a relative fair value basis.
Therefore we identified revenue recognition focusing on occurrence as a significant risk which was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement.
Our audit work included but was not restricted to walkthroughs of each significant class of revenue transactions and assessing the design effectiveness of key controls testing a sample of recurring contracted revenue which comprises the fair value of support and maintenance contracts by agreeing revenue to contracted amounts testing the related deferred income for selected recurring contracts to confirm it is correctly stated at the balance sheet date confirming for a sample of nonrecurring revenue items including sale of licences implementation of services and hardware ensuring that the sale was made to a bona fide customer by agreeing the occurrence of the sale to proof of service determining that a service has been provided or a sale has occurred in the financial year for revenue recorded through journal entries.
The Groups accounting policy on revenue recognition is shown in note 3 and related disclosures are included in note 4.
Key observations Based on our audit work we did not identify any evidence of material misstatement in the revenue recognised in the year to 30 September 2017.
Independent auditors report to the members of Sanderson Group plc continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 22 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
22 13122017 094644 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Key Audit Matter How the matter was addressed in the audit  Group Risk 2 Impairment of intangible assets The process for assessing whether an impairment exists under International Accounting Standard IAS 36 Impairment of assets is complex.
Directors assessment of the value in use of the Groups Cash Generating Units CGUs involves judgement about the future performance of the CGU and the discount rates applied to future cash flow forecasts.
Therefore we identified impairment of intangible assets as a significant risk which was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement.
Our audit work included but was not restricted to walkthroughs of managements process for assessing the impairment of intangible assets and assessing the design effectiveness of key controls testing the methodology applied in the value in use calculation complies with the requirements of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets testing the mathematical accuracy of managements model testing the key underlying assumptions for the financial year 2018 budget sufficient headroom in their calculation.
The Groups accounting policy on intangibles is shown in note 3 and related disclosures are included in note 16.
Key observations Based on our audit work we found that the assumptions made and estimates used in managements assessment of goodwill impairment were balanced.
Note 16 also appropriately discloses the assumptions used in arriving at the estimate.
We found no errors in the calculations.
Risk 3 Valuation of defined benefit pension scheme The Group operates a defined benefit pension scheme that provides benefits to a number of current and former employees.
At 30 September 2017 the defined benefit pension schemes net liability was 6.1 million.
The gross value of pension scheme assets and liabilities which form the net liability amount to 9.5 million and 15.6 million respectively.
The valuation of the pension liabilities and assets in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits involves significant judgement and is subject to complex actuarial assumptions.
Small variations in those actuarial assumptions can lead to a materially different defined benefit pension scheme asset or liability being recognised within the Group financial statements.
Therefore we identified the valuation of the defined benefit pension schemes as a significant risk which was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement.
Our audit work included but was not restricted to walkthroughs of managements process for valuing the defined benefit pension scheme and assessing the design effectiveness of key controls using an actuarial specialist to review the assumptions used including discount rates growth rates mortality rates and the calculation methods employed in the calculation of the pension liability testing the accuracy of underlying membership data used by the Groups actuaries for the purpose of calculating the scheme liabilities by selecting a sample of employees and agreeing pertinent data such as date of birth gender date of membership to underlying records and testing a sample of net movements in that data since it was last formally prepared on 1 April 2014 directly confirming the existence of pension scheme assets with external asset managers.
The Groups accounting policy on the defined benefit pension scheme is shown in note 3 and related disclosures are included in note 29.
Key observations Based on our audit work we found the valuation methodologies including the inherent actuarial assumptions to be balanced and consistent with the expectation of our actuarial specialists.
We consider that the Groups disclosures in note 29 appropriately describe the significant degree of inherent precision in the assumptions and estimates and the potential impact on future periods of revisions to these estimates.
We found no errors in calculations.
23 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
23 13122017 094645 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Our application of materiality We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality in determining the nature timing and extent of our audit work and in evaluating the results of that work.
Materiality was determined as follows Materiality Measure Group Parent Financial statements as a whole 186000 which is 4.75% of Group profit before tax excluding net interest on defined benefit pension scheme deficit sharebased payment charge amortisation of acquired intangible assets and oneoff nonrecurring costs.
This benchmark is considered the most appropriate because this is a key performance measure used by the Board of directors to report to investors on the financial performance of the Group.
Adjusted profit before tax is also a consistent basis for determining materiality compared with the previous years.
Materiality for the current year is higher than the level that we determined for the year ended 30 September 2016 as a result of the increased adjusted profit before tax in the current year.
122000 which is 0.5% of parent company total assets.
This benchmark is considered the most appropriate because this is a key performance measure used by the Board of directors to report to investors on the financial performance of the Company whose principal activity is that of an investment holding company.
Materiality for the current year is consistent with the level that we determined for the year ended 30 September 2016.
Performance materiality used to drive the extent of our testing Based on our risk assessment including the Groups overall control environment we determined a performance materiality of 75% of the financial statement materiality.
This is consistent with performance materiality in the previous year.
Based on our risk assessment including the Companys overall control environment we determined a performance materiality of 75% of the financial statement materiality.
This is consistent with performance materiality in the previous year.
Specific materiality We determined a lower level of materiality for certain areas such as directors remuneration and related party transactions.
We determined a lower level of materiality for certain areas such as directors remuneration and related party transactions.
Communication of misstatements to the audit committee 9300 and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds.
6100 and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds.
Independent auditors report to the members of Sanderson Group plc continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 24 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
24 13122017 094645 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 The graph below illustrates how performance materiality interacts with our overall materiality and the tolerance for potential uncorrected misstatements.
25% Tolerance for potential uncorrected misstatements
Tolerance for potential uncorrected misstatements
75% 25% 75% Overall materiality  Group Overall materiality  parent An overview of the scope of our audit Our audit approach was a riskbased approach founded on a thorough understanding of the Groups business its environment and risk profile and in particular included The components of the Group were evaluated by the audit team based on a measure of materiality considering each as a percentage of total Group assets liabilities revenues and profit before taxes to assess the significance of the component and to determine the planned audit response.
In order to address the audit risks described above as identified during our planning procedures we performed a fullscope audit of the financial statements of the parent company Sanderson Group plc and of the Groups operations throughout the United Kingdom.
The operations that were subject to fullscope audit procedures made up 97.8 per cent of consolidated revenues and 97.1 per cent of total profit before tax.
The remaining operations of the Group were subjected to analytical procedures over the balance sheet and income statements of the related entities with a focus on applicable risks identified above and the significance to the Groups balances.
Other information The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report set out on pages 3 to 20 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement in the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement in this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Our opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 is unmodified In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report under the Companies Act 2006 In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic report or the Directors report.
25 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
25 13122017 094645 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Responsibilities of directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on pages 19 and 20 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
David White Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Grant Thornton UK LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountant
27 November 2017 Independent auditors report to the members of Sanderson Group plc continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 26 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
26 13122017 094645 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Consolidated income statement for the year ended 30 September 2017
Revenue 4 21559 21320 Cost of sales 3830 3399 Gross profit 4 17729 17921 Technical and development costs 8566 8428 Administrative and establishment expenses 3860 3875 Sales and marketing costs 2423 2592 Profit from operating activities 4 2880 3026 Profit from operating activities before adjustments in respect of the following 4 3896 3686 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles 16 491 513 Oneoff nonrecurring costs 918 485 62 Sharebased payment charges 6 40 85 Profit from operating activities 2880 3026 Finance income 10 18 27 Finance expenses 11 183 180 Acquisitionrelated finance expense 11 2 92 Profit before taxation 2713 2781 Taxation 12 154 354 Profit for the year 2867 2427 All operations are continuing.
All of the profit for the year is attributable to equity holders of the parent undertaking.
Earnings per share From profit attributable to the owners of the parent undertaking during the year Basic earnings per share 14 5.2p 4.4p Diluted earnings per share 14 5.2p 4.3p The accompanying accounting policies and notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
27 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
27 13122017 094645 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2017
Profit for the year 2867 2427 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that will not subsequently be reclassified to profit or loss Remeasurement of net defined benefit pension liability 29 1802 3678 Deferred taxation effect of defined benefit pension plan items 19 413 568 1389 3110 Items that may subsequently be reclassified to profit or loss Change in fair value of available for sale financial asset 22 19 Foreign exchange translation differences 3 31 Total other comprehensive incomeexpense 1370 3060 Total comprehensive incomeexpense attributable to equity holders of the parent 4237 633 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 28 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
28 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Consolidated statement of financial position at 30 September 2017
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 15 467 524 Intangible assets 16 30419 30473 Investment 17 150 Deferred tax assets 19 1244 1755 32280 32752 Current assets Inventories 35 20 Trade and other receivables 20 5139 7032 Income tax receivable 270 Other shortterm financial assets 21 187 209 Cash and cash equivalents 6176 4344 11807 11605 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 23 3653 4570 Deferred consideration 22 24 155 Income tax payable  337 Deferred income 5519 5270 9196 10332 Net current assets 2611 1273 Total assets less current liabilities 34891 34025 Noncurrent liabilities Pension obligations 29 6176 8155 Deferred consideration 22  115 Deferred tax liabilities 19 784 824 6960 9094 Net assets 27931 24931 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent company Share capital 24 5507 5485 Share premium 9133 9056 Available for sale reserve 57 79 Foreign exchange reserve 53 56 Retained earnings 13287 10367 Total equity 27931 24931 These financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of directors on 27 November 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Christopher Winn
Company Registration Number The accompanying accounting policies and notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
29 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
29 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 September 2017
Share premium
Foreign exchange reserve
Total equity At 1 October 2016 5485 9056 79 56 10367 24931 Exercise of share options 22 77    99 Dividend paid     1376 1376 Sharebased payment charge     40 40 Transactions with owners 22 77   1336 1237 Profit for the year 2867 2867 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of net defined benefit liability     1802 1802 Deferred tax on above     413 413 Foreign exchange translation differences    3  3 Change in fair value of available for sale financial asset   22   22 Total comprehensive incomeexpense   22 3 4256 4237 At 30 September 2017 5507 9133 57 53 13287 27931 for the year ended 30 September 2016
Share premium
Foreign exchange reserve
Total equity At 1 October 2015 5460 9023 60 87 12171 26627 Exercise of share options 25 33    58 Dividend paid     1206 1206 Sharebased payment charge     85 85 Transactions with owners 25 33   1121 1063 Profit for the year     2427 2427 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of net defined benefit liability     3678 3678 Deferred tax on above     568 568 Foreign exchange translation differences    31  31 Change in fair value of available for sale financial asset   19   19 Total comprehensive incomeexpense   19 31 683 633 At 30 September 2016 5485 9056 79 56 10367 24931 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 30 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
30 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Cash flows from operating activities Profit for the year after taxation 2867 2427 Adjustments for Amortisation of intangible assets 1048 1026 Depreciation 237 199 Sharebased payment charge 40 85 Net finance expense 167 245 Release of contingent consideration 165 Income tax creditcharge 154 354 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital 4040 4336 Movement in trade and other receivables 1893 1560 Movement in inventories 15 63 Movement in trade and other payables 666 1135 Cash generated from operations 5252 3974 Payments to defined benefit pension scheme 360 330 Income tax paid 394 Net cash flow from operating activities 4498 3644 Cash flow utilised by investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 180 254 Acquisition of subsidiary undertakings net of cash acquired Payment of deferred consideration in respect of subsidiary undertakings 83 1660 Dividend received 15 15 Bank interest received 3 12 Investment 150 Development expenditure capitalised 994 872 Net cash flow utilised by investing activities 1389 2759 Cash flow utilised by financing activities Issue of shares net of costs 99 58 Equity dividends paid 1376 1206 Net cash flow utilised by financing activities 1277 1148 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 1832 263 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 4344 4607 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 6176 4344 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form an integral part of these financial statements.
31 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
31 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements forming part of the financial statements Reporting entity Sanderson Group plc is a company domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The address of the Companys registered office is Sanderson House Manor Road Coventry CV1 2GF.
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2017 comprise the results of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings together referred to as the Group.
The Group is primarily involved in the development and supply of IT software and services.
The Companys shares are traded on the Alternative Investment Market of the London Stock Exchange.
Basis of preparation The Group financial statements have been prepared and approved by the directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and the Companies Act 2006 that applies to companies reporting under IFRS and IFRIC interpretations.
The Company has elected to prepare its parent company financial statements in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European
These parent company financial statements appear after the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Going concern The Group financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of the post balance sheet acquisition as set out in note 30 and reasonably possible changes in trading performance that may arise as a result of current economic conditions and other risks faced by the Group show that the Group should remain profitable and cash generative.
At the financial yearend the Group reported cash balances of 6.18 million.
The Groups mediumterm strategy is to maintain a strong balance sheet with positive cash balances.
The Board believes strategic objectives regarding the development of existing businesses and complementary acquisitions are achievable whilst retaining a strong balance sheet.
Basis of measurement The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention with the exception of certain items which are measured at fair value as disclosed in the accounting policies below.
Functional and presentation currency The consolidated financial statements are presented in sterling which is the functional currency of the Group.
Use of estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised.
Information about significant areas of estimation and critical judgements that have the most significant impact on the financial statements are described in the following notes Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 32 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
32 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12
Note 16 Measurement of intangible assets In testing for impairment of intangible assets management has made certain assumptions concerning the future development of the business that are consistent with the annual budget and business plan.
Should these assumptions regarding the growth in profitability be unfounded then it is possible that intangible assets included in the statement of financial position could be impaired.
Management is confident that this will not be the case.
The Group has a history of retaining customers with the average length of customer relationships in excess of ten years.
The time and resources required by organisations to change enterprise systems is significant and therefore discourages change.
Management therefore believes the existing business will continue to generate revenues profits and positive cash flows for many years.
Accordingly when assessing the recoverable value attributable to goodwill and other intangible assets management has estimated cash flows attributable to existing businesses and extrapolated forward budgets for the financial year ending 30 September 2018 in line with the average length of customer relationships.
The calculations involve the use of a discount rate when measuring the present value of future cash flows.
The discount rate is a further estimate.
The results of this review are disclosed in note 16.
Note 18 Measurement of intangible assets relating to acquisitions In attributing value to intangible assets arising on acquisition management has made certain assumptions in terms of cash flows attributable to intellectual property and customer relationships.
The key assumptions relate to the trading performance of the acquired business and discount rates applied to calculate the present value of future cash flows.
The directors consider the resulting valuations to be reasonable approximations as to the value of the intangibles acquired.
Note 20 Measurement of trade receivables Management assesses the likely recoverability of amounts invoiced to customers on the basis of the creditworthiness of customers and the age of debts at the period end.
The directors consider the carrying amount of trade receivables approximates to their fair value.
Note 29 Measurement of defined benefit pension obligations The Groups interests in a defined benefit pension scheme have been accounted for in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
The main area of judgement is the valuation of pension scheme liabilities which represent the net present value of future pension obligations.
These calculations are performed by the scheme actuary with whom the directors have agreed the underlying assumptions to be applied.
The key assumptions are rates of increases in pension benefits mortality rates inflation and the discount rate applied to produce the net present value.
The discount rate is derived from market rates on AA corporate bonds at the yearend date.
Judgements
Note 9 Oneoff nonrecurring items Management use judgement in its assessment and classification of certain costs as oneoff nonrecurring items so as to facilitate comparison with prior periods and to better assess trends in financial performance.
Note 16 Intangible assets Development expenditure is recognised on the statement of financial position when certain criteria are met as described more fully in the accounting policy on the treatment of research and development expenditure.
Management uses its judgement in assessing development projects against the criteria.
Note 19 Deferred tax The extent to which deferred tax assets can be recognised is based on an assessment of the probability of the Groups future taxable income against which the deferred tax assets can be utilised.
In addition significant judgement is required in assessing the impact of any legal or economic limits or uncertainties.
33 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
33 13122017 094646 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies New and revised accounting standards applied for the first time in the current year The Group has adopted the following new standards or new provisions of amended standards Defined Benefit Plans Employee Contributions Amendments to IAS 19 Annual Improvements to IFRS 20102012 Cycle There has been no material impact on either amounts reported or disclosure in the financial statements arising from first time adoption.
Adopted IFRS not yet applied At the date of authorisation of these financial statements certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published by the IASB but are not yet effective and have not been applied early by the Group.
Management anticipates that the following pronouncements relevant to the Groups operations will be adopted in the Groups accounting policies for the first period beginning after the effective date of the pronouncement once adopted by the EU IFRS 9 Financial Instruments not yet adopted by the EU effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases not yet adopted by the EU effective 1 January 2019 Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses Amendments to IAS 12 not yet adopted by the EU Classification and Measurement of ShareBased Payment Transactions Amendments to IFRS 2 not yet adopted by the EU Disclosure Initiative Amendments to IAS 7 not yet adopted by the EU Other than in respect of IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 the directors anticipate that the adoption of these Standards and Interpretations in future periods will have no material impact on the financial statements of the Group.
With regard to IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 the Group has commenced an assessment of the impact likely from adopting the standard but is not yet in a position to state whether the impact will be material to the Groups reported results or financial position.
Certain other new standards and interpretations have been issued but are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial information comprises a consolidation of the accounts of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings at the statement of financial position date.
The results of subsidiary undertakings acquired during the financial year are included from the date of acquisition.
Control is achieved where the Company is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its powers over the investee.
All intragroup balances and transactions including unrealised profits arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated fully on consolidation.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is held at cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment charges.
Depreciation is calculated to write off the cost of property plant and equipment less the estimated residual value on a straightline basis over the expected useful economic life of the assets concerned.
Estimated residual values are revised annually.
The annual rates used are leasehold improvements  over life of the property leases which vary between 3 and 50 years plant and equipment  20%33 3% Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 34 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
34 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand demand deposits and bank overdrafts where they form an integral part of the Groups cash management.
Cash equivalents are held for the purpose of meeting shortterm cash commitments rather than for investment or other purposes.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Group are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
The only equity instrument applicable to the Group is its issued share capital.
Share premium includes any premium received on the issue of share capital.
Transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium net of any related tax benefits.
Retained earnings includes all current and prior period retained profits and losses.
Foreign currency Transactions in foreign currencies are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the yearend date are translated at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Foreign exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Non monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at fair value are translated at foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates the fair value was determined.
Investments
Trade investments are measured at cost less provision for impairment as the directors consider that fair value cannot be reliably measured for the reasons set out in note 17.
In the Groups financial statements all assets liabilities and transactions of Group entities with a functional currency other than sterling are translated into sterling upon consolidation.
Assets and liabilities including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on acquisition are translated into sterling at the closing rate.
Income and expenditure is translated at an average rate.
Exchange differences are charged or credited to other comprehensive income and recognised in the currency translation reserve in equity.
Accounting for financial assets The Group has financial assets in the following categories loans and receivables available for sale financial assets Financial assets are assigned to the different categories on initial recognition depending on the characteristics of the instrument and its purpose.
A financial instruments category is relevant for the way it is measured and whether any resulting income and expense is recognised in the income statement or statement of other comprehensive income.
All financial assets are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets other than those categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
Financial assets categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are recognised initially at fair value with transaction costs expensed through the income statement.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Any change in their value is recognised in profit or loss.
Sanderson Group plcs trade and other receivables fall into this category of financial instruments.
Significant receivables are considered for impairment on a casebycase basis when they are past due at the yearend date or when objective evidence is received that a specific counterparty will default.
All other receivables are reviewed for impairment in groups which are determined by reference to the industry and region of a counterparty and other available features of shared credit risk characteristics if any.
The percentage of the writedown is then based on recent historical counterparty default rates for each identified group.
Available for sale AFS financial assets AFS financial assets are nonderivative financial assets that do not qualify for inclusion in any of the other categories of financial assets.
The Groups AFS financial assets comprise listed securities and are measured at fair value.
Gains and losses are recognised in other comprehensive income and reported within the AFS reserve within equity except dividend income which is recognised in profit or loss.
35 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
35 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued Accounting for financial liabilities The Groups financial liabilities include trade and other payables which subsequent to initial recognition at fair value are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Conditional deferred consideration contingent consideration is classified as fair value through profit and loss.
Movements subsequent to initial recognition at fair value are recognised in the Consolidated income statement.
Pension benefits The Group operates defined contribution pension schemes and a subsidiary company is the principal employer to a closed defined benefit scheme.
The Groups net obligation in respect of the defined benefit scheme is calculated by estimating the amount of future benefit that employees have earned in return for their service in prior periods that benefit is discounted to determine its present value and the fair value of any scheme assets is deducted.
The liability is calculated using the projected unit method.
The discount rate is based on the annualised yield on AA creditrelated corporate bonds.
The calculation is performed by a qualified actuary.
Net interest expense on the net defined benefit liability is included in finance costs.
Gains or losses resulting from remeasurement of the net defined benefit liability are included in other comprehensive income.
Obligations for contributions to defined contribution pension schemes are recognised as an expense in the Consolidated income statement as incurred.
Revenue
Revenue comprises the fair value of sales of licences support and maintenance contracts training consulting and implementation services and hardware.
Value added tax and transactions between Group companies are excluded.
Revenues are recognised on the basis of the performance of contractual obligations and to the extent that the right to consideration has been earned.
In cases where a single contractual arrangement involves the sale of licences support maintenance and services the consideration received is allocated to the components of the arrangement on a relative fair value basis.
Initial licence fees are recognised upon the provision of software to the customer providing that payment terms are contractually binding collection is reasonably certain and there are no material contract conditions or warranties.
If any conditionality exists licence fees are recognised when the conditions have been met.
Revenue from the provision of professional services including support maintenance training and consultancy services is recognised as the services are performed.
Hardware sales are recognised on delivery.
Annual licence maintenance and support revenues are recognised evenly over the period to which they relate.
When amounts are invoiced in advance the unearned element remains in deferred income until recognition is appropriate.
Segmental reporting IFRS 8 requires the identification of operating segments on the basis of internal reports that are regularly reviewed by the Groups chief operating decision maker CODM.
The CODM has been determined to be the executive directors.
The Group has two main operating divisions Digital Retail and Enterprise.
These two divisions represent the Groups reportable segments under IFRS 8.
Each segment has a manager who is directly accountable to the CODM.
Each segment is managed separately as the characteristics of the markets served differ.
All intersegment transfers take place on an armslength basis.
Accounting policies used for reporting the results of segments are the same as those adopted in preparing the financial statements of the Group.
The activities of and products and services offered by the segments are described in the Group Chief Executives business review.
The Group operates a number of bank accounts including certain accounts specific to shared operations.
Whilst information contained in the income statement can be allocated between divisions certain items in the statement of financial position such as cash balances cannot be so allocated.
For this reason the cash and cash equivalents figure shown in note 4 to the financial statements does not correspond with the cash and cash equivalents figure of the Group disclosed in the Consolidated statement of financial position.
Bank balances in respect of shared operations are included in unallocated assets and liabilities.
Dividends
Dividends are recorded in the Groups financial statements in the period in which they are approved or paid.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses is capitalised as an asset and represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired.
Identifiable net assets are those which are capable of being sold separately or which arise from legal rights regardless of whether those legal rights are separable.
Where contingent consideration arises on acquisition as a result of performance targets it is recognised at fair value being the weighted average probability of potential outcomes.
At each yearend the fair value is recalculated and gains or losses arising are recognised in the Consolidated income statement.
The carrying value of goodwill relating to subsidiaries disposed of is deducted from sale proceeds in arriving at reported profit or loss on disposal.
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 36 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
36 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Research and development expenditure Expenditure on research activities is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
An internally generated intangible asset arising from the Groups development activity is recognised in the Consolidated statement of financial position if all of the following conditions are met an asset is created that can be identified such as software and new processes the Group intends to complete the development of the asset and has the ability to do so the Group has the technical and financial resources to complete the asset and exploit the economic benefits arising from it it is probable that the asset created will generate future economic benefits and the development cost of the asset can be reliably measured.
Internally generated intangible assets are amortised over their useful economic life typically between three and five years.
Where no internally generated intangible asset can be recognised development expenditure is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
Leases
Assets financed by leasing arrangements which give rights approximating to ownership are treated as if they had been purchased outright and are capitalised and depreciated over the shorter of the estimated useful life of the assets and the period of the leases.
The capital element of future rentals is treated as a liability and the interest element is charged against profits in proportion to the balances outstanding.
All other leases are operating leases and rental costs are charged against profits on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Other intangible assets Intangible assets separately purchased such as intellectual property rights are capitalised at cost and amortised on a straightline basis over their useful economic life.
Intangible assets acquired through a business combination are measured at fair value and amortised over their useful economic lives.
The following periods are used when assessing useful economic lives for purposes of calculating amortisation charges Intellectual property rights 310 years Customer relationships 310 years
The carrying amount of the Groups assets other than inventories deferred tax assets and available for sale financial assets see accounting policies above is reviewed at each yearend date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
An impairment loss is recognised whenever the carrying amount of an asset or its cashgenerating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Consolidated income statement.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset or cashgenerating unit is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset or cashgenerating unit in prior years.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised as income immediately.
Impairment
Impairment losses recognised in respect of cashgenerating units are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to cashgenerating units group of units and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other assets of the unit group of units on a pro rata basis.
Sharebased payments The equitysettled share option programme allows Group employees to acquire shares of the ultimate parent company these awards are granted by the ultimate parent.
The fair value of options granted is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity.
The fair value is measured using the BlackScholes model at grant date and spread over the period during which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The amount recognised as an expense is adjusted to reflect the number of share options expected to vest.
Deferred taxation is recognised over the vesting period.
Payments made to employees on cancellation of an equity settled award are accounted for as a repurchase of an equity interest and deducted from equity.
Any excess of the payment over the fair value of the award calculated at the date of cancellation is treated as an expense.
On exercise shares are issued and the nominal value of each share is credited to share capital.
The difference between the exercise price paid and the nominal value of each share is credited to share premium.
The exercise of options issued pursuant to the Companys Long Term Incentive Plan gives rise to a charge against reserves equal to the market price per share at the date of exercise.
37 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
37 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Accounting policies continued
Tax expense recognised in profit or loss comprises the sum of deferred tax and current tax not recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Current income tax assets and liabilities comprise those obligations to or claims from fiscal authorities relating to the current or prior reporting periods that remain unpaid at the reporting date.
Current tax is payable on taxable profit which differs from profit or loss in the financial statements.
Calculation of current tax is based on tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
Deferred income taxes are calculated using the liability method on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases.
However deferred tax is not provided on the initial recognition of goodwill or on the initial recognition of an asset or liability unless the related transaction is a business combination or affects tax or accounting profit.
Deferred tax on temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries is not provided if reversal of these temporary differences can be controlled by the Group and it is probable that reversal will not occur in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated without discounting at tax rates that are expected to apply to their respective period of realisation provided those rates are enacted or substantively enacted by the end of the reporting period.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the underlying tax loss or deductible temporary difference will be able to be utilised against future taxable income.
This is assessed based on the Groups forecast of future operating results adjusted for significant nontaxable income and expenses and specific limits on the use of any unused tax loss or credit.
Deferred tax liabilities are always provided for in full deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset only when the Group has a right and intention to set off current tax assets and liabilities from the same taxation authority.
Changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognised as a component of tax income or expense in profit or loss except where they relate to items that are recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case the related deferred tax is also recognised in other comprehensive income or equity respectively.
Deferred tax is calculated on the basis of rates and laws enacted or substantially enacted.
Oneoff nonrecurring items The Group discloses nonrecurring items in a separate note note 9 being those material items of income and expense which because of the nature and expected infrequency of the events giving rise to them merit separate presentation to allow shareholders to better understand the elements of financial performance in the year so as to facilitate comparison with prior periods and to better assess trends in financial performance.
Segmental reporting The Group is managed as two separate divisions providing IT solutions and associated services to the digital retail and enterprise software sectors.
The information provided to the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM is analysed between the divisions as follows Digital Retail Enterprise Software Total Revenue  external customers 7282 6398 14277 14922 21559 21320 Cost of sales 1722 1099 2108 2300 3830 3399 Gross profit 5560 5299 12169 12622 17729 17921
Operating profit before adjustments 1183 885 2713 2801 3896 3686
Oneoff nonrecurring items 198  287 62 485 62 Sharebased payment charges 26 53 14 32 40 85 Profit from operating activities 693 566 2187 2460 2880 3026 Net finance expense 167 245 Taxation 154 354 Profit attributable to equity holders 2867 2427 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles Depreciation charged to operating profit The CODM uses both gross profit and operating profit measures in assessing the performance of the Groups divisions.
The largest customer of the Digital Retail Division accounted for 46% 2016 41% of divisional revenue.
No other customer accounts for 10% or more of the revenue of either division.
Revenue amounting to 874000 2016 705000 was derived from customers domiciled in Eire.
Substantially all other revenue is generated within the UK.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 38 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
38 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 An analysis of items contained within the statement of financial position is set out below.
The Groups assets are held in the United
Included within other unallocated assets and liabilities are cash balances totalling 0.60 million 2016 0.72 million and an investment held for resale valued at 0.19 million 2016 0.21 million.
Amounts in respect of shared operations cannot be allocated between operating divisions.
Additions to property plant and equipment during the year amounted to 180000 2016 254000.
A total of 44000 2016 43000 was attributable to the Digital Retail Division with 136000 2016 211000 acquired by the Enterprise Software Division.
Analysis of items contained within the statement of financial position Digital Retail Enterprise Software Total Property plant and equipment 12tel467 524 Intangible assets 5857 6092 24562 24381 30419 30473 Investments 150    150 Deferred tax assets 60 117 1184 1638 1244 1755 Income tax 95  175  270 Inventories 13 20 22  35 20 Cash and cash equivalents 1968 860 3603 2765 5571 3625 Trade and other receivables 1381 1912 3758 5120 5139 7032 Total assets 9652 9136 33643 34293 43295 43429 Trade and other payables 1178 1214 2475 3356 3653 4570 Deferred income 763 717 4756 4553 5519 5270 Income tax  56  281  337 Deferred taxation 265 275 519 549 784 824 Deferred consideration  50 24 220 24 270 Pension obligations   6176 8155 6176 8155 Total liabilities 2206 2312 13950 17114 16156 19426 Allocated net assets 7446 6824 19693 17179 27139 24003 Other unallocated assets and liabilities 792 928 Net assets 27931 24931 Related parties The Groups related parties are its key management personnel and the Sanderson Group Retirement Benefit Scheme the Scheme a legacy defined benefit pension scheme that closed to new members in 1995 and to future accrual in 2004.
The defined benefit plan does not hold shares in Sanderson Group plc.
The Group provides payroll services to facilitate the payment of pensions to retired members of the Scheme and accounting services to the Scheme trustee for the preparation of the Scheme accounts.
Certain of the Groups employees act as directors of the corporate trustee of the Scheme.
No charge is made for these services.
The
Groups only transactions with the Scheme relate to contributions paid to the plan as set out in note 29 and administrative expenses incurred by the Scheme that are charged to the employer and expensed by the Group as incurred.
Key management personnel of the Group comprises the executive directors members of the senior management team and the non executive directors a total of 11 individuals.
Remuneration paid to key management personnel during the year is set out in note 8.
39 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
39 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Sharebased payments The Group operates an HMRC approved executive management incentive plan EMI an unapproved share option plan and a Company Share Option Plan CSOP.
Details of the total number of shares under option at the year end and conditions on qualification and exercise are set out below
Employees entitled
Performance conditions
Earliest exercise date
27052005 Management 215579 Earnings per share growth 56.00 01102007 15122017 21052010 Management 300000  23.00 21052013 21052020 05012011 Management 35000 27.50 05042014 05012021 29062011 Management 150000 30.00 29062014 29062018 27112012 Management 200000 45.75 27112015 27112019 18122012 Management 40000 49.00 18122015 18122019 13122013 Management 375000 71.00 13122016 13122023 17122013 Management 35000  70.50 17122016 17122023 17122013 Employees 3266  10.00 17122014 17122021 03032014 Management 400000 57.50 03032017 03032023 05092016 Management 486000 70.50 05092019 05092026 29112016 Management 300000 69.70 29122019 29122023 29112016 Management 123000 72.00 17012020 17012024 Performance conditions relating to options issued after 2005 have included targets based on operating profit growth in earnings per share and total shareholder return.
Performance conditions relating to options issued to certain managers at One iota Limited are based on target profitability and are in line with the conditions relating to the measurement and payment of deferred conditional consideration payable to the former shareholders of the business.
Options granted to employees of One iota Limited were issued without performance conditions and with an exercise price at a discount to the market value at the time of issue.
The options were originally exercisable in three equal annual tranches commencing December 2014.
The number and weighted average exercise price of share options are as follows
Number of options number
Number of options number Outstanding at start of year 53.4p 2668975 45.4p 2456409 Granted during the year 70.5p 423000 70.5p 554000 Exercised during the year 45.2p 218684 22.5p 251434 Forfeited during the year 60.2p 210446 27.0p 90000 Outstanding at end of the year 57.0p 2662845 53.4p 2668975 Exercisable at end of the year 50.0p 1753845 39.1p 1165279 Options exercised during the year were in respect of the following schemes Quantity Exercise price EMI 128684 10.00p  71.00p CSOP 90000 27.50p  30.00p Options outstanding at 30 September 2017 have exercise prices in the range 10.0 pence to 71.0 pence per share.
The weighted average contractual life of the options is 5.1 years 2016 4.2 years.
On 30 September 2017 the closing share price of Sanderson Group plc was 67.0 pence.
During the year ending on that date the closing share price varied in the range 61.4 pence to 88.6 pence.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 40 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
40 13122017 094647 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Fair value assumptions of sharebased payments The fair value of services received in return for share options granted is measured by reference to the fair value of share options granted.
The estimate of fair value is measured using the BlackScholes model.
Details of the fair value of share options granted in the period together with the assumptions used in determining the fair value are summarised below 2017 2016 Weighted average share price at date of grant pence 72.0 70.5 Weighted average exercise price pence 72.0 70.5 Weighted average contractual life years 3 10 Weighted average expected volatility 6.0% 6.0% Weighted average expected dividend yield 2.6% 3.0% Weighted average risk free interest rate 2.3% 2.3% Weighted average fair value of options granted pence 2.0 2.0 The volatility assumption measured at the standard deviation of expected share price movements is based on a statistical analysis of historic movements over a threeyear period ending on the date of grant.
Charge to the income statement The charge to the income statement comprises Sharebased payment charges 40 85 Expenses and auditors remuneration Included in the income statement are the following items Auditors remuneration Fees payable to the Groups auditor for the audit of the Groups Annual Accounts 14 10 Amounts received by auditors and their associates in respect of Audit of financial statements of subsidiaries 54 49 Taxation advice 12 16 Pension scheme advice 4 Share scheme advice 7 Depreciation and other amounts written off property plant and equipment Owned in respect of continuing activities 237 199 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets 491 513 Amortisation of development costs 557 513 Aggregate charge against income in respect of research and development 2214 2114 Cost of inventory recognised as an expense 3830 3399 Rentals payable under plant and machinery operating leases 13 11 Leasehold property rentals 393 401 The aggregate charge in respect of research and development represents the total cost incurred during the year less amounts capitalised in accordance with IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Cost of inventory represents the cost of third party products provided to customers in conjunction with the Groups own proprietary software and services.
41 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
41 13122017 094648 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Personnel expenses The average number of persons employed by the Group during the period was as follows
No.
Technical 179 180 Sales and marketing 27 30 Administrative The aggregate payroll costs of the persons employed including directors were as follows Wages and salaries 9379 9155 Social security costs 1080 1106 Contributions to defined contribution pension plans 709 696 Sharebased payment charge 40 85 11208 11042 Salary costs in respect of the directors of the Company are set out below
Payments to defined contribution pension
Value arising on exercise of options
For the year ended 30 September 2017 Executive directors Christopher Winn 112  7  119 Ian Newcombe 216 14 3  233 Adrian Frost Nonexecutive directors John Paterson 35    35 David Gutteridge 35     701
Payments to defined contribution pension
Value arising on exercise of options
For the year ended 30 September 2016 Executive directors Christopher Winn 297  5  302 Ian Newcombe Adrian Frost Nonexecutive directors John Paterson 34    34 Philip Kelly 28    28 David Gutteridge 34 Figures in respect of Philip Kelly are stated up to the date of his resignation on 1 June 2016.
Figures in respect of Adrian Frost are stated up to the date of his resignation on 1 September 2017 and include a termination payment of 117000.
Salaries paid to the executive directors include car allowances to compensate for the use of personal vehicles on Company business.
Mr
Winns and Mr Frosts salaries also include an amount paid in lieu of Company pension contributions.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 42 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
42 13122017 094648 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Executive directors bonuses are payable when targets in respect of Group operating profit set by the Remuneration Committee are achieved.
Bonuses for the year ending 30 September 2018 will be based on targets in respect of Group operating profit growth in earnings per share and cash generation.
The executive directors are provided with life assurance permanent health insurance and private medical insurance.
The cost to the Group is reflected in the value of benefits in kind disclosed above.
Contracts of employment for executive directors include mutual notice periods of twelve months.
The following table provides details of remuneration paid to key management personnel during the year.
For purposes of this disclosure key management personnel are defined as the executive directors members of the senior management team and the nonexecutive directors a total of 11 individuals 2016 11 individuals.
Shortterm employee benefits 1307 1395 Postemployment benefits 65 118 Sharebased payments 17 22 1389 1535 The directors received dividends from the Company by virtue of their shareholdings in the Company details of which are disclosed in the Directors report.
No director had a material interest in any contract in relation to the business of the Company or its subsidiary undertakings.
Oneoff nonrecurring items Recognised in arriving at operating profit from continuing operations Acquisitionrelated costs note 18 275 62 Internal reorganisationredundancy 430 Group Finance Director departure 162 Customer settlement 217 Release of contingent consideration note 22 165 During the year the Group incurred restructuring costs of 430000 2016 Nil in relation to redundancies an office closure and post acquisition reorganisation.
Finance income Bank interest received 3 12 Dividend received  Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
43 13122017 094648 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Finance expenses Net interest on defined benefit pension scheme deficit 183 180 The Company is required by International Accounting Standards to calculate the fair value of deferred consideration by discounting expected future cash payments using the Companys cost of capital.
The charge of 2000 2016 92000 has been reported as an acquisitionrelated finance expense.
T axation Current tax expense UK corporation tax for the current year 104 334 Relating to prior periods 316 Total current tax 212 334 Deferred tax Deferred tax for the current year 116 29 Relating to prior periods 24 51 Arising on change in rate of deferred tax 34 60 Total deferred tax 58 20 Taxation creditedcharged to the income statement 154 354 Reconciliation of effective tax rate The current consolidated tax charge for the period is lower 2016 lower than the average standard rate of corporation tax in the UK during the period of 19.5% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Profit before taxation 2713 2781 Tax using the average UK corporation tax rate of 19.5% 2016 20% 529 556 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 70 70 Utilisation and recognition of losses 95 153 Overunder provision in previous years 340 51 Change in tax rate 34 60 Expenses not reported in the income statement 284 110 Total tax in income statement 154 354 The Group has benefitted from a prior years tax charge adjustment relating to a catch up of RandD tax credit claims which is why there is a large over provision movement in respect of prior years.
Dividends
Interim dividend of 1.1p per share 2016 1.0p 606 549 Final dividend relating to previous financial year of 1.4p per share 2016 1.2p 770 657 Total dividend for the financial year 1376 1206 A final dividend of 1.55 pence per ordinary share in respect of the financial year ended 30 September 2017 will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting of the Company expected to be held on 15 February 2018.
If approved by shareholders the total final dividend payment will amount to 853595.
The directors will receive a proportion of this dividend by virtue of their shareholdings in the Company details of which are disclosed in the Directors report.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 44 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
44 13122017 094648 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Earnings per share Basic and diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the result after tax for the year by the weighted average number of ordinary shares at the end of the year and the diluted weighted average number of ordinary shares at the end of the year respectively.
In order to better demonstrate the performance of the Group an adjusted earnings per share calculation has been presented below which adds back items typically adjusted for by users of the accounts.
During the year a third party specialist firm has been engaged to review the Groups qualifying expenditure with regard to RandD tax credits.
As a result of this engagement the Group has benefitted from a prior years tax charge adjustment in respect of these RandD claims and basic earnings per share is therefore higher.
The calculations for earnings and the number of shares relevant to all of the measures of earnings per share described in the foregoing are set out below
Result for the year 2867 2427 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles 491 513 Sharebased payment charges 40 85 Oneoff nonrecurring items 485 62 RandD tax credit 388 Adjusted profit for the year 3495 3087 Number of shares
No.
In issue at the start of the year 54851985 54600550 Effect of shares issued in the year 136646 173846 Weighted average number of shares at year end 54988631 54774396 Effect of share options 587918 1520615 Weighted average number of shares diluted 55576549 56295011 Earnings per share pence pence Total attributable to equity holders of the parent undertaking Basic 5.2 4.4 Diluted 5.2 4.3 Earnings per share adjusted from continuing operations Basic 6.4 5.6 Diluted 6.3 5.5 45 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
45 13122017 094648 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Property plant and equipment
Plant and equipment
Cost
Balance at 1 October tel1112 Additions  254 254 Balance at 30 September 2016 321 1045 1366 Additions  180 180 Balance at 30 September 2017 321 1225 1546
Balance at 1 October tel643 Charge for the year 32 167 199 Balance at 30 September tel842 Charge for the year 37 200 237 Balance at 30 September tel1079 Net book value At 30 September tel524 At 30 September tel467 Intangible assets
Intellectual
Customer relationships
Total
Cost
Balance at 1 October 2015 27403 3693 1685 2777 35558 Internally developed    872 872 Balance at 30 September 2016 27403 3693 1685 3649 36430 Internally developed    994 994 Balance at 30 September 2017 27403 3693 1685 4643 37424 Amortisation and impairment Balance at 1 October 2015 1499 1425 518 1489 4931 Amortisation for the year  321 192 513 1026 Balance at 30 September 2016 1499 1746 710 2002 5957 Amortisation for the year  310 181 557 1048 Balance at 30 September 2017 1499 2056 891 2559 7005 Net book value Balance at 30 September 2016 25904 1947 975 1647 30473 Balance at 30 September 2017 25904 1637 794 2084 30419 Additions to development costs include 120000 2016 54000 in respect of products and services supplied by third parties.
All other development costs are internally generated.
The amortisation charges are recognised in the following line items in the income statement Administrative and establishment expenses 1048 1026 Amortisation and impairment Intangible assets other than goodwill are amortised over their useful economic lives.
In the case of intellectual property and customer relationships the useful economic life is assessed by reference to the anticipated minimum period over which the asset is expected to remain separately identifiable and cash generative.
This is typically between five and ten years.
Intellectual property and customer relationship assets have between two and nine years unamortised economic life.
In the case of development costs amortisation is charged over the period during which the development is expected to generate revenue.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 46 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
46 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Goodwill analysed by reference to cashgenerating units is set out below Digital Retail 3330 3330 Enterprise Software 22574 22574 Goodwill 25904 25904 The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if an event occurs to warrant a review.
The recoverable amounts attributed to each CGU are based on value in use calculations.
The key assumptions made in undertaking the value in use calculations involve estimating operating profit growth rates and are set out below.
Budgeted profit and cash flow forecasts for the financial year ending 30 September 2018 have been extrapolated for periods of between ten and twelve years based on the average length of customer relationship and used as the basis of the calculations.
Digital Retail CGU 38% operating profit growth from operating in a market exhibiting growth rates in excess of this figure.
Based on independent estimates of industryspecific growth rates where available and previous experience where not.
Independent estimates suggest the retail software economy is likely to grow by more than 10% per annum in the short to medium term.
Enterprise Software CGU 23% operating profit growth based on management estimates of achievable growth through greater market share.
The recent introduction of new products specifically developed by the Group for the target markets in which Sanderson operates is expected to enable the growth assumptions to be met.
Discount rate assumptions are based on management estimates of the internal cost of capital likely to apply over the expected useful economic life of the goodwill and managements view of the risk associated with each CGU.
A discount rate of 8% has been applied to the Enterprise Software CGU whereas 10% has been applied to the Digital Retail CGU.
The directors have formulated profit and cash flow forecasts for the financial year ending 30 September 2018 on the basis of the growth rates set out above.
The value in use of the goodwill of the Digital Retail CGU exceeds the carrying value by 10.88 million.
The value in use of the goodwill of the Enterprise Software CGU exceeds the carrying value by 9.02 million.
In the event that economic conditions worsen and growth in revenue and gross margin is not achievable the directors are of the view that judicious management of the Groups cost base will enable the profit growth targets to be achieved.
The directors have sensitised the profit and cash flow forecast relating to both CGUs.
The Digital Retail CGU profit forecast would need to fall by 70% to trigger an impairment charge.
In the case of the Enterprise Software CGU a profit reduction of 30% would be required.
Investments
Investment 150 This investment represents a 2% interest in the ordinary share capital of a startup business in a similar industry.
The investment is stated at cost as the shares do not have a quoted market price on an active market and the directors consider that a fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Acquisitions
Current year The Group did not complete any acquisitions during the year ended 30 September 2017.
However the Group did complete the acquisition of Anisa Consolidated Holdings Limited on 23 November 2017 and more information is disclosed in note 30.
The Board remains keen to enhance the strength of the Group by selective complementary acquisitions.
Management will continue to adopt a careful and measured approach to acquisitions with the priority being very much focused on continuing to deliver shareholder value.
Costs incurred in respect of the due diligence process have been shown in the Consolidated income statement as acquisitionrelated costs.
Prior year The Group did not complete any acquisitions during the year ended 30 September 2016.
47 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
47 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Deferred tax assets and liabilities Recognised deferred tax assets and liabilities Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following and are disclosed as noncurrent assets and liabilities in the Consolidated statement of financial position Assets Liabilities Net Property plant and equipment 111 108   111 108 Intangible assets   769 824 769 824 Sharebased payment expense 55 55   55 55 Trade and other payables 28 51 15  13 51 Employee benefits 1050 1468   1050 1468 Tax losses  73    73 1244 1755 784 824 460 931 Movement in deferred tax for the year ended 30 September 2017 As at 1 October
Statement of comprehensive income As at 30 September Property plant and equipment 108 3  111 Intangible assets 824 55  769 Sharebased payment expense 55   55 Trade and other payables 51 38  13 Employee benefits 1468 5 413 1050 Tax losses 73 73 Movement in deferred tax for the year ended 30 September 2016 As at 1 October
Statement of comprehensive income As at 30 September Property plant and equipment 231 123  108 Intangible assets 936 112  824 Sharebased payment expense 55   55 Trade and other payables 107 56  51 Employee benefits 926 26 568 1468 Tax losses  73  73 A deferred tax asset of 360000 2016 557000 in respect of tax losses has not been recognised as its future economic benefit is uncertain.
The gross value of losses in respect of which the unrecognised deferred tax asset relates is 2.12 million 2016 3.09 million.
The rate of UK corporation tax changed during the financial year ending 30 September 2017 resulting in a change to the rate at which deferred tax assets could be utilised.
This reduced the charge to the income statement by 66000 2016 52000.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 48 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
48 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Trade and other receivables Trade receivables 3831 5197 Prepayments and accrued income 1308 1835 5139 7032 All trade and other receivables are short term.
The directors consider that the carrying amount of trade receivables approximates to their fair value.
All trade and other receivables have been reviewed for indications of impairment.
The Group invoices all precontracted recurring revenues up to six weeks before the renewal date.
Payment terms require the invoices to be paid by the renewal date.
Such invoices are only shown as overdue when the invoice remains outstanding after the renewal date has passed.
Unless specific agreement has been reached with individual customers all other invoices are due 30 days after the date of the invoice.
The Groups terms and conditions of sale permit the Group to charge interest at 4% above bank base rates on all invoices that remain unpaid 30 days after their due date.
Due to the nature of the Groups trade certain customers may delay payment until projectrelated milestones have been met.
Payment terms are not contingent on milestones being met but an assessment as to the remaining work required to be done and the potential loss of customer goodwill arising from enforcement of contractual payment terms may take place when considering actions to be taken to secure payment.
The Group has a good record in respect of invoiced amounts proving difficult to recover and does not ordinarily write off amounts due.
Of the total trade receivables shown above 459000 2016 1163000 are past due but not impaired.
An analysis of these trade receivables is set out below 030 days overdue 223 619 3060 days overdue 37 147 6090 days overdue 12 147 90 days overdue 187 250 Total 459 1163 Movement in impairment provisions Balance at the beginning of the year 53 42 Impairment losses recognised 6 51 Amounts written off as uncollectible  40 Balance at the end of the year 59 53 Other shortterm financial assets Available for sale financial assets The Group has invested in the ordinary share capital of an unrelated company whose shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The shareholding represents less than 3% of the total issued share capital of the Company and is recorded at market value.
49 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
49 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Deferred consideration Current liabilities Arising on the acquisition of One iota Limited Unconditional deferred consideration  50 Arising on the acquisition of Evogenic Limited Unconditional deferred consideration 13 24 Conditional deferred consideration 11 81tel Noncurrent liabilities Arising on the acquisition of Evogenic Limited Unconditional deferred consideration  11 Conditional deferred consideration  104 Trade and other payables Trade payables 1061 1236 Other taxation and social security 1434 1658 Accruals 748 1225 Customer deposits 410 451 3653 4570 All trade and other payables are short term.
The directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Share capital
No.
Authorised
Equity 535000000 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 53500 53500 Allotted called up and fully paid At 1 October 2016 Equity  54851985 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 5485 5460 Issued during the year 22 25 At 30 September 2017 Equity  55070668 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 5507 5485 The following share issues occurred during the year all as a result of the exercise of share options Current year date Quantity Price Prior year date Quantity Price 280117 29016 10.00p 120116 31434 10.00p 260117 50000 27.50p 130116 50000 23.00p 260117 40000 30.00p 130116 30000 49.00p 171217 53000 71.00p 050216 40000 27.50p 310317 46667 71.00p 310316 50000 10.00p 210416 50000 23.00p Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 50 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
50 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Capital and reserves Reconciliation of movements in capital and reserves Movements in capital and reserves are set out in the Consolidated statement of changes in equity.
The accumulated amount of current and deferred tax relating to items that are charged or credited directly to equity is a credit of 864000 2016 a credit of 1277000.
The following capital and reserves accounts are maintained by the Company Called up share capital Represents the nominal value of shares that have been issued.
Share premium Includes any premiums received on issue of share capital.
Any transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium.
Profit and loss account Includes all current and prior period retained profits and losses.
Foreign exchange reserve Comprises all current and prior period foreign exchange gains and losses recognised on consolidation of a foreign subsidiary.
Available for sale reserve Represents all current and prior period fair value gains and losses on the revaluation of available for sale assets recognised.
Financial instruments disclosure Capital risk management Capital management objectives are to ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern and to provide a return to shareholders by adopting a progressive dividend policy.
The capital structure of the Group currently consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the Consolidated statement of changes in equity.
The Groups Audit Committee reviews the capital structure as part of its risk analysis.
As part of this review the Committee considers the cost of capital and the risks associated with each class of capital.
The Group is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements other than the minimum capital requirements and duties regarding serious reduction of capital as imposed by the Companies Act 2006 on all public limited companies.
Categories of financial assets and financial liabilities The Group held the following categories of financial instruments Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 6176 4344 Loans and receivables including trade and other receivables at amortised cost 3831 5197 Available for sale assets 187 209 Financial liabilities at amortised cost Trade payables accruals and customer deposits 2219 2912 Unconditional deferred consideration 13 85 2232 2997 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit and loss Conditional deferred consideration 11 185 The fair value of the financial instruments set out above is not materially different to the book value.
Market risk management The Group is exposed to price risk in respect of its investment in the listed equity securities of an unrelated company whose shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
For the listed equity securities an average volatility of 9% has been observed since the year end to November 2017.
The volatility figure is considered to be a suitable basis for estimating how profit or loss and equity would have been affected by changes in market risk that were reasonably possible at the reporting date.
If the quoted stock price for these securities increased or decreased by that amount other comprehensive income and equity would have changed by 17550.
The listed securities are classified as available for sale AFS assets therefore no effect on profit or loss would have occurred.
51 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
51 13122017 094649 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Financial instruments disclosure continued The investments in listed equity securities are considered strategic investments.
In accordance with the Groups policies no specific hedging activities are undertaken in relation to these investments.
The investments are continuously monitored and voting rights arising from these equity instruments are utilised in the Groups favour.
Liquidity risk management The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate cash reserves and by continuously monitoring both forecast as well as actual cash flows to enable matching of the maturity profiles of financial assets and liabilities.
Sufficient cash is retained to service shortterm financing needs.
The following is an analysis of the contractual undiscounted cash flows payable under financial liabilities.
The table includes principal only cash flows in respect of trade and other payables and gross amounts payable as deferred consideration.
Current Noncurrent Within 6 months 6 to 12 months 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Trade payables and accruals 2219 Deferred consideration 24 Trade and other payables 2243 Current Noncurrent Within 6 months 6 to 12 months 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Trade payables and accruals 2912 Deferred consideration 62 96 128 Trade and other payables 2974 96 128 Interest rate sensitivity analysis At the yearend date there was no material exposure to movements in interest rates as the Group reported a cash balance in excess of 6.18 million.
Other financial assets and liabilities The financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value in the statement of financial position are measured in accordance with the fair value hierarchy.
This hierarchy groups financial assets and liabilities into three levels based on the significance of inputs used in measuring the fair value of the financial assets and liabilities.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. or indirectly i.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
The level within which the financial asset or liability is classified is determined based on the lowest level of significant input to the fair value measurement.
The financial assets measured at fair value in the statement of financial position at 30 September 2017 are available for sale financial assets which are in Level 1 and valued as set out in note 21.
The financial liability measured at fair value in the statement of financial position at 30 September 2017 is deferred consideration which is in Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
The fair value of deferred consideration relates to the acquisitions completed in prior years and is estimated using a present value technique.
Fair value is estimated by discounting the estimated future cash flows at 8%.
The cash flows of consideration payable before discounting are 0.02 million and reflect managements estimates of consideration that will become payable in the future.
The discount rate is based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital.
The effects on the fair value of risk and uncertainty in the future cash flows are dealt with by adjusting the estimated cash flows rather than adjusting the discount rate.
Should any of the acquired businesses not achieve its performance targets then the estimated future cash flows may be reduced.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 52 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
52 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 The reconciliation of the carrying amounts of financial instruments classified within Level 3 is as follows Balance at 1 October 2016 270 1838 Remeasurement of business performance 165 Payments made during the year 83 1660 Discount unwound and recognised as acquisitionrelated finance expense 2 92 Foreign currency risk management The Group has minimal exposure to currency risk.
At 30 September 2017 cash balances were 6.18 million of which approximately 270000 was held in euros 200000 in USD and 100000 in ZAR.
Credit risk management The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade receivables.
Credit risk is managed by monitoring the aggregate amount and duration of exposure to any one customer depending upon their credit rating.
The amounts presented in the statement of financial position are net of allowances for doubtful debts estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience and their assessment of the current economic environment.
The Group has an excellent history in terms of the level of trade receivables written off as irrecoverable.
The credit risk on liquid funds is minimised because the counterparties are UK banks with high credit ratings assigned by international creditrating agencies.
Management of other risks The Groups policies on interest rate and liquidity risk are described above.
Contingent liabilities Each company within the Group has guaranteed the bank facilities of its fellow subsidiary companies.
Bank facilities available to each subsidiary are secured by fixed and floating charges over the whole of the Groups property assets and undertakings.
At 30 September 2017 the Group held net cash balances of 6.18 million.
Commitments
Capital commitments approved by the Board and existing at 30 September 2017 amounted to nil 2016 nil.
Total commitments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 2017 2016 Land and buildings
Land and buildings
Payable
Within one year In the second to fifth years inclusive Over five years 2572  2686 3700 47 3810 38 Operating leases relate to land buildings and other assets used to support the operational requirements of the Group.
53 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
53 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Pension schemes The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme.
The pension cost charge for the year relating to this scheme was 709000 2016 696000.
A wholly owned subsidiary undertaking Sanderson Limited contributes to one defined benefit pension scheme.
The scheme is now funded solely by employer contributions as it is closed to future accrual and as a result has no contributing members.
Benefits are paid to members by reference to their length of service and final pensionable salary on the date the scheme closed to future accrual.
The latest actuarial valuation of the scheme as at 1 April 2014 showed the scheme to have a deficit of 3.70 million.
The valuation was performed by the scheme actuary who is independent of the Group.
The valuation is based on the projected unit method.
The scheme falls within the statutory funding framework under the requirements of which the scheme must meet the statutory funding objective to have sufficient and appropriate assets to cover its technical provisions.
Technical provisions are an estimate based on actuarial principles of the assets needed to cover the scheme liabilities.
Liabilities include pensions in payment benefits payable to the spouses or dependants of deceased members and benefits accrued by members yet to reach their prescribed retirement age which will be payable in the future.
Technical provisions are calculated using an accrued benefits funding method and assumptions chosen by the trustees after taking the actuarys advice and obtaining the employers agreement.
The defined benefit pension scheme is a separate legal entity from the Sanderson Group and is independently responsible for managing the assets and liabilities of the scheme.
The scheme trustee is required by the schemes trust deed to act in the best interests of the members of the scheme.
Certain of the Groups employees act as directors of the corporate trustee of the scheme.
The scheme exposes the Group to actuarial risks such as Projection risk IAS 19 does not require a full actuarial valuation each period end.
The results of the 1 April 2014 actuarial valuation have therefore been projected forward to 30 September 2017.
By its nature such a projection involves a degree of estimation.
Investment mismatch risk The discount rate used to calculate the defined benefit obligation under IAS 19 should reflect the yield available on a high quality corporate bond.
The actual investment strategy adopted by the trustee is not to be fully invested in corporate bonds which means movements in the schemes assets may not correspond to movements in the value of liabilities as measured under IAS 19.
Longevity risk If pensions are not bought out and members live longer than expected the benefits will be payable for longer than allowed for in the calculation of the liabilities leading to an experience loss on the plan liabilities.
Conversely should members not live as long as expected an experience gain may arise.
Benefit risk In calculating the liabilities the Company must make a number of assumptions about the way the schemes benefits will increase over time such as the impact of inflation.
If the increase in benefits does not follow the assumptions made there is a risk that an experience gain or loss may arise.
Equalisation risk The Department for Work and Pensions has taken legal advice on GMP equalisation and is currently considering options for implementation.
There is a risk that additional benefits payable to members may arise as a result of implementation.
Solvency risk The IAS 19 liabilities are calculated on an ongoing basis which assumes the sponsoring employer remains solvent and the scheme remains in existence.
Should the sponsoring employer no longer be in a position to support the scheme the scheme would commence winding up and benefits may have to be bought out with an insurance company.
The cost of this action is likely to exceed the value of liabilities as calculated under IAS 19.
The principal assumptions used for the purpose of the IAS 19 valuation were as follows 2017 2016 Inflation  RPI 3.3% 3.1% Inflation  CPI 2.5% 2.3% Pension revaluation in deferment 3.3% 3.1% Pension escalation in payment 0.05.0% 0.05.0% Discount rate 2.9% 2.3% Different categories of member within the scheme are entitled to different rates of escalation.
Mortality tables PMA08 and PFA08 have been used in arriving at the 2017 valuation.
The valuation applies the CMI 2016 projection model with a longterm improvement of at least 1% for both males and females.
The 2016 valuation used the same mortality tables and applied the CMI 2014 projection model with long cohort improvements of at least 1% for both males and females.
A male member retiring at 30 September 2017 is assumed to have a life expectancy of 22.8 years 2016 22.8 years a female member 25.2 years 2016 25.2 years.
A male member retiring in 20 years is assumed to have a life expectancy from their retirement date of 24.1 years 2016 24.1 years and a female member 26.6 years 2016 26.6 years.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 54 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
54 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Amounts recognised in the income statement in respect of the scheme before taxation Included within operating profit Current service cost administration fees  21 Included within finance expense Net interest cost on scheme deficit 183 180 Remeasurements recognised in the statement of comprehensive income before taxation Actual return on scheme assets 707 1560 Expected return on scheme assets 205 320 Financial actuarial gain 502 1240 Experience gains or losses arising on the scheme liabilities  174 Effect of changes in actuarial assumptions 1300 4744 Remeasurement recognised in the statement of comprehensive income 1802 3678 The cumulative actuarial gains and losses recognised in the statement of comprehensive income are as follows Cumulative actuarial loss at 1 October 10334 6656 Recognised during the year 1802 3678 Cumulative actuarial losses at 30 September 8532 10334 The fair value of the scheme assets and present value of the scheme liabilities at each statement of financial position date were Fair value of defined benefit obligation 15649 17172 Fair value of scheme assets 9473 9017 Deficit in the scheme 6176 8155 Deferred taxation on above 1050 1468 Net pension liability 5126 6687 The Groups share of the assets of the scheme are invested as follows Equities 4213 6468 Bonds 4268 2130 Unitised withprofits fund 315 281 Property 677 130 Cash and cash equivalents  8 Closing fair value of scheme assets 9473 9017 None of the schemes assets have quoted prices in an active market.
The assets of the scheme do not comprise any of the Groups own financial instruments or any assets used by Group companies.
55 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
55 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Pension schemes continued An analysis of the Groups share of the schemes assets by investment type is provided below % % Equities 44 72 Bonds and gilts 45 24 Cash and cash equivalents Other including unitised with profits Changes in the Groups share of the fair value of the schemes assets before taxation Opening fair value of scheme assets at 1 October 9017 8600 Return on plan assets 205 320 Financial actuarial gain 502 1240 Benefit payments made including transfers out 611 1473 Contributions paid 360 330 Closing fair value of scheme assets at 30 September 9473 9017 Changes in the Groups share of the fair value of the defined benefit obligations before taxation Opening defined benefit obligation at 1 October 17172 13227 Interest cost 388 500 Benefit payments made including transfers out 611 1473 Actuarial gainslosses financial 1334 4805 Actuarial losses demographic 34 113 Closing defined benefit obligation at 30 September 15649 17172 The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation at 30 September 2017 was 20 years.
Total committed contributions to the defined benefit scheme for the financial year ending 30 September 2018 amount to 360000 in respect of agreed monthly contributions.
The results of the IAS 19 valuation at 30 September 2017 are sensitive to the assumptions adopted.
The sensitivities regarding the principal assumptions used to measure the scheme liabilities are set out below Assumption Change in assumption Change in liabilities Discount rate Decrease by 0.5% Increase by 10.4% Rate of inflation Increase by 0.5% Increase by 10.0% Life expectancy Increase by 1.0% Increase by 0.01% The above analysis is based on a change in an assumption whilst holding all other assumptions constant.
In practice this is unlikely to occur and changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated.
The sensitivity of the defined benefit obligation to significant actuarial assumptions has been estimated based on the average age and the normal retirement age of members and the duration of the liabilities of the scheme.
Notes to the consolidated financial statements continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 56 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
56 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Post balance sheet event On 23 November 2017 the Group acquired control of Anisa Consolidated Holdings Limited by purchasing the entire issued ordinary share capital and thereby 100% of the voting rights for an enterprise value of 12.0 million.
The purchase consideration for the acquisition comprises an initial 3.39 million made up of approximately 2.06 million in cash which is being financed from existing Sanderson cash resources and by the issue of 1894217 new Sanderson 10p ordinary shares valued at 70p which are subject to a lockin period of three years.
Further consideration of 1.82 million is payable to Anisa share option holders to be satisfied by cash or new Sanderson shares also subject to a lockin period of three years at a price of 70p by 31 December 2017 dependent on the choice of the option holder.
Sanderson is also taking over Anisas utilised fiveyear repayable term debt facility final quarterly repayment being due in 2020 of 4.12 million as well as a current account positive cash balance of just over 1 million.
Furthermore loan notes with a coupon of 5% to the value of 1.05 million will be repaid by October 2018.
Deferred consideration totalling 1.63 million is payable in three tranches.
The first payment of 563000 is payable in April 2018 and the second payment for the same amount payable in October 2018 both tranches are unconditional.
A third and final deferred payment of up to 500000 is scheduled for April 2019 dependent upon some preagreed trading performance criteria.
The business specialises in the delivery of worldclass integrated supply chain and enterprise resource planning solutions and has around 250 customers who are provided with twentyfour hour support on a worldwide basis throughout the year.
Anisa employs over 90 staff and operates from office locations in London Runcorn Liverpool and Solihull within the UK and from smaller support operations in Singapore and Australia.
Anisa complements the Enterprise Division of Sanderson and the enlarged merged business is expected to provide and develop incremental and synergistic market opportunities.
The managed services hosting services and cloud delivery services which have been developed by Anisa represent an exciting and enhanced service delivery option for existing Sanderson customers.
The initial accounting for the business combination is incomplete due to the close proximity of the acquisition date to the date of signing these accounts.
Certain disclosure requirements including the following therefore cannot be made at this stage Fair value of assets and liabilities acquired at acquisition date Goodwill to be recognised on acquisition Acquisitionrelated costs The revenue and profit of the combined entity for the current reporting period as though the acquisition date had been as of the beginning of the annual reporting period.
57 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
57 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Company statement of financial position at 30 September 2017
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 35 96 76 Investments 36 18318 18278 Deferred tax asset 37 27 34 18441 18388 Current assets Trade and other receivables 38 5031 5234 Income tax 195 39 Other shortterm financial assets 187 209 Cash and cash equivalents 602 720 6015 6202 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 39 5787 3752 5787 3752 Net current assets 228 2450 Net assets 18669 20838 Equity attributable to the equity holders of the Company Called up share capital 40 5507 5485 Share premium account 9133 9056 Available for sale reserve 57 79 Retained earnings 3972 6218 Total equity 18669 20838 The loss for the financial period dealt with in the profit and loss of the Company was 910k 2016 profit of 792k.
The Company statement of financial position was approved and authorised for issue by the Board of directors on 27 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Christopher Winn
Company Registration Number Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 58 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
58 13122017 094650 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Company statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Cash flows from operating activities Lossprofit for the year after taxation 910 792 Adjustments for Net finance income 18 5 Depreciation 29 25 Income tax 149 48 Operating cash flow before changes in working capital 1048 860 Movement in trade and other receivables 42 64 Movement in amounts due tofrom subsidiary undertakings 2239 405 Movement in trade and other payables 41 103 Cash generated from continuing operations 1190 494 Net cash flow from operating activities 1190 494 Cash flow utilised by investing activities Payment of deferred consideration relating to subsidiaries  213 Purchase of property plant and equipment 49 35 Bank interest received 3 12 Dividend received 15 15 Net cash flow utilised by investing activities 31 221 Cash flow utilised by financing activities Issue of shares net of costs 99 58 Equity dividends paid 1376 1206 Net cash flow utilised by financing activities 1277 1148 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents 118 875 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 720 1595 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 602 720 59 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
59 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 September 2017
Share premium
Retained earnings
At 1 October 2016 5485 9056 79 6218 20838 Dividend paid    1376 1376 Exercise of share options 22 77   99 Sharebased payment charge    40 40 Transactions with owners 22 77  1336 1237 Loss for the year    910 910 Other comprehensive income Change in fair value of available for sale asset   22  22 At 30 September 2017 5507 9133 57 3972 18669 for the year ended 30 September 2016
Share premium
Retained earnings
At 1 October 2015 5460 9023 60 6547 21090 Dividend paid    1206 1206 Exercise of share options 25 33   58 Sharebased payment charge    85 85 Transactions with owners 25 33  1121 1063 Profit for the year    792 792 Other comprehensive income Change in fair value of available for sale asset   19  19 At 30 September 2016 5485 9056 79 6218 20838 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 60 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
60 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Notes to the Company financial statements Accounting policies Basis of preparation As used in the financial statements and related notes the term Company refers to Sanderson Group plc.
The separate financial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared and approved by the directors in accordance with International Reporting Financial Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
For the purposes of the financial statements of the Company the date of transition to IFRS was 1 October 2010.
A separate income statement dealing with the results of the Company only has not been presented as permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis of measurement The financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention with the exception of certain items which are measured at fair value as disclosed in the accounting policies below.
Functional and presentation currency The financial statements are presented in sterling which is the functional currency of the Company.
Use of estimates and judgements The preparation of the financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expenses.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised.
Information about significant areas of estimation and critical judgements that have the most significant impact on the financial statements are described in the following notes
Note 38 Measurement of intercompany receivables Management assesses the likely recoverability of intercompany receivables based on the performance of the Group companies that the balance is held with.
Judgements
Note 37 Deferred tax The extent to which deferred tax assets can be recognised is based on an assessment of the probability of the Groups future taxable income against which the deferred tax assets can be utilised.
In addition significant judgement is required in assessing the impact of any legal or economic limits or uncertainties.
Investments
Investments in subsidiary undertakings are stated at cost less provision for impairment where necessary to reduce book value to recoverable amount.
Investment income is recognised on a receivable basis.
Sharebased payments The equitybased share option programme allows Group employees to acquire shares of the Company.
The fair value of options to purchase shares in the Company that have been issued to employees of subsidiary companies is recognised as an additional cost of investment by the parent company.
An equal amount is credited to a sharebased payments reserve.
Taxation
The current tax charge is based on the profit for the year and is measured at the amounts expected to be paid based on the tax rates and laws substantively enacted by the yearend date.
Current and deferred tax is recognised in the profit and loss account for the year except to the extent that it is attributable to a gain or loss that is or has been recognised directly in the statement of comprehensive income.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all temporary differences that have originated but not reversed at the yearend date where transactions or events have occurred at that date that will result in an obligation to pay more or a right to pay less or receive more tax.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that the directors consider it is more likely than not that there will be suitable taxable profits from which the future reversal of the underlying temporary differences can be deducted.
Deferred tax is measured on an undiscounted basis at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which temporary differences reverse.
61 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
61 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Personnel expenses The Company employed two nonexecutive directors during the course of the year 2016 three nonexecutives.
John Paterson and David Gutteridge served throughout 2017.
Philip Kelly resigned on 8 June 2016.
Fees paid in respect of these appointments amounted to 70000 2016 96000.
Details of the remuneration of executive directors paid by subsidiary companies is given in note 8 to the accounts.
The Company employed the executive directors Christopher Winn and Ian Newcombe throughout the year.
Adrian Frost resigned as Group Finance Director on 1 September 2017.
Note 8 to the financial statements provides details of remuneration paid.
Accounting for financial liabilities The Companys financial liabilities include trade and other payables which are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Financial liabilities recorded at fair value through the income statement are initially recognised net of issue costs when the Company becomes a party to the contractual agreements of the instrument.
All interestrelated charges and if applicable changes in an instruments fair value that are reported in profit or loss are included in the income statement line movement in fair value of derivative financial instrument.
Accounting for financial assets The Company has financial assets in the following categories loans and receivables available for sale AFS financial assets Financial assets are assigned to the different categories on initial recognition depending on the characteristics of the instrument and its purpose.
A financial instruments category is relevant for the way it is measured and whether any resulting income and expense is recognised in the income statement or statement of other comprehensive income.
All financial assets are recognised when the Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial assets other than those categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
Financial assets categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are recognised initially at fair value with transaction costs expensed through the income statement.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
After initial recognition these are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Any change in their value is recognised in profit or loss.
Sanderson Group plcs trade and most other receivables fall into this category of financial instruments.
Significant receivables are considered for impairment on a casebycase basis when they are past due at the yearend date or when objective evidence is received that a specific counterparty will default.
All other receivables are reviewed for impairment in groups which are determined by reference to the industry and region of a counterparty and other available features of shared credit risk characteristics if any.
The percentage of the writedown is then based on recent historical counterparty default rates for each identified group.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand demand deposits and bank overdrafts where they form an integral part of the Companys cash management.
Cash equivalents are held for the purpose of meeting shortterm cash commitments rather than for investment or other purposes.
Equity instruments An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Company after deducting all of its liabilities.
Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
The only equity instrument applicable to the Company is its issued share capital.
Share premium includes any premium received on the issue of share capital.
Transaction costs associated with the issuing of shares are deducted from share premium net of any related tax benefits.
Retained earnings includes all current and prior period retained profits and losses.
Notes to the Company financial statements continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 62 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
62 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Personnel expenses The average number of persons employed by the Group during the period was as follows
No.
Sales and marketing 2 3 Administrative The aggregate payroll costs of the persons employed including directors were as follows Wages and salaries 1134 1140 Social security costs 127 153 Contributions to defined contribution pension plans 91 117 Sharebased payment charge 7 22 1359 1432 Employee share option schemes Details of options granted over the shares of the Company are set out in note 6 to the financial statements.
Of the options granted during the year a total of 123000 were in respect of an employee of the Company.
The sharebased payment charge in respect of these awards amounted to 3052 2016 28.
The Company has adopted IFRS 2 in accounting for options issued to employees of subsidiary companies.
Dividends
Interim dividend of 1.1p per share 2016 1.00p 606 549 Final dividend relating to previous financial year of 1.4p per share 2016 1.20p 770 657 Total dividend for the financial year 1376 1206 A final dividend of 1.55 pence per ordinary share in respect of the financial year ended 30 September 2017 will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting of the Company expected to be held on 15 February 2018.
If approved by shareholders the total final dividend payment will amount to 853595.
The directors will receive a proportion of this dividend by virtue of their shareholdings in the Company details of which are disclosed in the Directors report.
Property plant and equipment Plant and equipment
Balance at 1 October 2015 320 Additions 35 Balance at 30 September 2016 355 Additions 49 Balance at 30 September 2017 404
Balance at 1 October 2015 254 Charge for the year 25 Balance at 30 September 2016 279 Charge for the year 29 Balance at 30 September 2017 308 Net book value At 30 September 2016 76 At 30 September 2017 96 63 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
63 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Noncurrent asset investments Shares in
Cost
At 1 October 2015 22947 Fair value of share options granted to employees of subsidiaries 85 At 30 September 2016 23032 Fair value of share options granted to employees of subsidiaries 40 At 30 September 2017 23072
At 1 October 2015 30 September 2016 and 30 September 2017 4754 Net book value At 30 September 2016 18278 At 30 September 2017 18318 The subsidiary undertakings of Sanderson Group plc consist of the following wholly owned companies with all trading entities being denoted by an asterisk Sanderson MultiChannel Solutions Limited Priam Retail Solutions Limited Sanderson Limited Sanderson Logistics Limited One iota Limited Sanderson Support Limited Proteus Software Limited Sanderson Commercial Services Limited Sonarsend Limited Sanderson Ireland Limited Sanderson Australia Pty Limited Sanderson Retail Systems Limited Sanderson MultiChannel Retail Solutions Limited Deals Joy Limited Evogenic Limited Sanderson Technologies Limited Sanderson Australia Pty Limited is incorporated in Australia.
Sanderson Ireland Limited is incorporated in the Republic of Ireland.
All other companies are incorporated in England.
Deferred taxation Recognised deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets are attributable to the following and are disclosed as noncurrent assets in the Consolidated statement of financial position Temporary differences re capital allowances 7 Sharebased payment expense 32 33 Trade and other payables Movement in deferred tax As at 1 October
As at 30 September
As at 30 September Property plant and equipment 41 41  7 7 Trade and other payables 3 2 1 1 2 Sharebased payment expense 37 4 33 1 32 A deferred tax asset of 135000 2016 146000 in respect of tax losses has not been recognised as its future economic benefit is uncertain.
The gross value of losses in respect of which the unrecognised deferred tax asset relates is 792000 2016 813000.
Notes to the Company financial statements continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 64 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
64 13122017 094651 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Trade and other receivables Current assets Prepayments 183 141 Amounts due from subsidiary undertakings 4848 5093 5031 5234 Amounts due from subsidiary companies are repayable on demand.
Trade and other payables Current liabilities Trade and other payables 81 64 Accruals 301 277 Amounts due to subsidiary companies 5405 3411 5787 3752 Amounts due to subsidiary companies are repayable on demand.
Called up share capital
No.
Authorised
Equity 535000000 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 53500 53500 Allotted called up and fully paid At 1 October 2016 Equity  54851985 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 5485 5460 Issued during the year 22 25 At 30 September 2017 Equity  55070668 Ordinary shares of 10 pence each 5507 5485 The following share issues occurred during the year Date Reason Quantity Price 280117 Exercise of options 29016 10.00p 260117 Exercise of options 50000 27.50p 260117 Exercise of options 40000 30.00p 170217 Exercise of options 53000 71.00p 310317 Exercise of options 46667 71.00p The following share issues occurred during the prior year Date Reason Quantity Price 120106 Exercise of options 31434 10.00p 130116 Exercise of options 50000 23.00p 130116 Exercise of options 30000 49.00p 050216 Exercise of options 40000 27.50p 310316 Exercise of options 50000 10.00p 210416 Exercise of options 50000 23.00p 65 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
65 13122017 094652 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Financial instruments disclosure Capital risk management Capital management objectives are to ensure the Companys ability to continue as a going concern and to provide a return to shareholders.
The capital structure of the Company currently consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the Company statement of changes in equity.
The Groups Audit Committee reviews the capital structure as part of its risk analysis.
As part of this review the Committee considers the cost of capital and the risks associated with each class of capital.
The Company is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements other than the minimum capital requirements and duties regarding serious reduction of capital as imposed by the Companies Act 2006 on all public limited companies.
Categories of financial assets and financial liabilities The Company held the following categories of financial instruments Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 602 720 Loans and receivables including trade and other receivables at amortised cost 4848 5093 Available for sale assets 187 209 Financial liabilities at amortised cost Trade payables and accruals 5787 3752 The fair value of the financial instruments set out above is not materially different to the book value.
Market risk management The Company is exposed to price risk in respect of its investment in the listed equity securities of an unrelated company whose shares are traded on the London Stock Exchange.
For the listed equity securities an average volatility of 9% has been observed since the year end to November 2017.
The volatility figure is considered to be a suitable basis for estimating how profit or loss and equity would have been affected by changes in market risk that were reasonably possible at the reporting date.
If the quoted stock price for these securities increased or decreased by that amount other comprehensive income and equity would have changed by 17550.
The listed securities are classified as available for sale AFS assets therefore no effect on profit or loss would have occurred.
The investments in listed equity securities are considered longterm strategic investments.
In accordance with the Companys policies no specific hedging activities are undertaken in relation to these investments.
The investments are continuously monitored and voting rights arising from these equity instruments are utilised in the Companys favour.
Liquidity risk management The Company manages liquidity risk by maintaining adequate cash reserves and by continuously monitoring both forecast as well as actual cash flows to enable matching of the maturity profiles of financial assets and liabilities.
Sufficient cash is retained to service short term financing needs.
Notes to the Company financial statements continued Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 66 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
66 13122017 094652 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 The following is an analysis of the contractual undiscounted cash flows payable under financial liabilities.
The table includes principal only cash flows in respect of trade and other payables.
Current Noncurrent Within 6 months 6 to 12 months 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Trade payables and accruals 382 Amounts due to subsidiary companies 5405 Current Noncurrent Within 6 months 6 to 12 months 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years Trade payables and accruals 341 Amounts due to subsidiary companies 3411 Interest rate sensitivity analysis At the yearend date there was no material exposure to movements in interest rates as the Company reported a cash balance of 0.60 million 2016 0.72 million.
Other financial assets and liabilities The financial assets and liabilities are measured at fair value in the statement of financial position in accordance with the fair value hierarchy.
This hierarchy groups financial assets and liabilities into three levels based on the significance of inputs used in measuring the fair value of the financial assets and liabilities.
The fair value hierarchy has the following levels Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. or indirectly i.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable inputs.
The level within which the financial asset or liability is classified is determined based on the lowest level of significant input to the fair value measurement.
The financial assets measured at fair value in the statement of financial position at 30 September 2017 are available for sale financial assets which are in Level 1 and valued as set out in note 21.
Foreign currency risk management The Company has no material currency exposure.
The Companys financial instruments are denominated in sterling.
Credit risk management The Company has no material credit risk exposure.
Management of other risks The Companys policies on interest rate and liquidity risk are described above.
67 Stock code SND site Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
67 13122017 094652 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 8 Contingent liabilities Each company within the Group has guaranteed the bank facilities of its fellow subsidiary companies.
Bank facilities available to each subsidiary are secured by fixed and floating charges over the whole of the Groups property assets and undertakings.
At 30 September 2017 the Group held net cash balances of 6.18 million.
Related party transactions The Company levied management charges on the following subsidiary companies during the year Sanderson Limited  250 Sanderson MultiChannel Retail Solutions Limited  100 Sanderson MultiChannel Solutions Limited  250 One iota Limited  100 Proteus Software Limited  100 The Company received dividends from the following subsidiary companies during the year One iota Limited  250 Sonarsend Limited Sanderson MultiChannel Retail Solutions Limited  500 Sanderson MultiChannel Solutions Limited  250 Proteus Software Limited  250 Amounts due fromto subsidiary companies at 30 September 2017 are set out below Sanderson Limited 937 332 Sanderson MultiChannel Solutions Limited 2526 1439 Sanderson MultiChannel Retail Solutions Limited 3484 3799 One iota Limited 682 179 Proteus Software Limited 252 191 Poplar 600 Limited dormant subsidiary 2080 2080 Priam Retail Solutions Limited dormant subsidiary 25 25 Sanderson Retail Systems Limited dormant subsidiary 117 117 Sanderson Technologies Limited 150 Directors of the Company received dividends during the year by virtue of their shareholdings in the Company details of which are disclosed in the Directors report.
Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 68 Our Financials Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
68 13122017 094652 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Group information Company Secretary Richard Mogg Registered company number Registered and head office Sanderson House Manor Road
CV1 2GF Nominated advisor and broker N1 Singer One Bartholomew Lane
EC2N 2AX
Neville Registrars Limited Neville House 18 Laurel Lane
B63 3DA Solicitor to the Company Schofield Sweeney Springfield House 76 Wellington Street
LS1 2AY Auditor to the Company Grant Thornton UK LLP The Colmore Building 20 Colmore Circus
B4 6AT Financial PR Walbrook PR Limited 4 Lombard Street
EC3V 9HD Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
6 13122017 094653 25862 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 12 December 2017 407 PM Proof 12 Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 30 September 2017 To find out more about our business please visit site site To go directly to our website scan the QR code opposite Registered Office Sanderson House Manor Road
CV1 2GF Tel 44 0tel Fax 44 0tel Sanderson Annual Report 2017.
