Gooch and Housego PLC Dowlish Ford Ilminster TA19 0PF United Kingdom tel email GOOCH and HOUSEGO ANNUAL REPORT 2017 ANNUAL REPORT SEPTEMBER 2017
1 28112017 Gooch and Housego generates controls amplifies connects and measures lasers and light sources.
Our expertise enables customers to push the boundaries of commercial applications of photonics technology.
CONTENTS
WELCOME
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Highlights 02 Our Sectors and Applications 06 Strategic Report
Chairmans Statement 10
Chief Executive Officers Statement
Market Overview 14 Financial and Operating Review 22 Strategy Overview 26 Principal Risks and Uncertainties 27
Board of Directors 28 Directors Report 30 Audit Committee Report 34 Nomination Committee Report 36
Remuneration Committee Report 37
Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report  Group 42 Group Income Statement 47 Group Statement of Comprehensive Income 47 Group Balance Sheet 48 Group Statement of Changes in Equity 49 Group Cash Flow Statement 50 Notes to the Group Cash Flow Statement 51 Notes to the Financial Statements 52 Company Balance Sheet 77 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 78 Company Cash Flow Statement 79 Notes to the Company Cash Flow Statement 80 Notes to the Company Financial Statements 81 Shareholder Information Company Information 89 Notice of Annual General Meeting 90 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Operating and Strategic Highlights Strong financial performance set against a backdrop of favourable market conditions in our three main sectors of industrial aerospace and defence and life sciences Demand was particularly high for critical components used in microelectronic manufacturing and hireliability fibre couplers used in undersea cable networks Significant progress was made towards our strategic goals of further diversification and moving up the value chain StingRay Optics acquired in February 2017 has integrated well into the wider Group and is performing above our expectations Investment in RandD up 16.2% 22 new products introduced and 7 new patents granted Substantial investments were made enabling us to meet increased demand and laying the foundation for future growth
Financial Highlights
Revenue for the year 112.0m 30.2% higher than FY 2016 18.7% on a constant currency basis The acquisition contributed 5.3m in the year Adjusted profit before tax up 13.7% Adjusted basic earnings per share up 16.2% Strong cash performance delivering net cash of 14.9m at year end an increase of 27.9% Record year end order book of 72.1m up 36.5% from 30 September 2016 HIGHLIGHTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 deferred consideration and gain on bargain purchase.
Revenue
30.2%tel 2016 86.1 Net cash 27.9%tel 2016 11.7 Adjusted profit before tax 13.7%tel 2016 1 4.2 Adjusted basic earnings per share pence 16.2%tel 2016 42.5 49.4tel 2016 9.0 Total dividend per share pence 13.3%tel 2016 10.1 Statutory profit before tax 24.8%tel 2016 29.1 Basic earnings per share pence 25.1% HIGHLIGHTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Fremont
PO
Moorpark
Orlando
PO
Bedford
FO
PO
EO
Cleveland
P aris
PO
Glenrothes
PO
St Asaph
PO
AO
FO
Torquay STG H Q
Gooch and Housego demonstrates unparalleled capabilities in the following photonic technologies Acoustooptics AO Electrooptics EO Fiber optics FO Precision optics PO
22.5% 20.7m 24.0%
BY CURRENCY
5.4% 5.3m 6.2%
72.1% 60.1m 69.8% Manufacturing locations Sales offices
Keene
EUR
GBP
USD
AO
HIGHLIGHTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
REVENUE
BY SECTOR HISTORICAL REVENUE BY SECTOR millions GandH met its FY 2017 financial goals and was able to make strategically important investments in key skills processes systems and the latest capital equipment.
Significant progress has been made towards meeting our strategic aims of diversifying the business and moving up the value chain.
These strategic initiatives combined with a record year end order book mean the Board remains confident that GandH is well positioned to deliver further progress in FY 2018 and beyond.
Mark Webster
Chief Executive Officer
Aerospace and Defence millions 31.1%
Research millions 3.0%
57.4%
Sciences millions 8.5%tel 2016 54.3
2016 20.0
2016 7.9
Sciencestel
2016 3.9
Research
HIGHLIGHTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Photonics play an everincreasing role in industrial manufacturing.
GandH serves these applications and markets with a diverse product portfolio from components to subassemblies and final test and measurement equipment.
Production Technologies Laser Material Processing Laser material processing is a broad term which encompasses production processes such as ablating bending cutting curing forming fusing marking micromachining sintering thermal annealing via drilling and welding.
For these applications we design and manufacture products which are used in laser cavities to steer and control or to modulate the beam.
Printing
In lithography and microlithography the production process is inherently photonic in nature.
Computertoplate technologies flexographic and offset printing production components utilize laser processing to create the printing tools.
We provide a variety of optical components into these applications where accurate transmitted wavefronts and high energy tolerance provide superior printed image quality and longevity in production.
Test and Measurement Photonics is used across a wide variety of applications to ascertain quality damage motion chemical composition temperature location distance and to automate these types of tests.
Sensing
Fibre optics are deployed in a wide variety of sensing applications.
These applications may use fibre simply as the communication medium for speed lack of ignition sources or weight.
They may also integrate fibre gratings as the sensor to leverage the superior resolution.
We supply fibre optic and acoustooptic subassemblies and components to equipment manufacturers and installers of these systems.
Telecommunications
We serve the more demanding applications within telecommunications.
Our customers deploy our fibrebased products in undersea networks and in space for satellitetosatellite communications.
In addition we supply specialist crystals into 40G and 100G modulation systems.
SECTORS AND APPLICA TIONS Gooch and Housegos wide range of photonic devices are deployed across a uniquely broad range of applications often in challenging environments.
OUR SECTORS AND APPLICATIONS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SECTORS AND APPLICA TIONS AEROSPACE and DEFENCE Defence and avionics markets have been important drivers for our investment in operational quality and program management.
We continue to invest in our continuous improvement and lean manufacturing programs as well as production equipment and metrology to better serve our most demanding aerospace and defence customers.
Communications
Tactical communications require rugged hireliability components and subsystems in some instances lightweight for maximum mobility.
We support a number of C4ISR command control communications computers intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance applications including RF over fibre secure fibre optic networks and surveillance and target acquisition.
Our militarygrade components are designed to survive under extreme conditions manufactured in AS9100C facilities and qualified to the necessary Telcordia BSI DIN or MIL specifications as required.
Imaging under Extreme Conditions Sights telescopes periscopes and other imaging systems have long played a role in defence.
In recent years photonics has broadened imaging systems to a wide variety of conditions night fog and haze smoke sand storm aerial and space and adapted to a range of situations.
GandH provides an array of photonic components subassemblies and systems into these applications which include building and asset surveillance firefighting policing and LIDAR mapping.
T arget Designation and RangeFinding used on LandBased and Airborne Systems From missiles to guided bombs photonic targeting and rangefinding systems ensure correct deployment of munitions.
Extreme conditions require athermalized instant on systems.
GandH designs and delivers a variety of subsystems and components to prime contractors.
Countermeasures for GroundBased Systems and Airborne Platforms Infrared countermeasures protect military assets from missile attacks.
These systems require accurate modulation of the infrared energy under extreme environmental conditions.
We provide fibre optic acoustooptic and nonlinear crystal products which are used in customerspecific countermeasure applications both ground based and airborne.
Gyroscopes for Navigation Gyroscopes are used in inertial navigation systems in aircraft guided missiles submarines ships and spacecraft for rotation sensing to measure or maintain orientation.
We design and produce components for ring laser gyroscopes and fibre optic gyroscopes which are deployed in commercial aircraft as well as missiles satellites and other military vehicles.
OUR SECTORS AND APPLICATIONS Image by Pete Mobbs  Crown copyright 2011 Image by Jonathan Hamlet Crown copyright 2010 Image by Russ Nolan Crown copyright 2013 Image by Hamish Burke Crown copyright 2013 Crown copyright 2011 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SECTORS AND APPLICA TIONS
GandH has a proven track record in the design and development of space hardware for European Space Agency ESA National Aeronautics and Space Administration NASA and other western allied national space agencies missions and other commercial projects with components modules and systems integrated within operational satellites and on board the probes and rovers.
We maintain a leading role in research and development programs in Europe the USA and Asia through multiple projects and contracts centered on optical inter and intrasatellite communication links.
Our work on space projects fuels the company roadmap on a new generation of product lines.
GandH works with major prime contractors and government agencies on groundbreaking scientific and technology development programs for navigation earth observation and communication.
Our enabling technologies span our core capabilities in AcoustoOptics FibreOptics and Precision Optics.
OUR SECTORS AND APPLICATIONS Image courtesy of ESA Image courtesy of ESA GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SECTORS AND APPLICA TIONS LIFE SCIENCES GandH serves the life sciences markets with photonics engineering solutions from across the companys technology portfolio.
Optical Coherence Tomography OCT Widely used for ophthalmic imaging OCT has proven invaluable in improving the diagnosis of glaucoma and macular degeneracy.
We serve most of the worlds leading manufacturers of OCT retinal imaging systems.
Medical and Cosmetic Laser Systems GandH is helping develop new laser products which enable less invasive surgical techniques.
Applications include cataract replacement vision correction prostate surgery varicose vein treatment and mole treatment in addition to tattoo removal teeth whitening freckle removal and wrinkle reduction.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH GandH works with some of most prestigious Big Science projects in the world.
We are a primary supplier of many critical optical components such as very large frequency conversion crystals used in the worlds most powerful laser system at the National Ignition Facility NIF at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
We supply similar products to the Commissariat  lnergie atomique et aux nergies alternatives CEA and other inertial confinement fusion ICF programs around the world.
Image Julie Russell Image James Pryatel OUR SECTORS AND APPLICATIONS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Set against a backdrop of favourable market conditions your company has delivered a strong financial performance in 2017.
This has been delivered through a mix of organic and acquisitive growth.
Demand for certain of Gooch and Housegos products particularly from the microelectronics and undersea fibre optic communications sectors reached unprecedented levels during the year.
The resulting record order book presented a significant challenge for some of the Companys manufacturing operations.
Investments made in recent years in lean manufacturing and continuous improvement meant that GandH was in part able to respond to this demand through an enhanced ability to match capacity with demand across the Companys various manufacturing locations.
Combined with significant investments during the year in people and in the latest manufacturing equipment these initiatives made it possible to satisfy the needs of our customers and begin to reduce lead times towards the yearend.
In February 2017 GandH acquired StingRay Optics LLC StingRay a USA based designer and manufacturer of specialist optical and optomechanical systems.
StingRay was a particularly significant acquisition as it provides GandH with advanced optical systems design capabilities for harsh and demanding applications.
These new capabilities support the Companys twin strategic objectives of moving up the value chain and achieving greater diversification by enabling GandH to provide systemslevel solutions to Aerospace and Defence AandD customers.
In 2017 the StingRay acquisition helped sales into the AandD sector approach one third of total revenues.
StingRay has delivered a consistently strong performance since acquisition.
The acquisitions completed in the previous year Alfalight and Kent Periscopes also made valuable contributions in 2017.
The investment in people during 2017 represents an important enhancement of the skillsbase of GandH and bodes well for the future.
In order to meet the challenges of greater scale and complexity GandH has chosen to focus on specific high growth products and markets.
Recent recruitment has reflected the need for a higher level of specialisation across a wide range of business functions including manufacturing processes and systems business development human resources supplychain and research and development.
These and planned future changes reflect a recent board review of the organisational structure of the GandH that had the objective of ensuring that it be optimised for delivering sustainable growth over the long term as GandH grows both organically and by acquisition.
In successfully responding to the challenges of 2017 an exceptional effort was required by many people.
I would like to express my thanks to my fellow directors and to all employees of Gooch and Housego.
I am pleased to welcome David Bauernfeind who joined the board as a nonexecutive director and Chair of the Audit Committee on 1 May 2017.
Gooch and Housego is stronger today than at any time in its past.
With a sound financial foundation new talents and capabilities a pipeline of exciting new products and a record order book to start the year the Company is wellpositioned to continue to deliver in 2018 and beyond.
Gareth Jones
28 November 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT Gooch and Housego is stronger today than at any time in its past.
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
CEO Mark Webster accepting the 2017 AIM Award for Global Achievement GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
FY2017 Performance Gooch and Housego GandH benefited from positive market conditions and strong demand across its main sectors of industrials aerospace and defence AandD and life sciences.
Demand was particularly high for critical components used in microelectronic manufacturing and high reliability fibre couplers used in undersea cable networks.
FY 2017 has been a watershed year for the company as we passed through the 100 million sales barrier for the first time.
Revenue of 112.0 million represents year on year growth of 30.2% or on a constant currency basis 18.7%.
Adjusted PBT which is less affected by foreign exchange fluctuations due to the natural hedging within the business was 16.1 million equating to a year on year profit growth of 13.7%.
Strategically important investments in people processes systems and the latest capital equipment were made during the year enabling us to address high levels of demand in FY2017 and provide an important platform for GandHs future growth.
Strategic Goals Considerable progress has been made towards our strategic goals of further diversification and moving up the value chain.
AandD and life sciences both provide a counter balance to the exposure that the industrial laser sector has to the global economic cycle.
These business areas have customer bases which include tier one AandD and medical diagnostic companies who often prefer GandH to provide sub systems or systems rather than solely critical components providing a strong impetus to move up the value chain.
When coupled with the regulatory hurdles inherent in both AandD and life sciences these markets provide a defensible business model with a high barrier to entry.
Our aim is to establish a critical mass of business in both the AandD and life science sectors.
This has in large part been achieved in AandD which now represents 31.1% of GandHs FY2017 revenue 2016 23.2% this was made possible due to a combination of organic growth and by the three acquisitions made in FY 2016 and FY 2017.
Life sciences has undergone good organic revenue growth in particular with products utilising our optical coherence tomography technology and laser surgery but the sector still needs further acquisitions to achieve the desired critical mass.
Sub systems and systems now represent 22.1% of our business 2016 15.1% with the growth again helped by the recent acquisitions most notably Kent Periscopes and StingRay.
Kent
Periscopes acquired in FY 2016 moved to a larger custom fitted facility in St.
Asaph North Wales during FY 2017.
This was funded in large part by the Welsh Government.
As well as being required for the growth of the existing Kent Periscopes business the facility is earmarked to become a hub for assembly of sub systems and systems across the Group.
Acquisitions
Strategic acquisitions remain an important part of GandHs business model and in February 2017 we acquired StingRay Optics LLC StingRay.
StingRay is a USA based specialist designer and manufacturer of high performance optical and optomechanical sub systems for demanding defence and commercial applications.
Their product range is focused on laboratory ground based airborne unmanned aerial vehicles UAVs and space applications for key US defence customers.
Synergies include leveraging GandHs greater reach through our global sales teams and our expertise in manufacturing infrared precision optics and specialist coatings.
The partnership has proven to be very successful so far with StingRays performance exceeding our expectations and their talented workforce integrating well into the wider company.
Research and Development RandD There has been continued benefit from concentrating our RandD efforts on fewer higher return projects.
During FY 2017 we introduced a record 22 new products and we expect the full value of these products to peak over the next three years.
Revenue generated from new products this year was 11.1 million.
Gooch and Housego met its FY 2017 financial goals and was able to make strategically important investments in key skills processes systems and the latest capital equipment.
Significant progress has been made towards meeting our strategic aims of diversifying the business and moving up the value chain with AandD now representing 31.1% of our business.
We acquired USA based StingRay in February 2017 which has integrated well into the wider organisation and performed strongly CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT Good progress has been achieved in our key RandD areas of interest notable among which are the following Microelectronics is entering a new phase of nano technology and the UV lithography and via drilling techniques required to achieve this need a new generation of precision lasers and laser systems which are being developed with our laser manufacturer and laser system partners.
OCT technology dominates the retinal scanning and imaging arena but the longer term development partnerships we have with medical diagnostic companies in the areas of cardiovascular disease and cancer detection are now moving to the prototype and early commercial model stage with the prospect of new product launches in the near future.
Our space communication group has gone from strength to strength with European Space Agency and UK Space agency funded work in satellite communications and is now attracting commercial interest from the USA and elsewhere.
In addition to the grant funded work we have enhanced our 4 million commercial contract to provide communication systems for near term satellite launches.
We are also developing similar technology for the adjacent market of UAVs.
Various aspects of our RandD defence programmes in the US and Europe are classified but we are able to say that we are making good headway in developing key parts of Kent Periscopes product portfolio so they are compatible with USA military standards.
We have recently moved some of our RandD effort into sensing technology focusing on use in harsh environments with ruggedised photonics technology.
We have been able to bring some of our space communications experience to problem solving in this arena.
In order to accommodate the need for more system based projects the Systems Technology Group STG primarily based at our Torquay site has been expanded.
The group consists of scientists and engineers who bring a wide range of skills such as electronic software and mechanical engineering which are required in order to present a complete sub system or system to our customers.
Performance Improvement Programme In addition to the enhanced RandD performance outlined above we have continued to expand our business development group adding a microelectronic business development executive to the existing life science and AandD executives.
The established business development executives have brought enhanced access to tier 1 AandD companies and multinational medical diagnostic organisations and have been instrumental in the development of some of our most notable RandD projects.
Our
GandHs ongoing operational performance improvement programme was instrumental in enabling us to meet the challenge of this years high growth rate.
The major infrastructure projects in Fremont CA and Cleveland OH are now substantially complete.
Investment in key skills lean processes and systems and the latest capital equipment was accelerated in sites that provide critical components for precision lasers used in microelectronic manufacturing namely Ilminster Fremont CA and Torquay.
We have built on the good work done in previous years to further improve efficiency customer service and to establish a more scalable organisational model for future growth.
Our ten manufacturing sites have been organised into three manufacturing centres.
They are based on our sites areas of technical expertise namely Acousto Optic  Electro Optic Precision Optics and Fibre Optics.
Each manufacturing area has a leader and their role is to ensure best practice is shared there is process harmonisation and optimal allocation of resource.
GandH is in a strong positon financially and is well positioned to make further investment in the business.
Market and Applications
The industrial sector represents 57.4% of GandHs revenue and is composed of a diverse range of industrial applications aligned to our world class photonic technologies including microelectronic manufacturing semiconductor manufacturing and test remote sensing metrology and optical communications.
Our industrials division grew by 10.0 million or 18.4% compared to the previous year reflecting a positive performance across the range of industrial products.
Critical components for precision lasers used in microelectronic manufacturing were in particular demand.
This was driven by the next generation of smart phones and tablets and the consequent change in manufacturing technology required to produce them.
The aforementioned cutting edge technology is primarily dependent on the latest solid state lasers and we worked closely with the laser manufacturers and laser system suppliers to meet these demands.
Precision inspection equipment for real time calibration in smart phone and tablet production continued to deliver significant revenue for us during FY 2017.
The ongoing need for ever more data capacity from government industry and the consumer continues to drive a strong optical telecommunications performance.
GandH provides some of the more technically challenging elements to both land and undersea optical communications.
Our ultra hireliability fibre couplers are CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT used in amplifiers that are a key part of undersea cable networks.
Over the last couple of years there has been a positive step change in the requirement for these products driven by technology firms laying their own cable networks in order to control the process of data delivery.
This new level of demand has continued unabated throughout FY 2017.
Aerospace and Defence AandD represented 31.1% of our revenue and grew year on year by 14.9 million or 74.5%.
This was due to a combination of organic growth and acquisition as highlighted earlier.
GandH is now able to bring a wide range of photonic capabilities that very much represent the direction of travel in this sector.
These include target designation range finding ring laser and fibre optic gyroscope navigational systems infrared and RF counter measures periscopes and sighting systems for armoured vehicles and optomechanical sub systems for unmanned aerial vehicles.
Delivering product quality reliability and performance in challenging environments is essential in the AandD arena and this very much plays to GandHs strengths.
Our customers encompass the major European and USA AandD companies.
Space satellite communication is undergoing a technology revolution.
The use of fibre optic lasers to transmit information means the satellite communication systems are more efficient and robust as well being significantly lighter.
This has changed the economics of the sector and has led to smaller satellites and encouraged the move towards the use of satellite constellations as part of a communications network.
The investment we have made in this area means we are at the forefront of some of these developments.
Life Sciences Life Sciences represents 8.5% of GandHs revenue and grew year on year by 1.7 million or 21.1%.
Despite the increase in revenue the profit did decline year on year which is primarily due to the investments made into future capabilities.
Though life sciences is a relatively small sector for GandH we see this as a strategically important one going forward.
The principal applications are in optical coherence tomography OCT laser surgery and microscopy.
OCT is widely used in ophthalmology for 3D retinal scanning and GandH has a dominant position in supplying critical components and sub systems to the main equipment suppliers.
We also have a number of RandD collaborations with medical diagnostic companies in cardiovascular and cancer detection.
Laser surgery is a fast growing area particularly in ophthalmology prostate and cosmetic surgery and has significant potential to be exploited beyond these current areas of use.
There is potential for photonic technology to be used in minimally invasive surgery endoscopy and robotic surgery and this sector remains an area where GandH will continue to invest in RandD and look for strategic acquisitions.
Scientific Research GandHs research market is dominated by a small number of big science projects in the fields of nuclear fusion research and synchrotron radiation sources.
It provides 3.0% of our revenue.
The year on year decline was due to the phasing of one of the projects.
This is a profitable sector for GandH where we have some unique capabilities that has the capacity to deliver growth and we will continue to selectively invest in this area.
Outlook
GandH met its FY 2017 financial goals and was able to make strategically important investments in key skills processes systems and the latest capital equipment.
Significant progress has been made towards meeting our strategic aims of diversifying the business and moving up the value chain with AandD now representing 31.1% of our business by revenue.
We acquired USA based StingRay Optics LLC in February 2017 which has integrated well into the wider organisation and performed strongly.
GandH will continue with an active policy of making further progress towards a more diverse and balanced business by building critical mass in AandD and life sciences through a mix of investment in RandD and acquisitions.
We are committed to making further investment in RandD in our targeted high growth areas.
These include fibre and solid state laser systems precision inspection equipment for microelectronic manufacturing OCT medical diagnostics laser surgery space satellite communications AandD sub systems and fibre optic sensing systems.
GandH intends to take the performance improvement programme to the next level by further investment in business development activity focusing our global resources on a few high return RandD projects and continuing to improve operational efficiency.
We believe the introduction of three well defined and focused manufacturing centres will provide a scalable platform for enhanced lean manufacturing practice These strategic initiatives combined with a record year end order book mean the Board remains confident that GandH is well positioned to deliver further progress in FY 2018 and beyond Mark Webster
Chief Executive Officer
28 November 2017 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS STATEMENT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Applications Products and Markets Industrial Lasers for materials processing applications.
Gooch and Housego supplies Qswitches and other acoustooptic electro optic and fibre optic products.
The end users for industrial lasers are extensive due to the ubiquitous adoption of this technology in high tech manufacturing.
The microelectronics materials processing represents the largest end market.
A move towards new laser enabled production techniques has driven strong growth in the microelectronic materials processing end market.
Optical communications specifically for high reliability and high performance applications.
The products supplied into this market are based upon the Groups fibre optic crystal growth and precision optics technologies.
The end users of these products are typically global telecommunication equipment companies and more recently large technology companies for applications such as undersea and long haul telecommunication networks.
The demand for more data from government industry and particularly the consumer has driven strong growth in this sector.
Metrology for laserbased highprecision noncontact measurement systems.
The Group principally supplies its precision optics acoustooptics and instrumentation systems into this market the customers are typically bluechip OEMs.
This market was flat on the previous year.
Remote sensing for applications including asset protection perimeter security strain temperature and pressure sensing.
Gooch and Housego supplies fibre optic and acoustooptic components and subassemblies including the recently developed FibreQ.
Manufacturers of these systems address diverse end markets such as wind energy and oil and gas exploration and production.
This area was lower in 2017 due to customer ordering patterns and a very strong FY2016 comparator .
Semiconductor for lithography and test and measurement applications.
The products supplied into this market are precision optics and acoustooptics.
Customers are typically global semiconductor equipment manufacturers.
This market is closely aligned with the microelectronics industry and has demonstrated good growth across the year.
Growth Strategy To continue to invest in RandD and process engineering in order to develop our existing portfolio bring to the market new products and to ensure that we remain at the cutting edge of technology in this important area.
During 2017 Gooch and Housego introduced twelve new products that address its Industrial market.
To focus on niche markets that play to the strengths of Gooch and Housego principally those that demand high levels of quality and reliability typically require complex design and engineering input and for a number of our products require survivability in harsh environments.
To expand into and develop new geographical markets that offer high growth opportunities through leveraging and expanding the Groups global sales organisation.
To continue to focus our energies and investment on making the transition from a components supplier to a manufacturer of subassemblies instruments and systems where appropriate.
To invest in longer term RandD projects.
To make strategic acquisitions.
Gooch and Housego will continue to seek high quality acquisition opportunities as a route to grow its industrial business.
STRA TEGIC REPORT MARKET OVERVIEW
GandH Torquay Integrity Award presentation from Sharing in Growth SiG CEO Andy Page GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
18.4%
Operating Profit millions 9.3% 63.1%
57.4% GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Applications Products and Markets Target designation and range finding used on both landbased and airborne systems.
The products supplied into this market are based upon our precision optics and electrooptics technologies.
Our customers are US and European defence contractors.
In 2017 this business was in line with the previous financial year.
Guidance and navigation components for ring laser gyroscope and fibre optic gyroscope inertial navigation systems.
The products supplied into this market are based upon our precision optic and fibre optic technologies.
Gooch and Housego navigation components are used in a variety of end markets including civil and military aircraft missiles satellites and space exploration.
In 2017 this business was in line with the previous financial year.
Countermeasures for ground based systems and airborne platforms.
The products supplied into this market are based upon fibre optic acoustooptic and nonlinear optics technologies.
The customers are US and European defence contractors.
In
2017 this business grew compared to the previous year.
Space Photonics GandH is leveraging its heritage of ultrahigh reliability components for space applications in order to address the next generation requirement for fibre optics on satellites.
We are working with both the European Space Agency and commercial organisations to develop and deploy subsystems for intersatellite and satellite to ground communications radio over fibre and optically interconnected onboard processors within telecommunications satellites.
Periscopes and Sighting Systems for land based Armoured Fighting Vehicles.
GandH provides system level products for harsh environments to an impressive list of blue chip defence companies.
2017 was a challenging year for this segment due to customer push outs although prospects remain positive supported by a strong order book.
Optomechanical sub systems for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
This capability was added during the year following the acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC.
The business provides system level optical products for use in harsh environments to key US defence customers.
This is a growing area in both the core defence and commercial markets.
Growth Strategy To continue to focus energy and investment on moving from being a components supplier to a subsystems provider.
Our
Aerospace and Defence customers are changing their business models and are looking for companies such as Gooch and Housego that are capable of providing a full service.
To continue to invest in manufacturing processes and engineering in order to meet the exacting expectations of this sector which is becoming increasingly demanding in terms of quality and price.
To make strategic acquisitions that will provide synergies are complementary to our existing AandD business and will help us build a critical mass in this sector.
GandH acquired StingRay Optics LLC a USA based specialist designer and manufacturer of high performance optical and optomechanical subsystems for demanding defence applications.
To introduce a greater number of new products including products which look to fill a market need as well as projects initiated by our customers.
During 2017 Gooch and Housego introduced five new products that address its Aerospace and Defence market.
STRA TEGIC REPORT MARKET OVERVIEW Aerospace and Defence Image by Chris Hill Crown copyright 2011 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
74.5%
Operating Profit millions 186.7% 23.2%
31.1% Image by Andy Holmes  Crown copyright 2011 Image courtesy of ESA Image by Graeme Main Crown copyright 2011 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Applications Products and Markets Optical Coherence Tomography OCT primarily used in retinal imaging for the diagnosis of glaucoma and macular degeneration.
Gooch and Housego provides a family of fibre optic products in this market ranging from discrete components to full optical systems.
Customers include most of the worlds leading manufacturers of OCT retinal imaging systems.
This market grew in 2017 and we continue to work on the next generation of products with key customers.
Laser surgery used in a wide range of applications including prostate surgery scar correction cataract surgery freckle mole and tattoo removal as well as wrinkle reduction and teeth whitening.
The products supplied into this market are based upon electrooptic fibre optic and acoustooptic technologies.
The customers in this market include both laser system manufacturers and biomedical equipment manufacturers.
This market remained buoyant in the year and continues to be a growth area.
Microscopy modern laserbased techniques are revolutionising the field of microscopy.
Gooch and Housegos acoustooptic devices and hyperspectral imaging systems are used to control the multiple laser sources and analyse complex images.
The end customers are typically medical equipment manufacturers.
This market was stable in the year for GandH.
The growth strategy for Life Sciences mirrors that for Aerospace and Defence in many respects.
This is particularly true in terms of the size of the available market and the desire of the customer base to pull Gooch and Housego up the value chain.
Growth Strategy To continue to invest in longer term RandD projects and to develop the existing portfolio of products to ensure that they remain competitive.
During 2017 Gooch and Housego introduced five new products that address its Life Sciences market.
Where appropriate seek to sell the full range of our Life Sciences products to a wider range of customers.
To make strategic acquisitions that are synergistic are complementary to our existing Life Science business and will help us build critical mass in this sector.
Gooch and Housego will continue to seek high quality acquisitions as a route to grow its Life Sciences business should the opportunity arise.
STRA TEGIC REPORT MARKET OVERVIEW Life Sciences GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
21.1%
Operating Profit millions 37.5% 9.2%
8.5% Image courtesy of Michelson Diagnostics GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 Applications Products and Markets Nuclear fusion research and energy laser technology is being used to recreate the conditions found in the core of the sun.
At these temperatures and pressures isotopes of hydrogen fuse to form helium and in doing so release huge amounts of energy the energy that powers the sun and stars.
One of the most exciting potential applications of this research is using laser fusion to provide limitless quantities of clean carbonfree energy to meet the worlds growing needs.
The products supplied into this market utilise a wide range of the Companys technologies including crystal growth precision optics thinfilm coatings and fibre optics.
Gooch and Housego supplies many of the worlds leading nuclear fusion energy research facilities.
We are also the sole supplier of many critical optical components used in the worlds most powerful laser system at the National Ignition Facility NIF at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Northern California.
Instrumentation for applications in agricultural solar marine and industrial research.
An example of an industrial research application is the development of Light Emitting Diode LED illumination systems.
Instrumentation products are supplied from our Orlando facility and include photometers radiometers spectroradiometers and their associated calibration services.
The customer base ranges from universities and research institutes to Government agencies and national standards laboratories.
A small number of Big Science projects which are reliant on government funding dominate this market.
The products supplied into this market span the complete breadth of the Companys technology portfolio.
Many of Gooch and Housegos current products have evolved from early stage collaborations with universities and this is an area the Company will focus on on a selective basis.
Growth Strategy To maintain and develop the businesss capabilities in crystal growth and ultraprecision optics for nuclear fusion research and energy university research and Big Science projects.
Gooch and Housego is the custodian of some of the worlds most advanced optical technologies.
To continue to invest in RandD to develop and commercialise the next generation of Instrumentation products.
STRA TEGIC REPORT MARKET OVERVIEW Scientific Research Image courtesy of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Image courtesy of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
14.2%
Operating Profit millions 42.9% 4.5%
3.0% Image courtesy of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL AND OPERATING REVIEW
Performance Overview The business has once again delivered strong profitable growth.
Group revenue for the year was a record 112.0million.
This represents an increase of 25.9 million or 30.2% over the previous year of 86.1 million.
During the year Gooch and Housego acquired StingRay Optics LLC which contributed 5.3 million to Group revenue in the year so organic revenue was up by 23.9%.
On a constant currency basis revenue was 18.7% higher than the previous year.
During 2017 Gooch and Housego invested 5.8 million in property plant and equipment and 5.7 million in acquisitions.
Despite this the business has increased its net cash position to 14.9 million at 30 September 2017 2016 11.7 million through sustained strong operating cash flows.
In the financial year under review adjusted operating margins increased by 2.1 million in absolute terms to 16.4 million 2016 14.3 million.
At a percentage margin level adjusted operating margins were 14.6% compared to 16.6% in 2016 as a result of foreign exchange and planned investment in people and systems to support the growth.
Revenue
2017 2016 Y ear ended 30 September 000 % 000 % Industrial 64261 57.4% 54296 63.1% Aerospace and Defence 34860 31.1% 19977 23.2% Life Sciences 9570 8.5% 7904 9.2% Scientific Research 3325 3.0% 3874 4.5% Group Revenue 112016 100% 86051 100% In our Industrial segment revenue grew by 18.4% from 54.3 million last year to 64.3 million this year.
Revenue in our Aerospace and Defence business increased by 74.5% from 20.0m to 34.9m.
Excluding the acquisition in the year AandD revenue increased by 48.0%.
Life Sciences revenue increased by 21.1% whilst sales in our smallest segment Scientific Research reduced by 14.2%.
Group Earnings Performance All amounts in 000 Adjusted Reported Year ended 30 Septembertel Operating profit 16406 14258 13278 10184 Net finance costs 295 88 676 88 Profit before taxation 16111 14170 12602 10096 Taxation 4059 3865 3710 3048 Profit for the year 12052 10305 8892 7048 Basic earnings per share p The Group adjusted profit before tax amounted to 16.1 million 2016 14.2 million and represented a net margin of 14.4%.
Statutory profit before tax was 12.6 million compared with 10.1 million last year.
The adjusted effective rate of tax was 25.2% 2016 27.3% the reduction caused by a number of factors including a lower applicable corporate tax rate in the UK tax deductions being available on intangibles on recent US acquisitions and certain one off effects in the prior year.
The effective rate of tax of 29.4% 2016 30.2% was higher than the adjusted effective rate because of the effect of the interest charge on deferred consideration which is not subject to tax and the restructuring and acquisition costs being incurred in the UK which has a lower tax rate than the overall rate for the Group.
The rate reflects a combination of the varying tax rates applicable throughout the countries in which the Group operates principally the UK and the USA.
The effective rate of tax should benefit in the future from further reductions in the UK tax rate although the proportion of profit generated in the USA where tax rates are higher will affect this.
Adjusted earnings per share EPS increased from 42.5p to 49.4p.
Reported basic EPS was 36.4p compared with 29.1p last year.
Reconciliation of Adjusted Performance Measures Operating Profit Net finance costs Taxation Earnings per share Year ended 30 September 000 Reported 13278 10184 676 88 3710 3048 36.4p 29.1p Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 2202 1263   168 333 8.3p 3.8p Gain on bargain purchase  578      2.4p Impairment of goodwill 615 771     2.5p 3.2p Release of accrued contingent consideration 615      2.5p Provision for regulatory compliance risk  500      2.1p Restructuring costs 536 1652   105 391 1.8p 5.2p Transaction fees 390 466   76 93 1.3p 1.5p Interest on deferred consideration   381    1.6p Adjusted 16406 14258 295 88 4059 3865 49.4p 42.5p GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL AND OPERATING REVIEW
Non GAAP Measures The Company uses a number of non GAAP measures which are shown in the table above and in the segmental analysis.
These measures are used to illustrate the impact of nonrecurring and nontrading items on the Companys financial results.
These are the impact of the amortisation of acquired intangible assets costs associated with restructuring activities interest on deferred consideration impairment of goodwill and release of accrued contingent consideration.
In 2016 they also included the provision for regulatory risk compliance and the gain on bargain purchase of Alfalight.
Segmental Analysis
Our Industrial business grew strongly during the year with revenues of 64.3 million compared with 54.3 million last year.
This growth was largely driven by a combination of our industrial laser and telecommunications businesses.
Revenue from the Groups industrial laser business segment grew strongly driven by high demand for precision lasers used in microelectronic manufacturing.
Demand for the traditional Q Switch grew in 2017 and represented 14.0% of total Group revenue 2016 10.2%.
Adjusted operating profit for the Industrial sector as a whole was 10.1% higher at 11.8 million compared with 10.8 million last year.
Aerospace and Defence AandD AandD revenue was 34.9 million up 74.5% on last year benefitting from the full year effect of the two acquisitions in FY16 and the acquisition of StingRay in FY17.
These results reinforce our belief that this sector represents a growth opportunity for Gooch and Housego as optical technologies continue to be increasingly deployed in this market.
Operating
Life Sciences In 2017 Life Sciences revenue was up by 21.1% compared to the prior year.
The majority of this growth was driven by a strong performance in our Optical Coherence Tomography OCT market driven largely by our customers development cycles.
Despite this adjusted operating margins in this sector were down on the previous year due to the competitive nature of the OCT market and the investment in this relatively small sector.
Scientific Research Our activities in the Scientific Research market are dominated by a small number of large longterm programmes.
This market was down in 2017 due to demand phasing.
Research and Development RandD Gooch and Housego continues to invest in RandD in all areas of the business and regards this as fundamental to the continued growth of the company.
There were a record 22 product releases in 2017 together with 7 new patents granted.
Expenditure on RandD in the year to 30 September 2017 increased by 16.2% from 7.4 million to 8.6 million.
A proportion of this increase was funded through UK and European grant funding.
RandD expenditure represented 7.7% of revenue 2016 8.6%.
The Group capitalised 0.7m 2016 0.7 million of development expenditure.
Operations
As reported in our Interim Statement the Company has committed to upgrading its Cleveland Ohio facility.
This facility which houses GandHs world leading crystal growth capabilities is a key contributor to current and future profitability and will benefit from the modernisation that has been taking place.
The upgrade is substantially complete and we will have invested in the region of 5 million.
The refurbishment will help drive much needed operational efficiency provide greater capacity as well as a more compelling showcase of our capabilities for customers.
The Company has concluded a legal dispute with the landlord of its Fremont facility.
As a result of this a Californian court has awarded GandH in the region of 2 million in damages arising from the landlords nonperformance in respect of the lease.
This will be accounted for in FY18.
Investment in key skills lean processes systems and the latest capital equipment was accelerated in sites that provide critical components for precision lasers used in microelectronic manufacturing namely Ilminster Fremont CA and Torquay.
We have built on the good work done in previous years to further improve efficiency customer service and to establish a more scalable organisational model for future growth.
Our ten manufacturing sites have been organised into three manufacturing areas.
They are based on our sites areas of technical expertise namely Acousto Optic  Electro Optic Precision Optics and Fibre
Each manufacturing area has a leader and their role is to ensure best practice is shared there is process harmonisation and optimal allocation of resources.
Acquisitions
GandH will continue to evaluate acquisition opportunities that have the potential to accelerate delivery of the Companys strategic objectives.
Having established a presence in its target markets GandH is now focussing on moving up the value chain in each of those markets.
Whilst the business will continue to evaluate bolt on businesses in our core component technologies continued strong focus is being placed on acquisition opportunities that enhance the Companys ability to wrap electronics and software around core photonic products to yield systemlevel solutions.
In February 2017 GandH acquired StingRay Optics LLC a US based specialist designer and manufacturer of high performance GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT optical and optomechanical subsystems for demanding defence and commercial applications.
StingRay was founded in 2004 and has established itself as a market leading designer manufacturer and supplier of world class custom optical assemblies.
The business has a proven capability in providing system level optical products for use in harsh environments to key US defence customers.
StingRays product range covers laboratory ground based airborne unmanned aerial vehicles and space applications.
The acquisition of StingRay is aligned with GandHs strategic objectives of moving up the value chain and further diversification into the Aerospace and Defence sector.
Potential synergies include leveraging GandHs greater reach through our global sales teams and our expertise in manufacturing infrared precision optics and specialist coatings.
StingRay has performed very well since acquisition contributing 5.3 million to Group revenue and 1.6 million in profit before tax in the year.
As a result of two key customers delaying the delivery of product from existing orders Kent Periscopes did not reach its threshold for the first tranche of its earnout to be triggered.
Consequently the provision for a proportion of this payment approximately 0.6m made under IFRS accounting rules has been released to the income statement for the current year.
Whilst the delay in delivery of these contracts has affected the anticipated results of Kent Periscopes for the earnout period the outlook for the business remains positive.
The order book for the next two years remains very strong at approximately 12.5 million.
Whilst the core value of this business remains strong as part of its biannual review of the carrying value of goodwill the Board has taken the decision to impair the goodwill of the Kent Periscopes acquisition to the sum of 0.6 million.
Non Trading Items Restructuring costs of 0.5 million 2016 1.7 million related to the relocation of our Palo Alto facility to Fremont and to restructuring costs arising from the efficiency savings the business has put in place.
Balance Sheet The Groups total equity at the end of the year was 98.1 million an increase of 8.0 million over the prior year.
This increase comprised 6.6m from retained earnings 2.0m from issues of share capital and a net reduction of 0.6m from foreign exchange and other movements.
Additions to property plant and equipment totalled 5.8m excluding acquisitions.
The main additions related to investment in plant and machinery the expansion of our Torquay facility and the refurbishment of our Cleveland facility.
Working capital was 19.2% of revenue in the current year compared to 24.5% in 2016.
This metric has benefitted from the year end GBPUSD exchange rate being higher than the average for the year but also reflects management efforts to reduce working capital as a percentage of sales.
Inventory at the year end was 21.1 million an increase of 2.1 million over the prior year.
Excluding the impact of currency and the inventory attributable to the acquisition the underlying inventory increased by 1.6m or 8.5% in the year.
This increase is reflective of the increased activity in the year.
Trade receivables were unchanged at 20.5m.
The effect of a strong shipment profile towards the end of the year and the acquisition of StingRay were largely offset by movements in the dollar exchange rate.
Cash balances at 30 September 2017 were 26.4 million compared with 23.2 million at 30 September 2016.
Net cash flows from operating activities totalled 17.6 million compared with 12.6 million last year reflecting a cash generated from operations to adjusted operating profit rate of 119% 2016 96%.
During the year the business increased its net cash position from 11.7m to 14.9 million despite investing 5.7m in the acquisition of StingRay and 5.8m in property plant and equipment.
Movement in Net Cash All amounts in m Gross
Gross
Debt
Net
Cash
At 1 October2016 23.2 11.5 11.7 Operating cash flows 19.8  19.8 Debt repayment net of drawdown 0.4 0.4 Acquisitions 5.7  5.7 Net capital expenditure 6.4  6.4 Working capital 0.3  0.3 Interest tax and dividends 4.5  4.5 Exhange movements 0.1 0.4 0.3 At 30 September 2017 26.4 11.5 14.9 Order Book As at 30 September 2017 the Group order book stood at 72.1 million compared to 52.8 million at the end of the 2016 financial year a 36.5% increase.
The acquisition of StingRay added 3.5 million to the order book.
On a constant currency basis the order book was 39.1% higher.
The book to bill ratio for the business as a whole was 1.08 six month rolling average as at 30 September 2017 2016 1.01.
Staff
The Group workforce increased from 755 at 30 September 2016 to 823 at the end of September 2017 an increase of 68.
This is a net position and therefore reflects both the work the business has done in driving efficiency improvements and the FINANCIAL AND OPERATING REVIEW GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT additional headcount that has come from the recent acquisitions and investment in capacity.
Dividends
The Directors propose a final dividend of 6.5p per share making a total dividend per share for the year of 10.2p 2016 9.0p an increase of 13.3%.
The final dividend if approved will be payable on 2 March 2018 to shareholders on the Companys share register as at the close of business on 26 January 2018.
Key Performance Indicators KPIs The Group objective is to deliver sustainable longterm growth in revenue and profits.
This is to be achieved through the execution of the Boards strategies.
In striving to achieve these strategic objectives the main financial performance measures monitored by the Board are All amounts in mtel At actual exchange rates 30% 9% 12% At constant exchange rates 19% 3% 8% The Board is focused on driving revenue growth by investing both organically and through acquisitions.
The Group business has delivered strong underlying growth.
Target market revenuetel Aerospace and Defence m 34.9 20.0 19.8 Life Sciences m 9.6 7.9 9.0 The Group targeted markets of Aerospace and Defence and Life Sciences provide a route to sustainable growth and a more diversified revenue base.
These markets also provide significant opportunities for Gooch and Housego to migrate up the value chain from materials and components to higher value subassemblies modules and systems in response to the trend for our larger customers to outsource increasingly complex parts of their business.
The increase in AandD revenue includes the full year effect of last years acquisitions combined with the acquisition of StingRay in FY17.
Net cash analysistel Net cash m 14.9 11.7 17.3 In order to balance business risk with the investment needs of the Company management closely monitors and manages net cash.
This year following the acquisition of StingRay and the investment in capital assets the net cash position increased from 11.7 million to 14.9m.
Earnings per share EPStel Adjusted diluted EPS pence 48.5p 41.7p 38.9p As a result of a strong trading performance the business has been able to deliver growth in adjusted diluted EPS of 16.3% from 41.7p to 48.5p in 2017.
The revenue cash and earnings per share targets for the year were met.
FINANCIAL AND OPERATING REVIEW GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT STRATEGY OVERVIEW STRA TEGIES
To develop through RandD and acquisition a presence in new markets that offer the potential for significant growth as a result of their adoption of photonic technology while also reducing our exposure to cyclicality in any particular sector.
Progress
Diversification within the Industrial market.
In 2017 Gooch and Housego grew its business in the areas of
Semiconductors
Aerospace and Defence.
Acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC Life Sciences 26.5% growth in Optical Coherence T omography business Moving up the V alue Chain To leverage our excellence in materials and components to move up the value chain to more complex subassemblies and systems.
Progress
Continued expansion of the Systems Technology Group to further focus the businesss drive up the value chain.
Acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC.
Organic Research and Development To leverage Gooch and Housegos world leading products technologies and capabilities to develop innovative new products.
Progress
In 2017 the companys organic research and development programmes have delivered a record 22 new products.
In addition 7 new patents have been awarded.
The Group continues to invest in longer term RandD projects in all of its key markets.
Investment in RandD increased by 16.2% in 2017.
Gooch and Housegos strategy is built around the twin pillars of diversification and moving up the value chain.
In order to ensure its strategic goals are met management considers investment in RandD acquisitions and strategic partnerships.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 STRA TEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Gooch and Housego adopts a formal risk identification and management process designed to ensure that risks are properly identified prioritised evaluated and mitigated to the extent possible.
A formal Group wide risk register is maintained and approved by the Board on an annual basis.
The following represent the significant risks identified in the Groups risk register.
RISK MITIGATION
The Group recognises the importance of retaining and developing its highly skilled management team and workforce in order to achieve its strategic objectives.
This is a key area of focus for the GandH management team.
Fundamental to mitigating the effects of our competitors is to maintain our product quality and ontime delivery performance to ensure our customers expectations are fulfilled.
Our significant investment in RandD enabled us to launch 22 new products during FY2017.
The Group also has a cost reduction roadmap in place including the roll out of lean manufacturing practices across our sites and the use of lower cost manufacturing partners where it is efficient to do so.
Our business development teams maintain a presence in the market place and attend key trade shows which enables them to monitor competitor activity and respond accordingly.
RETENTION OF KEY PERSONNEL The Group recognises the importance of retaining and developing its highly skilled management team and workforce in order to achieve its strategic objectives.
Our people are at the heart of our business.
We maintain development and reward schemes to encourage individuals to play a long term role in the future development of the Group.
CAPACITY PLANNING Recent market trends have led to unprecedented demand for certain products which has exceeded the capacity of certain of our facilities during FY17.
There has been significant management focus on increasing efficiency during FY17 in order to increase capacity.
This included investment in machinery and people and removing bottlenecks from production lines.
Significant progress has been made in increasing capacity at strategically important plants.
GLOBAL ECONOMIC TRENDS Adverse changes in the major markets in which the Group operates can have a significant impact on the Groups performance.
Gooch and Housego PLC has seen substantial growth in its business in recent years.
Through its strategies of market diversification and moving up the value chain the Group seeks to provide routes to new markets and reduce its dependence on any one market sector.
Whilst the continued growth in the business remains challenging to predict the yearend order book was 37% higher than the previous year including the impact of an acquisition.
The strategic report has been approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Mark Webster
Chief Executive Officer
28 November 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Mark Webster Chief Executive Officer Appointed January 2015 Mark was previously Chief Executive Officer of Bio Products Laboratory Ltd.
He has extensive executive experience and has held a number of senior leadership roles such as Senior Vice President Bayer Healthcare AG Head of Global Strategic Marketing and MandABusiness Development Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC and Vice President Abbott Laboratories Inc.
Mark was a nonexecutive Director of Gooch and Housego PLC before becoming an Executive
He has also been a nonexecutive Director at Abcam PLC.
Mark holds an honours degree in Chemistry from the University of Durham.
Andrew Boteler Chief Financial Officer Appointed August 2009 Andrew Boteler is a Chartered Accountant having trained with Ernst and Young and qualified in 1993.
He has an honours degree from Exeter University.
In 2002 Andrew was part of the team that bought out the US telecommunications components group JDSUs UK fibre optics business to establish SIFAM Fibre Optics Ltd.
There he held the position of Finance Director until the company was acquired by Gooch and Housego PLC in May 2007.
Between 2007 and 2009 Andrew held the positions of Head of Finance for Europe Middle East and Africa and Acting Chief Financial Officer for Gooch and Housego PLC before joining the Board in August 2009.
Alex Warnock Chief Operating Officer Appointed November 2014 Alex Warnock is a Chartered Engineer and member of the Institute of Engineering and Technology and Institute of Directors.
Prior to joining Gooch and Housego PLC Alex held senior positions at Optos PLC most recently Chief Operating Officer.
He has also worked in senior roles at Johnson and Johnson and Pace Micro Technology Inc.
Alex has an honours degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering.
He has lived and worked in the USA and Germany.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS Executive Directors GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS NonExecutive Directors
David Bauernfeind Appointed 1 May 2017 David is Chief Financial Officer of Connect Group PLC a specialist distribution company listed on the London Stock Exchange.
Prior to his current role David was Chief Financial Officer and Executive Director at Xchanging PLC a position he held from 2011 until its takeover and delisting in 2016.
David was also a director of Xchanging Solutions Limited formerly Cambridge Solutions Limited a subsidiary of Xchanging PLC with a dual listing on the National Stock Exchange of India and the Bombay Stock Exchange.
Before joining Xchanging in 2001 David held management roles in BAE Systems PLC and Johnson Matthey PLC.
David is Chairman of the Audit Committee and a member of the Remuneration and Nomination Committees of the Gooch and Housego Board.
Gareth Jones NonExecutive Chairman Appointed January 2015.
Gareth was formerly Chief Executive Officer from January 2003 Gareth Jones has an honours degree in Physics from Imperial College and is a Fellow of the Institute of Physics.
He joined Gooch and Housego in 1978 and was instrumental in the development of new products and capabilities that helped transform the business from a craftbased optical engineering company into todays global technology business.
Gareth became Technical Director in 1985 and Managing Director in 1995.
In 1997 he was a member of the team that led Gooch and Housegos IPO on the Alternative Investment Market.
In 2000 he left Gooch and Housego to become a Partner in a leading UK venture capital firm.
He rejoined Gooch and Housego in 2003 as Chief Executive Officer.
Brian Phillipson Appointed 1 September 2015 Brian has extensive experience of the Aerospace and Defence industry in both Strategic and Operational roles across a range of locations.
Most recently he has been a Board Member and Business Unit MD at Marshall Aerospace and Defence Group.
Previously he held a number of senior roles within BAe Systems PLC including Director of Strategy Group Managing Director Major Programme Assurance Group Managing Director Sea Systems and first CEO then later COO of Eurofighter GmbH based in Munich.
Brian holds an MA Hons in Engineering from Cambridge University.
Brian Phillipson took over the role of Chairman of the Remuneration Committee with effect from 1 October 2016.
Brian is a member of the Audit and Nomination Committees.
Dr Peter Bordui Appointed February 2012 Peter Bordui has thirty years experience in the photonics industry in senior leadership roles within Bookham NewFocus JDSU and Crystal Technology at the time a subsidiary of Siemens and has held a number of additional nonexecutive director roles.
He is a governing trustee of a private charitable foundation and a director of the nonprofit organisation American Citizens Abroad.
Peter has bachelors masters and PhD degrees from MIT.
Peter has taken on the role of Senior Independent Director from 1 October 2016.
He is Chairman of the Nomination Committee and a member of the Remuneration and Audit Committees.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their report together with the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2017.
A review of the development and performance of the Group during the year and its future prospects is set out in the Financial Highlights on page 2 and in the Financial and Operating Review on pages 22 to 25.
An outline of the businesss principal activities strategy and the Groups progress in the year towards these strategies is given in the Strategic Report on pages 10 to 27.
An analysis of the segmental information by market sector is given on pages 14 to 21.
Key Performance Indicators KPIs The Group uses a selection of KPIs to monitor and review the performance of the business.
These are detailed from page 25 of the Financial and Operating Review.
Dividends
During the year ended 30 September 2017 a final dividend of 5.7p per share was paid for the previous financial year.
The final 2015 dividend of 5.2p per share was paid in the year ended 30 September 2016.
A further interim dividend of 3.7p per share was paid for the half year ended 31 March 2017 2016 3.3p.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 the Directors propose that a final dividend of 6.5p per share be paid.
Substantial shareholdings As at 15 November 2017 the following shareholders had notified the Company that they held an interest in 3% or more of its issued ordinary share capital Shareholder Number % holding Octopus Investments 3835243 15.64% Investec Wealth and Investment 2192019 8.94% Aberdeen Standard Investments 1884407 7.69% Hargreave Hale 1590027 6.49% Black Rock Investment Management 1525047 6.22% Franklin T empleton Investment Management 1297550 5.29% JM Finn and Co 776825 3.17% Save for these interests the Directors have not been notified that any person is directly or indirectly interested in 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
Treasury Policies The Groups treasury policies are designed to manage financial risk to the Group that arises from operating in a number of foreign currencies and to maximise interest income on cash deposits whilst maintaining the security of these deposits.
As an international group of companies the main exposure is in respect of foreign currency risk on the trading transactions undertaken by Group companies and on the translation of the net assets of overseas subsidiaries.
This exposure is principally to the US dollar.
Monthly cash management reporting and forecasting is in place to facilitate management of this currency risk.
The operations of Group treasury take place at head office.
All balances not immediately required for Group operations are placed on shortterm deposit with leading international highly rated financial institutions.
At a transactional level the Group seeks to offset its exposure to foreign exchange movements by contracting with significant supply partners in US Dollars and undertakes regular financial reviews to assess whether it would be appropriate for the Group to enter into currency hedging contracts to mitigate the currency risk.
During the year there were no forward contracts in place.
The Groups bank borrowings are denominated in US Dollars which acts as a partial hedge of a net investment against its US Dollar denominated companies within the Group.
Research and Development The Group has a continuing commitment to a high level of research and development.
This commitment is to actively develop new technologies and capabilities that will become a key part of the Groups future product portfolio and revenue.
Directors Indemnities The Directors have the benefit of an indemnity which is a qualifying third party indemnity provision as defined by Section 234 of the Companies Act 2006.
The indemnity was in force throughout the last financial year and is currently in force.
The Company also purchased and maintained throughout the financial year Directors and Officers liability insurance in respect of itself and its Directors.
Employee Involvement The Group is committed to including all employees in the performance and development of the business.
An established employee appraisal and reward scheme is in operation and employees are appraised regularly with relevant development support provided by the Group.
The Group attaches considerable importance to informing and involving its employees on matters which concern them and in the achievement of its business objectives.
The Group has a formal employee communication plan involving regular meetings between management and employees and the provision of a comprehensive employee handbook.
Corporate Governance The Board recognises the importance of good corporate governance and has put in place procedures it considers appropriate.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
DIRECTORS REPORT The Board currently comprises three executive and four nonexecutive Directors.
The directors holding office during the period of this report and their biographies are detailed from page 28 and are also available on our website site The Board focuses on formulation of strategy management of effective business controls and review of business performance.
The Board is specifically responsible for the approval of annual and interim results and interim management statements acquisitions and disposals major capital expenditure borrowings director and company secretary appointments and removals any material litigation strategic forecasting and major development projects.
A framework of delegated authorities is in place that details the structure of delegation below Board level and includes matters reserved for the Board.
All the nonexecutive Directors are considered by the Board to be independent in character and judgement.
In accordance with the Companys Articles of Association all directors will retire at the Annual General Meeting and being eligible offer themselves for reelection.
The Board has three formally constituted committees the Audit committee the Remuneration committee and the Nomination committee.
Board membership and meeting attendance is presented in the following table.
Executive Directors Mark Webster 88 Andrew N Boteler 88 Alex Warnock 78 Nonexecutive Directors Gareth Jones 88 Peter Bordui 88 Brian Phillipson 88 David Bauernfeind 33 Appointed 1 May 2017 Paul Heal 33 Retired 22 February 2017 Risk management and internal control The Directors acknowledge that they are responsible for the Groups system of internal financial control.
The system can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatements and losses.
There are defined lines of responsibility and delegation of authorities.
There are also internal financial controls in existence which are centrally maintained and documented and provide reasonable assurance of the maintenance of proper accounting records and the reliability of financial information used within the business.
The Group does not have an internal audit department but senior finance staff regularly visit the sites to perform reviews of controls and processes in place.
Annual budgets and three year strategic plans are prepared for each company.
Financial and operational reports enable the Board to compare performance against budget and to take action where appropriate.
During the year all senior staff within the organisation undertook Anti Bribery training.
Financial Risk Management
An explanation of the Groups financial risk management objectives is contained in note 5.
Environmental Policy The policy of the Group is to meet the statutory environmental requirements placed upon it and to apply good environmental practice in its operations while recognising that it is contractually obliged to meet its customer requirements.
Statement of Directors Responsibilities The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and parent company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the company will continue in business.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and parent company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and parent company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors of the ultimate parent company are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the ultimate parent companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The directors consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and parent companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 28 and 29 confirm that to the best of their knowledge the parent company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities and financial position of the parent company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Annual Report and Financial Statements includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and parent company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
In the case of each director in office at the date the Directors Report is approved so far as the director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and companys auditors are unaware and they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and parent companys auditors are aware of that information.
Going Concern Based on Managements operating projections and cash flow forecasts the Directors believe that the Group will generate sufficient cash and have access to working capital facilities to enable it to meet its funding requirements for at least the next 12 months and will continue to comply with its banking covenants.
Accordingly the Directors have formed a judgement at the time of approving the financial statements that there is a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
For this reason the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Independent Auditors A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as auditors to the Company and the Group will be proposed at the Annual General Meeting.
Approved and signed on behalf of the Board of Directors by Mark Webster
28 November 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 GOVERNANCE GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT
The Audit Committee comprises all of the nonexecutive directors and is chaired by David Bauernfeind a Chartered Accountant who is currently Chief Financial Officer of Connect Group PLC a company listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The Audit Committee is considered to have had an appropriate balance between those individuals with finance or accounting training and those from a general business background.
How the Committee operates The Committee met three times during the year as part of its standard schedule to consider matters planned around the Groups financial calendar.
Attendance at those meetings is summarised below Nonexecutive Directors David Bauernfeind 22 Appointed 1 May 2017 Gareth Jones 23 Dr Peter Bordui 33 Brian Phillipson 33 Paul Heal 11 Retired 22 February 2017 At the invitation of the Committee representatives of the external auditor PwC LLP  attended meetings together with the Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Chief Operating Officer and the Company Secretary.
The Committee also seeks to meet regularly with the external auditor without the Executive Directors in attendance.
In the year the Committee met twice with representatives from PwC LLP without others being present.
Responsibilities
The role and responsibilities of the Committee are set out in its terms of reference which are available on the Companys web site and from the Company Secretary on request.
The terms of reference are reviewed annually by the Committee.
The principal responsibilities of the Committee are reviewing the effectiveness of the Companys financial reporting internal control policies and procedures for the identification assessment and reporting of risk Advising the Board on whether the Committee believes the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy Considering and making recommendations to the Board as to the appointment reappointment or removal of the external auditor and the approval of their remuneration and terms of engagement Assessing the external auditors independence and objectivity and the effectiveness of the audit process Reviewing the policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT Financial Reporting During the year the Audit Committee reviewed the appropriateness of the Groups interim and full year financial statements including the consideration of significant financial reporting judgements made by management taking into account reports from management and the external auditors.
The main area of focus considered by the Committee during the year were as follows AREA OF FOCUS CONCLUSION ACQUISITION ACCOUNTING The Audit Committee reviewed the accounting for the acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC during the year.
The Committee reviewed the nature of the intangible assets identified and the assumptions underpinning managements valuation thereof.
The
Committee satisfied itself that the acquisition accounting was reasonable.
GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT REVIEWS Management perform annual impairment reviews of the carrying value of goodwill.
These impairment reviews are based on future projected cash flows and are therefore inherently judgmental.
The Audit Committee reviewed the key judgements underpinning the impairment reviews performed.
The Committee is satisfied that the impairment recognised in the year is appropriate and that the remaining carrying value of goodwill is supportable.
INVENTORIES
The Committee reviewed managements estimates in relation to inventory ageing and obsolescence.
The Committee was satisfied that the provisions made adequately reflected the risk of impairment.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS The Committee considered the appropriateness of the measure of adjusted profits quality of earnings and the classification and transparency of items separately disclosed as Exceptional items.
The Committee was satisfied that the presentation of normalised profit before tax provides a reasonable view of the underlying performance of the Group and that there was transparent and consistent disclosure of items shown separately as Exceptional items.
External auditors Under its terms of reference the Committee is responsible for assessing the scope fee objectivity and effectiveness of external audits and for making a recommendation to the Board regarding the appointment reappointment or removal of the auditor on an annual basis.
In line with professional standards the Companys external auditor PwC LLP has a policy of rotating engagement partners every five years.
As FY16 was the fifth audit overseen by Colin Bates a new partner Mark Ellis was appointed to undertake the FY17 audit.
The Committee also regularly reviews the nature extent objectivity and cost of nonaudit services provided by the auditors.
In doing this the Committee does not approve additional services which would compromise the auditors independence.
The auditors are required to make a formal report to the Audit Committee on an annual basis on the safeguards that are in place to maintain their independence and the internal safeguards in place to ensure their objectivity.
To ensure compliance with this policy the Audit Committee reviewed and approved the remuneration received by PwC for the audit service auditrelated services and nonaudit work.
Approval
David Bauernfeind Chairman of the Audit Committee 28 November 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT The Nomination Committee which consists of the Chief Executive Officer and all four NonExecutive Directors is responsible for the composition of the Board.
Role of the Committee Reviews the composition of the Board and its committees.
Identifies and recommends for Board approval suitable candidates to be appointed to the Board.
Considers succession planning for Directors and other senior executives and in doing this considers diversity experience knowledge and skills.
Areas of focus for the Nomination Committee during FY17 Appointment of a new NonExecutive Director to act as Chairman of the Audit Committee following the retirement of Paul Heal in February 2017.
Succession planning for other members of the Board.
Advisors
During FY17 the Committee appointed Edward Drummond an external search agency  to assist with the identification of suitable NonExecutive Director candidates to take over as Chairman of the Audit Committee.
Appointment Process As part of the appointments process the Committee determined the selection criteria for the Chairman and NonExecutive Director roles.
The Committee worked with Edward Drummond who drew up a list of external candidates from a range of industries and backgrounds for initial appraisal by the Committee.
From this a shortlist of suitable candidates that met the search and selection criteria was prepared and these candidates were interviewed by the Board.
Following these interviews the Nomination Committee recommended to the Board which duly approved the appointment of David Bauernfeind as NonExecutive Director on 1 May 2017.
Membership and attendance at meetings held in 2017 Nonexecutive Directors Dr Peter Bordui 55 Gareth Jones 55 Brian Phillipson 55 David Bauernfeind 33 Appointed 1 May 2017 Paul Heal 11 Retired 22 February 2017 Executive Directors Mark Webster 55
Peter Bordui Chairman of the Nomination Committee 28 November 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT
Introduction
It is an objective of the Group to attract and retain high calibre Directors and employees and reward them in a way which encourages the creation of value for shareholders.
The incentive and remuneration schemes employed by GandH were largely developed and introduced in 2013 and few changes have been made to the schemes since then.
The Groups market capitalisation has increased threefold in less than five years during which time there have also been significant changes to governance expectations.
Accordingly the Remuneration Committee felt it appropriate to update our remuneration schemes during 2017 to which end the Committee engaged FIT Remuneration Consultants to assist the Committee with a review of the GandH remuneration policy for Executive Directors and other senior management.
This review confirmed that our schemes continue to be appropriate and that they are in line with practise not just on AIM but also among many FTSE SmallCaps on the Main Market.
However following the review it was felt appropriate to make some adjustments to the Annual Bonus and Long Term Incentive Plan criteria.
None of these proposed changes require shareholder approval although we have consulted with our major shareholders who have been supportive of the proposals.
Further detail of the changes are given in the Remuneration Policy table on the following page.
The Committee values all feedback from shareholders and hopes to receive your support at the forthcoming AGM.
Operation of the Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Brian Phillipson and comprises all the nonexecutive directors.
Although not a member of the committee the Chief Executive Officer submits a report outlining proposals and is usually requested to present the report to the committee.
After presenting the report he withdraws from the meeting and does not participate in the decision making or voting processes.
The Committee has three scheduled meetings each year to deal with ordinary business.
In addition to these the Committee meets on an ad hoc basis when there are additional matters to deal with.
Brian Phillipson gives an update on the Remuneration Committees activities at each Board meeting.
Nonexecutive Directors Brian Phillipson Chairman 44 Gareth Jones 44 Brian Phillipson 44 David Bauernfeind 22 Appointed 1 May 2017 Paul Heal 11 Retired 22 February 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Remuneration Policy T able The table below summarises our policy for 2017 and the planned changes for 2018 Element of remuneration Purpose and link to strategy FY17 Policy and approach Opportunity FY18 Policy and approach
Salary
Takes into account experience and personal contribution to the companys strategy Attracts and retains executives of the quality required to deliver the companys strategy Reviewed annually with changes effective from 1 October if applicable Consideration given to individual and company performance General pay increases across the wider workforce are also taken into consideration Where the company considers it appropriate and necessary larger increases may be awarded in exceptional circumstances Base salary increases are applied in line with the outcome of the annual review The FIT review identified that Mark Websters salary was lower than the median for AIM 100 Company CEOs and the Committee therefore increased his base pay accordingly with effect from 1 October 2017.
Annual Bonus Incentivise achievement of short term financial targets that the Committee considers to be critical drivers of business growth Awarded annually Award level is based upon level of normalised diluted earnings per share and operating cash flow against internal targets 50% of the maximum bonus is payable for reaching threshold targets Maximum bonus is achieved for reaching 10% over threshold targets Maximum of 100% of base salary Introduction of broader performance measures Up to 60% payable for exceeding target EPS by 10%.
20% of bonus payable for achieving target operating cash flow.
Nil if not met.
020% of bonus payable for achievement of personal objectives linked to operational performance and major initiatives.
Pension Provide employees with market competitive pension scheme Defined contribution personal pension plan Company contributes 10% of salary 10% of base salary The Committee keeps the benefit policy and benefit levels under regular review No changes proposed Benefits Provide employees with market competitive benefits Executive Directors receive private health insurance life assurance and long term disability insurance The Committee keeps the benefit policy and benefit levels under regular review No changes proposed Long Term Incentive Plan L TIP Incentivise executive performance over the longer term
Award levels are determined by reference to an individuals position and performance prior to grant Awards vest after three years subject to achievement of Total Shareholder Return targets.
Maximum award of 120% of base salary No changes to maximum awards.
Absolute TSR retained for 60% of awards with full vesting at 15% TSR per annum.
Introduction of an EPS target for remaining 40% of awards.
Full vesting at 15% EPS growth per annum.
15% growth per annum target is in line with the Boards objective of doubling the size of the company over a period of 5 years.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Directors Remuneration 2017 Basic pay
Benefits in kind
Subtotal
Share options
Executive
A Boteler 199 130 4 1telA Warnock   412
Dr P Bordui 40    40  40 B Phillipson 40    40  40 D Bauernfeind  17    17  17 P Heal  17    17   1455 393 1848 2016 Basic pay
Benefits in kind
Subtotal
Share options
Executive
A Boteler 178 100 6 2telA Warnock   372
G Jones 36 P Heal  40    40  40 Dr P Bordui 18    18  18 B Phillipson 37    37   1328 807 2135 The above disclosure has been audited.
David Bauernfeind was appointed 1 May 2017.
Paul Heal retired on 22 February 2017.
During the year ended 30 September 2016 Peter Bordui was paid 19140 for consultancy services in addition to the amounts shown.
This arrangement ceased on 30 September 2016 since when his entire remuneration has been paid through the payroll.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Share Options Exercised 2017 Scheme Number of Share Options
Market
Price
Exercise
Price
Exercise
Date
Total
Gain
Director
A Boteler L TIP 12873 1182.9 0.0 270217 152 G Jones L TIP 19784 1216.3 0.0 0103tel
Number of Share Options
Market
Price
Exercise
Price
Exercise
Date
Total
Gain
Director
A Boteler L TIP 27500 878.2 0.0 080116 242 A Boteler L TIP 7576 875.0 0.0 110116 66 G Jones L TIP 27500 878.2 0.0 080116 242 G Jones L TIP 29376 875.0 151.0 110116 257 Basic Pay Executive Directors are paid a basic salary together with annual bonus payments based on the achievement of Group profitability and cash targets.
In addition Executive Directors participate in a share option scheme and receive benefits in kind including medical expenses and insurance.
Nonexecutive directors are paid a fee to attend board meetings and to serve as members of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration committees.
Further payments may be made in respect of additional services provided at the request of the Company.
2017 performance Related Bonuses Gooch and Housego has continued to perform well in 2017 delivering strong financial performance and continuing to make progress in its key strategic goals of diversification and moving up the value chain.
In terms of financial performance adjusted profit before tax increased by 13.7% to 16.1m.
Once again a strong cash performance resulted in the Group reporting a net cash position of 14.9m after significant investment in property plant and equipment and a successful acquisition.
The increasing strength of the balance sheet meant that the Company was able to recommend a 13.3% increase in the total dividend for the year.
Delivering growth through diversification within our sectors and by moving up the supply chain to provision of higher value offerings as well as improvements in operational performance have continued to be the principal strategic themes of the business.
The trend towards a more balanced spread of business across the Companys principal market sectors has continued.
New product development at both the operational sites and within the Systems Technology Group continues to deliver with 22 new products being launched in 2017.
The business has made progress on its drive for operational efficiency through its continued adoption of lean principles as well as investments in plant equipment staff and processes.
The Executive Directors 2017 bonus outcomes were 69% of maximum reflecting the strong results for the year.
Directors Pension Arrangements During the year the Company contributed to a money purchase pension scheme on behalf of the executive
The number of Directors who are currently accruing benefits under a pension scheme is 2 2016 2.
Contributions to a scheme on behalf of continuing Directors amount to 10% of the Directors basic salary.
Gareth Jones sacrificed part of his salary in exchange for increased company pension contributions until the arrangement ceased on 31 August 2016.
Mark Webster has sacrificed his entitlement to company pension scheme contributions in exchange for an increase to his salary of an equal amount.
Alex Warnock and Andrew Boteler have both sacrificed part of their pension entitlement for an increase in salary of the same amount during the year.
Directors Contracts The Executive Directors have rolling service contracts that are subject to either six or twelve months notice.
The Chairman and nonexecutive Directors do not have contracts of service.
Exercises of Share Options by Directors Exercises of share options under the Long Term Incentive Scheme by the Directors are summarised below.
Gareth Jones exercises relate to L TIPs awarded to him during his tenure as an Executive Director.
He no longer holds any unvested or unexercised share options.
REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017
Director Shareholdings The Directors beneficial interests in the issued ordinary share capital of the Company were as follows Number of shares at 30 September Number of shares at 30 September Executive Directors Mark Webster Andrew Boteler 26181 26181
Warnock
Nonexecutive Directors Gareth Jones 65401 55401 Dr Peter Bordui Brian Phillipson David Bauernfeind Shareholding Guidelines Following the review during the year formal Executive Director shareholding guidelines have been introduced.
Executive
Directors are required to acquire and maintain a qualifying interest in the ordinary shares of the company equivalent to 100% of base salary.
For L TIPs granted in March 2017 and subsequent awards the Directors will not be permitted to sell shares unless the specified shareholding has been achieved other than sale of shares to satisfy tax obligations.
For L TIPs granted in 2014 and 2015 until the minimum holding is achieved the Directors are permitted to sell up to 50% of shares vesting after sufficient have been sold to settle tax liabilities.
The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan The Gooch and Housego 2013 L TIP was adopted on 9 April 2013.
Under the plan awards will be made annually to key employees based on a percentage of salary or management grade.
Subject to the satisfaction of the required TSR performance criteria and EPS financial performance these grants will vest upon publication of the results of the Company three years after the grant date.
The exercise price of all awards is nil.
Number of ordinary shares under option Date of grant
01.10.2016
Exercised in year
At
30.09.2017
Date
Executive
M Webster 17.12.2014 90866    90866 17.12.2018 M Webster 23.12.2015 36080 36080 23.12.2019 M Webster 10.03.2017  34606   34606 23.12.2021 A Warnock 17.12.2014 68878    68878 17.12.2018 A Warnock 23.12.2015 26949 26949 23.12.2019 A Warnock 10.03.2017  25674   25674 26.03.2021 A Boteler 01.12.2013 25911  12873 13038  16.12.2017 A Boteler 17.12.2014 28032    28032 17.12.2018 A Boteler 23.12.2015 22661    22661 23.12.2019 A Boteler 10.03.2017  21680   21680 26.03.2021
G Jones 01.12.2013 39822  19784 20038  16.12.2017 The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan specifies that the Company will operate within the standard dilution limit of 10% of the Companys issued share capital over a 10 year period but excluding the dilution arising from the 2010 Value Creation Plan.
During the year to 30 September 2017 587000 2016 638000 was charged to the income statement in respect of the IFRS 2 share based payments charge on all share option schemes valued using the Monte Carlo option pricing model and 446000 2016 36000 in respect of employers national insurance contributions based on a year end share price of Brian Phillipson Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 28 November 2017 REMUNERATION COMMITTEE REPORT GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Report on the audit of the financial statements Our Opinion In our opinion Gooch and Housego PLCs Group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit and the Groups and the parent companys cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent companys financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Financial Statements the Annual Report which comprise the Group and company balance sheets as at 30 September 2017 the Group income statement and Group statement of comprehensive income the Group and company cash flow statements the notes to the Group and company cash flow statements and the Group and company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the Group and company financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for Opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
Our Audit Approach
Gooch and Housego PLC is listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM of the London Stock Exchange and its principal activities comprise the research design engineering and manufacture of advanced photonic systems components and instruments in the Aerospace and Defence Industrial Life Sciences and Scientific Research sectors.
It has operations across the USA and Europe.
In February 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC in Keene USA.
The acquisition allows the business to further its strategic objective of broadening its product offering and diversifying its markets and follows two previous acquisitions in FY16.
The Groups strategic objectives remain the diversification of its product offering and moving up the value chain.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Materiality
Audit scope Key audit matters Overall Group materiality 620000 2016 635000 based on 5% of profit before tax.
Overall parent company materiality 122000 2016 92000 based on 5% of profit before tax.
The UK audit team performed an audit of the complete financial information of one operating unit in the USA Gooch and Housego Palo Alto LLC and two operating units in the UK Gooch and Housego UK Limited and Gooch and Housego Torquay Limited as well as the Parent company based in the UK Gooch and Housego PLC.
Additional procedures were also performed at a Group level over centralised processes and functions including the audit of consolidation journals.
Taken together these four reporting units post consolidation entries account for 87% of Group profit before tax.
Specific audit procedures were also performed by the UK audit team on certain other balances and transactions and the remaining sixteen reporting units.
In particular additional detailed testing was performed on revenue at three reporting units in the USA Gooch and Housego Ohio LLC StingRay Optics LLC and EM4 Inc.
Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Group and investments parent company Group and parent.
Acquisition accounting Group.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current year and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS KEY AUDIT MATTER HOW OUR AUDIT ADDRESSED THE KEY AUDIT MATTER Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Group and investments parent company The assessment of the carrying value of goodwill and intangibles involves judgment and any impairment of the carrying value of such assets could have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
Similarly the assessment of the carrying value of investments held involves judgment and any impairment of the carrying value of such assets could have a material impact on the parent companys financial statements.
These are areas of continued focus for the audit to ensure that assets are valued correctly and not overstated in the context of the trading performance of the relevant cash generating units.
Group and parent We examined managements impairment assessment auditing in detail the key underlying assumptions in the discounted cash flow models.
We noted that a 0.6m impairment had been taken in relation to the Kent Periscopes business the result of a poorer than expected first full year post acquisition.
We met with management and key operational personnel to update our understanding of the various sites and considered the discounted cash flow models with reference to current performance.
We assessed each of the key assumptions in turn and sensitised managements model which itself built in an element of sensitivity against budget to reflect uncertainty in the future cash flows.
We also compared key assumptions such as discount rate and longterm growth with market data in the UK and the US for reasonableness.
Based on our work we determined that the judgment of management that a 0.6m impairment was required at Kent Periscope was reasonable.
We also concluded that the judgment that no further impairment was required at either this site or any other was also reasonable.
We note however that goodwill and intangibles held remain sensitive to changes in key assumptions.
In particular a failure to achieve growth objectives for certain sites could give rise to an impairment in the future.
Given this management has disclosed relevant sensitivities see note 17.
We assessed the appropriateness of the accounting and related disclosures included in the financial statements.
These are deemed reasonable.
Acquisition accounting Acquisition accounting involves a number of judgements from management and is therefore a subjective area.
The risk is that the purchase price allocation PPA model may not reflect the true value of the acquisitions made leading to misstatement in the financial statements.
Group
StingRay
We reviewed the underlying transactions tested the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired together with the intangible assets identified as part of the purchase price allocation and reviewed the disclosures in the financial statements.
There were no significant issues noted from our work.
Included within the StingRay total consideration was 10m of deferred consideration payable based on performance over two earn out periods subsequent to the acquisition.
Management have reassessed this deferred consideration at the balance sheet date.
Based on the current activity within the business historical growth rates and the latest forecasts for the business management consider that both payments 6.0m and 4.0m will be made.
We have reviewed the available information and based on our work consider that managements judgment is reasonable.
Kent Periscopes We note that a reassessment was also made of the deferred consideration associated with the acquisition of Kent Periscopes acquired in 2016.
Based on the current activity levels historical performance and forecasts for the coming period management concluded that the first earn out target would be missed but the second would be achieved.
A 0.6m adjustment was made to the deferred consideration reflecting the amount no longer payable.
We have reviewed the available information and based on our work consider that the adjustment made is reasonable.
Further the decision to hold the remaining deferred consideration as due against the second earn out is deemed reasonable.
REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the parent company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group comprises four divisions being Industrial Aerospace and Defence Life Sciences and Scientific Research and we focused our audit work on the Groups largest operating units within these divisions in the USA and UK.
The UK audit team conducted an audit of the complete financial information of four operating units the largest in the USA the two largest in the UK and the Parent company based in the UK due to their size and risk characteristics.
In addition procedures were performed at a Group level over centralised processes and functions including the audit of consolidation journals.
Specific audit procedures were also performed by the UK team on certain balances and transactions material to the Group financial statements at the remaining reporting units.
Taken altogether these procedures gave us the evidence we needed for our opinion on the Group financial statements as a whole.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Overall materiality 620000 2016 635000.
122000 2016 92000.
How we determined it 5% of profit before tax.
5% of profit before tax.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on the benchmarks used in the annual report and our understanding of the business profit before tax is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the Group and is a generally acceptable auditing benchmark.
We believe that profit before tax is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the entity and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 122000 and 589000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 31000 Group audit 2016 31750 and 6100 Parent company audit 2016 4600 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Conclusions Relating to Going Concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups and parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on Other Information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 September 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the Financial Statements and the Audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on pages 31 and 32 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view .
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other Required Reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other Voluntary Reporting Directors remuneration The parent company voluntarily prepares a Directors Remuneration Report in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The directors requested that we audit the part of the Directors Remuneration Report specified by the Companies Act 2006 to be audited as if the parent company were a quoted company.
In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the CA06.
Mark Ellis Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
28 November 2017 REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS GROUP INCOME STATEMENT For the year ended 30 September 2017 GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME For the year ended 30 September 2017
Revenue 7 112016 86051 Cost of revenue 65937 53752 Gross profit 46079 32299 Research and Development 8119 6697 Sales and Marketing 9459 6469 Administration 16937 11425 Other income and expenses 9 1714 2476 Operating profit 11 13278 10184 Finance income 12 27 39 Finance costs 12 703 127 Profit before income tax expense 12602 10096 Income tax expense 13 3710 3048 Profit for the year 8892 7048 Basic earnings per share 15 36.4p 29.1p Diluted earnings per share 15 35.8p 28.6p Reconciliation of operating profit to adjusted operating profit
Profit before tax 12602 10096 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 17 2202 1263 Gain on bargain purchase  578 Release of accrued contingent consideration 615 Impairment of goodwill 17 615 771 Provision for regulatory compliance risk 23  500 Restructuring costs 11 536 1652 Transaction fees 11 390 466 Interest on discounted deferred consideration 381 Adjusted profit before tax 16111 14170
Profit for the year 8892 7048 Other comprehensive expense  income  items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Currency translation differences 26 1410 5954 Other comprehensive expense  income for the year net of tax 1410 5954 T otal comprehensive income for the year attributable to the shareholders of Gooch and Housego PLC 7482 13002 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS GROUP BALANCE SHEET As at 30 September 2017
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 16 33890 32384 Intangible assets 17 40250 29916 Deferred income tax assets 24 2703 2674 76843 64974 Current assets Inventories 18 21078 18973 Income tax assets 267 394 Trade and other receivables 19 24723 22679 Cash and cash equivalents 20 26425 23167 72493 65213 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 21 23758 19624 Borrowings 22 6 4 Income tax liabilities 579 891 Provision for other liabilities and charges 23 888 940 Deferred consideration 4286 29517 21459 Net current assets 42976 43754 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 22 11492 11494 Deferred income tax liabilities 24 5938 4806 Deferred consideration 4253 2256 21683 18556 Net assets 98136 90172 Shareholders equity Called up share capital 25 4903 4852 Share premium account 26 15530 15530 Merger reserve 26 4640 2671 Cumulative translation reserve 26 5574 6984 Retained earnings 26 67489 60135 Total equity 98136 90172 The financial statements for Gooch and Housego PLC registered number  on pages 47 to 76 were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Mark Webster Andrew Boteler
Director GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS
Called up share capital
Merger reserve
Earnings
Cumulative translation reserve
At 1 October 2015 4818 15530 2671 54318 1030 78367 Profit for the financial year    7048  7048 Other comprehensive income for the year     5954 5954 Total comprehensive income for the year    7048 5954 13002 Dividends 14    2055  2055 Shares issued 34   34 Fair value of employee services    638  638 Tax credit relating to share option schemes    220  220 T otal contributions by and distributions to owners of the parent recognised directly in equity 34   1231  1197 At 30 September 2016 4852 15530 2671 60135 6984 90172 At 1 October 2016 4852 15530 2671 60135 6984 90172 Profit for the financial year    8892  8892 Other comprehensive income for the year     1410 1410 Total comprehensive income  expense for the year 8892 1410 7482 Dividends 14    2289  2289 Shares issued 51  1969 15  2005 Fair value of employee services    587  587 Tax credit relating to share option schemes    179  179 T otal contributions by and distributions to owners of the parent recognised directly in equity 51  1969 1538  482 At 30 September 2017 4903 15530 4640 67489 5574 98136 GROUP STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS GROUP CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 30 September 2017 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 19526 13897 Income tax paid 1957 1324 Net cash generated from operating activities 17569 12573 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired 5658 5687 Purchase of property plant and equipment 5799 9710 Sale of property plant and equipment 29 Purchase of intangible assets 604 629 Interest received 27 39 Interest paid 326 111 Net cash used in investing activities 12331 16098 Cash flows from financing activities Drawdown of borrowings 5918 5426 Repayment of borrowings 5523 39 Dividends paid to ordinary shareholders 2289 2055 Net cash used in  generated from financing activities 1894 3332 Net increase  decrease in cash 3344 193 Cash at beginning of the year 23167 22556 Exchange losses  gains on cash 86 804 Cash at the end of the year 26425 23167 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS NOTES TO THE GROUP CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 30 September 2017 Reconciliation of cash generated from operations Profit before income tax 12602 10096 Adjustments for Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 2202 1263 Amortisation of other intangible assets 199 355 Gain on bargain purchase of Alfalight  578 Impairment of goodwill 615 771 Release of accrued contingent consideration 615 Depreciation 3664 3042 Share based payment charge 587 638 Amounts claimed under the RDEC 370 270 Finance income 27 39 Finance costs 703 127 Total 6958 5309 Changes in working capital Inventories 1442 223 Trade and other receivables 1465 4436 Trade and other payables 2873 2705 Total 34 1508 Cash generated from operating activities 19526 13897 Reconciliation of net cash inflow to movements in net cash Increase  Decrease in cash in the year 3344 193 Drawdown of borrowings 5918 5426 Repayment of borrowings 5523 39 Changes in net cash resulting from cash flows 2949 5580 Finance leases acquired  25 Translation differences 310 55 Movement in net cash in the year 3259 5660 Net cash at 1 October 11668 17328 Net cash at 30 September 14927 11668 Analysis of net cash At 1 Oct 2016 Cash flow
At 30 Sep 2017 Cash at bank and in hand 23167 3344 86 26425 Debt due after 1 year 11474 402 396 11480 Finance leases 25 7  18 Net cash 11668 2949 310 14927 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 General information Gooch and Housego PLC the Company is incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The Company is listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM Market of the London Stock Exchange.
The address of the registered office of the Company is given on page 89.
The consolidated financial statements of the Group for the year ended 30 September 2017 comprise the Company Gooch and Housego PLC and its subsidiaries together referred to as the
A listing of the Companys subsidiaries is set out on page 84.
The Group is a manufacturer of specialist optoelectronic components materials and systems and specialist instrumentation and life sciences devices.
The Group has facilities in the United Kingdom Germany and the United States.
Basis of Preparation These financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative instruments at fair value and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS and IFRIC Interpretations in issue at 30 September 2017 and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies preparing financial statements in accordance with IFRS.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
Application of IFRS Adoption of New Standards There has been no material impact from the adoption of new standards or revised standards or interpretations which are relevant to the Group Annual Improvements 20122014 Amendment to IAS16 Property plant and equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets on depreciation and amortisation Amendments to IAS27 Separate financial statements on equity accounting Amendments to IFRS10 Consolidated financial statements and IAS28 Investments in associates and joint ventures on applying the consolidation exemption Amendments to IAS1 Presentation of financial statements disclosure initiative ISA UK 700 ISA UK 700 Forming an opinion and reporting on financial statements applies to AIM listed entities for periods commencing on or after 17 June 2016.
The form and content of the audit report contained within the financial statements has been extended.
The following standards will apply to the Group in future accounting periods IFRS 9 Financial Instruments This standard will apply for the first time in the year ending 30 September 2019.
Management do not currently envisage this standard having a material effect on the financial statements because the Group does not currently utilise derivatives although there may be some changes to the disclosure related to financial instruments.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS15 will apply to the Group for the first time in the year ending 30 September 2019.
Management have been monitoring the potential effect of the Standard on the Groups financial statements.
The majority of the Groups revenue is derived from sale of products none of which have warranty terms extended beyond the standard for the industry.
Because of this management do not currently expect IFRS15 to have a material impact on the financial statements but will continue to monitor this as the adoption date gets closer.
IFRS 16 Leases This new standard will apply to the Group for the first time in the year ending 30 September 2020.
Following adoption of the standard management expect all of the Groups operating leases to be reclassified onto the balance sheet.
This will entail the recognition of right of use assets and lease liabilities relating to existing operating leases although we do not currently envisage a material effect on the Groups net assets or profit before tax.
Accounting Policies The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the financial statements are set out below.
The policies have been consistently applied to all of the years presented unless otherwise stated.
Consolidation
Subsidiaries are entities that are directly or indirectly controlled by the Group.
Control exists where the Group has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of the entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
In assessing control potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are taken into account.
The purchase method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.
The cost of a business combination is measured as the fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued the fair value of contingent or deferred consideration and liabilities incurred or assumed at the date of exchange.
Costs directly attributable to the business combination are charged to the income statement.
The excess of the costs of a business combination over the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If the cost of a business combination is less than the fair value of the net assets of the GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 subsidiary acquired the difference is recognised directly in the income statement.
Should the fair value of contingent or deferred consideration vary from the actual value on settlement date the difference is recognised directly in the income statement.
Where deferred consideration is payable in cash the amount is discounted to present value at the date of acquisition using the Groups weighted average cost of capital.
The financing charge which arises on the discounted consideration between the acquisition date and the date of payment is included within finance costs.
Transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated but considered an impairment indicator of the asset transferred.
Accounting policies of subsidiaries have been changed where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
Subsidiary audit Exemptions Gooch and Housego UK Limited Gooch and Housego Torquay Limited Spanoptic Limited Kent Periscopes Limited GandH US Holdings Limited and GandH Property Holdings Limited are exempt from the requirement to file audited accounts by virtue of Section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
Segment Reporting A business segment is a grouping of operations engaged in providing products or services that are subject to risks and returns that are different from those of other business segments.
A market segment is engaged in providing products or services within a particular economic environment that are subject to risks and returns which are different from those of segments operating in other economic environments.
The chief operating decision maker in determining a business or operating segment is the Board of Directors.
Foreign Currency Translation a.
Functional and presentation currency The consolidated financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is the Groups presentation currency.
Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups subsidiaries are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency. b.
Transactions and Balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into an entitys functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at balance sheet exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement except when deferred in equity as qualifying cash flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges. c.
Subsidiaries
The results and financial position of subsidiaries that have a functional currency different from the presentation currency are translated into the presentation currency as follows assets and liabilities for each balance sheet presented are translated at the closing rate at the date of that balance sheet income and expenses for each income statement are translated at average exchange rates unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the rate on the dates of the transactions and all resulting exchange differences are recognised in other comprehensive income and as a separate component of equity.
On consolidation exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign operations and of borrowings and other currency instruments designated as hedges of such investments are taken to shareholders equity.
When a foreign operation is partially disposed of or sold exchange differences that were recorded in equity are recognised in the income statement as part of the gain or loss on sale.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign entity are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign entity and translated at the closing rate.
Property Plant and Equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost less depreciation.
Historical cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items.
No depreciation is charged on freehold land or capital work in progress.
Certain plant used in the manufacturing process which is constructed from precious metals is not depreciated.
Depreciation on other assets is calculated to allocate their cost over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold buildings 23% Straight line Leasehold property over term of lease Straight line Plant and machinery 1020% Straight line Fixtures fittings and computers 1033% Straight line Motor vehicles 25% Reducing balance GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Where an assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount the assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell or an assets value in use.
Intangible Assets a.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of a business combination over the fair value of the net identifiable assets of the acquired business.
Goodwill arising from business combinations is included in intangible assets.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
The impairment testing requires an estimation of the value in use of the Cashgenerating unit the CGU to which goodwill is allocated using appropriately discounted cash flow projections.
Any impairment is recognised immediately as an expense to the income statement and is not subsequently reversed.
For the purpose of impairment testing a CGU is defined as either a business segment or an operating entity as appropriate.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold. b.
Patents Trademarks and Licenses Internally incurred costs associated with the filing and perfection of patents and trademarks are capitalised and carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straight line method to allocate the cost over their useful economic lives and are charged to Research and Development in the income statement.
Acquired patents trademarks and licences are shown at historical cost.
Patents trademarks and licences have a finite useful life and are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Amortisation is calculated using the straight line method to allocate the cost over their useful economic lives. c.
Computer Software Costs associated with developing or maintaining computer software programmes are recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly associated with the development of identifiable and unique software products controlled by the Group and that will probably generate economic benefits exceeding costs beyond one year are capitalised and recognised as intangible assets.
Costs include the software development employee costs and an appropriate portion of relevant overheads.
Acquired computer software and licences are capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire and bring to use the specific software.
Capitalised software costs are amortised using the straight line method over their estimated useful lives of up to 5 years and charged to Administration in the income statement. d.
Research and Development Expenditure on research activities undertaken with the prospect of gaining new scientific or technical knowledge and understanding is recognised as an expense as incurred.
Development costs incurred after the point at which the commercial and technical feasibility of the product have been proven and the decision to complete the development has been taken and resources made available are capitalised.
The expenditure capitalised includes the cost of materials direct labour and an appropriate proportion of overheads.
Capitalised development expenditure is stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
Development costs are amortised using the straight line method over their estimated useful life lives which is typically 5 years and are charged to Research and Development in the income statement. e.
Acquired Intangibles Other acquired intangible assets are stated at fair value less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses.
The useful life of each of these assets is assessed based on the differing natures of each of the intangible assets acquired.
Amortisation is charged on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the assets acquired and charged to administration in the Income Statement.
Customer relationships up to 10 years Brand names up to 10 years Acquired patents trademarks and licences up to 3 years Government Grants Government grants are accounted for on an accruals basis.
Grants are credited to the income statement over the life of the project.
Where grants are used to fund the acquisition of property plant and equipment the grant is initially credited to deferred income then credited to the income statement over the estimated economic life of the asset.
Impairment of Nonfinancial Assets The Group assesses at each balance sheet date whether an asset may be impaired.
If any such indicator exists the Group tests for impairment by estimating the recoverable amount which is the higher of the value in use and the fair value less costs to sell.
If the recoverable amount is less than the carrying value of the asset the asset is impaired and the carrying value is reduced to its recoverable amount.
In addition to this assets with indefinite lives are tested for impairment annually.
Nonfinancial assets other than goodwill which have suffered NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS an impairment are reviewed for possible reversal of the impairment at each balance sheet date.
Loans and Receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They are included in current assets except those with maturities greater than 12 months from the balance sheet date.
These are classified as noncurrent assets.
Loans and receivables are classified as trade and other receivables in the balance sheet.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of weighted average cost and net realisable value.
The cost of finished goods and work in progress comprises design costs raw materials direct labour other direct costs and related production overheads based on normal operating capacity.
It excludes borrowing costs.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less applicable variable selling expenses.
Long term contract balances included in work in progress comprise costs incurred on long term contracts net of any amounts transferred to trading expenditure after deducting foreseeable losses and related payments on account.
Costs include all direct material and labour costs incurred in bringing a contract to its state of completion at the year end.
Provisions for estimated losses on contracts are made in the period in which such losses are foreseen.
Long term contract balances do not include attributable profit.
The amount by which customer billings exceed the revenue recognised on a contract is shown as a payment on account.
Trade Receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments more than 30 days overdue are considered indicators that the trade receivable may be impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the income statement within Administration costs.
When a trade receivable is uncollectible it is written off against the allowance account for trade receivables.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against Administration costs in the income statement.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents for the purpose of the cash flow statement includes cash in hand and deposits held on call with banks with original maturities of three months or less.
Trade Payables Trade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Borrowings
Borrowings are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred.
Borrowings are subsequently stated at amortised cost any difference between the proceeds net of transaction costs and the redemption value is recognised in the income statement over the period of the borrowings using the effective interest method.
Borrowing costs which are directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of a qualifying asset are capitalised as part of the cost of that asset.
Borrowing costs are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the balance sheet date.
Financial Instruments Financial instruments are initially recognised at fair value on the date that a contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value.
The Group documents the relationship between the hedging instrument and the hedged item and on a periodic basis assesses whether the hedge is effective.
Current and Deferred Income Tax Income tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using rates enacted at the balance sheet date and any adjustments to tax payable in respect of prior years.
Amounts claimed under the RDEC scheme have been recognised within operating profit.
Deferred income tax is provided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However the deferred income tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred income tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income and equity in which case it is recognised in other comprehensive income and equity.
In the UK and US the Company is entitled to a tax deduction for amounts treated as compensation on exercise of certain employee share options under each jurisdictions tax rules.
As explained under Share options below a compensation expense is recorded in the Companys income statement over the period from the grant date to the vesting date of the relevant options.
As there is a temporary difference between the accounting and tax bases a deferred income tax asset is recorded.
The deferred income tax asset arising is calculated by comparing the estimated amount of tax deduction to be obtained in the future based on the Companys share price at the balance sheet date with the cumulative amount of the compensation recorded in the income statement.
If the amount of estimated future tax deduction exceeds the cumulative amount of the remuneration expense at the statutory rate the excess is recorded directly in equity.
Employee benefits a.
Pension Obligations The Group operates money purchase pension schemes for UK employees and Section 401k plans for US employees.
The
Group pays contributions to publicly or privately administered pension insurance plans on a mandatory  contractual or voluntary basis.
The Group has no further payment obligations once the contributions have been paid.
The contributions are recognised as an employee benefit expense in the income statement when they are due.
Prepaid contributions are recognised as an asset to the extent that a cash refund or a reduction in the future payments is available. b.
Profit Share and Bonus Plans The Group recognises a liability and an expense for bonuses and profitsharing based on a formula that takes into consideration the profit attributable to the Groups shareholders after certain adjustments.
The Group recognises a provision where contractually obliged or where there is a past practice that has created a constructive obligation. c.
Share Options The Group operates a number of share option schemes.
In accordance with IFRS 2 the fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is recognised as an expense in the income statement.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions for example profitability targets.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to vest.
Employers National Insurance in the United Kingdom and equivalent taxes in other jurisdictions are payable on the exercise of certain share options.
In accordance with IFRS 2 this is treated as a cashsettled transaction.
A provision is made calculated using the fair value of the Companys shares at the balance sheet date prorated over the vesting period of the options.
At each balance sheet date for awards with non market vesting conditions the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
The fair value of the options under the Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan are determined by using the Monte Carlo option pricing model.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium when the options are exercised.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
The Group monitors and assesses its warranty provision requirement on a continuing basis.
The provision for other liabilities and charges provides for the anticipated cost of repair and rectification of products under warranty based on historical repair and replacement costs.
In addition the Directors will also assess expected changes in future costs based on current information.
Exceptional Items T ransactions are classified as exceptional where they relate to an event that falls outside the ordinary activities of the business and where individually or in aggregate they have a material impact on the financial statements.
Leases
Leases which transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of an asset are treated as a finance lease.
Assets held under a finance lease are capitalised at their fair value at NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS the inception of the lease and depreciated over the estimated useful economic life of the asset or lease term if shorter.
Finance charges are associated with the finance lease are expensed in proportion to the capital amount outstanding.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Operating
Share Capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Revenue Recognition Revenue comprises the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the sale of goods and services in the ordinary course of the Groups activities.
Revenue is shown net of valueadded tax returns rebates and discounts and after eliminating sales within the Group.
The Group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and when specific criteria have been met for each of the Groups activities as described below.
The amount of revenue is not considered to be reliably measurable until all contingencies relating to the sale have been resolved. a.
Sale of Goods Revenue is recognised when the risks and rewards of the underlying sale have been transferred to the customer and when collectability of the related receivable is reasonably assured.
Depending on the terms of business this occurs either on the dispatchdelivery of the goods supplied or on acceptance by the customer. b.
Long Term Contracts Revenue is recognised on long term contracts by reference to the stage of completion of the contract activity at the balance sheet date.
Revenue and profits are determined by estimating the outcome of the contract and determining the costs and profit attributable to the stage of completion.
Where the outcome of the contract cannot be reliably estimated contract costs are recognised as an expense when incurred and revenue is recognised to the extent of the costs incurred that are expected to be recoverable.
In both cases any expected contract loss is recognised immediately. c.
Interest Income Interest income is recognised on a timeproportion basis using the effective interest method.
Dividend distribution Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Financial Risk Management
Capital Risk Management
Management considers capital as equity as shown in the Group balance sheet excluding net cash.
The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
The Board is satisfied that these objectives have been met during the year.
Actions taken during the year to achieve these objectives are outlined in the Chief Executive Officers Review.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares sell assets to reduce debt and vary the level of debt financing.
While the Groups debt to equity ratio is consistently monitored changes in the Groups need for capital and the selection of the source and funding of capital are assessed against a number of criteria which may have a direct effect on the Group debt to equity ratio.
The Groups capital needs include but are not solely limited to its investment in noncurrent assets investment in working capital and acquisition of businesses technologies and other intangible assets.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS The criteria against which the Groups capital needs are assessed include but are not limited to availability of and cost of debt financing ability to raise equity financing at an acceptable share price and ratio of debt to equity.
Financial Risks The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks market risk including foreign exchange risk and cash flow interest rate risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups overall risk management programme focuses on the unpredictability of financial markets and seeks to minimise potential adverse effects on the Groups financial performance.
Where considered appropriate the Company will use derivative financial instruments to hedge risk exposures although no such arrangements were in place during the year ended 30 September 2017 or 2016. i.
Market risk a.
Foreign exchange risk The Group operates internationally and is exposed to foreign exchange risk arising from various currency exposures primarily with respect to the US Dollar.
Foreign exchange risk arises from future commercial transactions recognised assets and liabilities and net investments in foreign operations.
The Group has certain investments in foreign operations whose net assets are exposed to foreign currency translation risk.
Currency exposure arising from the net assets of the Groups foreign operations is managed primarily through borrowings denominated in the relevant foreign currencies.
No financial derivatives have been entered into to manage foreign exchange exposure.
As a significant amount of the Groups profit is earned by its US subsidiaries the Groups profit is sensitive to movements in the US Dollar exchange rate.
If the average US Dollar exchange rate for the year had been consistent with the closing exchange rate at 30 September 2016 with all other variables constant post tax profits for the year would have been 123000 lower 2016 447000 lower as a result of the translation in US Dollars.
Equity is more sensitive to movement in the US Dollar exchange rate as a significant amount of the Groups net assets are held in the Groups US subsidiaries.
If the US Dollar weakened by 10% against Pound Sterling with all other variables held constant the net assets of the Group would be 1953000 lower 2016 1821000 lower.
If the US Dollar strengthened by 10% against Pound Sterling with all other variables held constant the net assets of the Group would be 2388000 higher 2016 2226000 higher. b.
Cash flow interest rate risk The Group has cash balances of 26.4m which are held in interest bearing current accounts.
The Groups income and operating cash flows are substantially independent of changes in market interest rates.
The Groups interest rate risk arises from its revolving credit facility.
A 1% increase in the cost of borrowing would have resulted in an annualised increase in interest expense of 146000 2016 68000 had the Groups borrowings been in place throughout the year.
Borrowings issued at variable interest rates expose the Group to cash flow interest rate risk.
During 2016 and 2017 the Groups borrowings at variable interest rates were denominated in Pound Sterling and US Dollars as detailed in Note 22. ii.
Credit Risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
It arises principally from the Groups trade receivables. a.
Trade and other receivables The management of credit risk exposure is the responsibility of each business unit which has credit policies in place to mitigate the risk.
The credit policies seek to verify a customers credit worthiness prior to trading and maintain the level of trading within agreed credit limits.
Changes to credit limits require authorisation in accordance with internal control policies.
The Group is exposed to concentration of credit risk.
The Groups top ten customers in 2017 accounted for 25% of the Groups revenue 2016 26%.
No individual customer made up more than 6% of revenue in either the current or prior year.
The Groups trade receivables are analysed in note 19. b.
Cash
Cash is held in current and deposit accounts with financial institutions which have credit ratings of A or greater.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS iii.
Liquidity Risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group aims to achieve a balance between certainty of funding and a flexible cost effective borrowing structure.
The Companys facilities comprise a committed revolving credit facility of 15m of which 8m is drawn and an uncommitted flexible acquisition facility of 20m of which 7.5m is drawn.
Both are available until 30 April 2019.
These are analysed in Notes 22 and 29.
The Group aims to ensure that there are sufficient funds or credit lines available to supplement cash flows generated from trading to meet known obligations in the next twelve months.
Critical accounting estimates and judgments The preparation of financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS requires the Directors to make critical accounting estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes.
These estimates and judgments are continually evaluated and are based on historical experiences and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The resulting accounting estimates will on occasions fail to equal actual results.
The estimates and assumptions that have significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are outlined below.
Impairment of Goodwill The Group tests goodwill for impairment at least annually.
This requires an estimation of the value in use of the Cash Generating Units the CGUs to which goodwill is allocated.
The value in use calculations are based on forecast cash flows of the CGU discounted at the Groups weighted average cost of capital.
These calculations have a number of significant variables including forecast revenue and margins working capital movements and maintenance capital expenditure levels.
The calculations are also sensitive to the discount rate used.
Further details are given in note 17.
Accounting for Acquisitions An assessment of the fair value of the purchase consideration and net assets acquired has been undertaken in respect of the acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC.
Determining the fair value of the consideration involves an estimate of the deferred consideration payable which is dependent on postacquisition performance and therefore inherently uncertain.
Intangible
Inventory Provision The Group continually monitors and assesses the provision for old and slow moving inventory.
Factors considered by the Directors include the expected future usage and the potential obsolescence and deterioration of the Inventory.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Segmental Analysis The Companys segmental reporting reflects the information that management uses within the business.
The business is divided into four market sectors being Aerospace and Defence Life Sciences Industrial and Scientific Research together with the Corporate cost centre.
The industrial business segment primarily comprises the industrial laser market for use in the semiconductor and microelectronic industries but also includes other industrial applications such as metrology and telecommunications.
Scientific Research covers academic and government funded research including major multinational projects.
For the year ended 30 Spetember 2017 Aerospace and Defence
Sciences
Industrial
Scientific
Research
Corporate
Total
Revenue
Total revenue 34860 9570 71336 3325  119091 inter and intradivision   7075   7075 External revenue 34860 9570 64261 3325  112016 Divisional expenses 29880 8165 50417 2821 1389 92672
4980 1405 13844 504 1389 19344 EBITDA% 14.3% 14.7% 21.5% 15.2%  17.3% Depreciation and amortisation 715 388 2000 136 625 3864 Operating profit before amortisation of acquired intangible assets goodwill impairment and release of contingent consideration Amortisation of acquired intangible assets goodwill impairment and release of contingent consideration 2202 2202 Operating profit 4265 1017 11844 368 4216 13278 Operating profit margin % 12.2% 10.6% 18.4% 11.1%  11.9% Add back nonrecurring items and amortisation of acquired intangibles goodwill impairment and release of contingent consideration Adjusted operating profit 4265 1017 11844 368 1088 16406 Adjusted profit margin % 12.2% 10.6% 18.4% 11.1%  14.6% Finance costs     676 676 Profit before income tax expense 4265 1017 11844 368 4892 12602 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS For the year ended 30 Spetember 2016 Aerospace and Defence
Sciences
Industrial
Scientific
Research
Corporate
Total
Revenue
Total revenue 19977 7904 59875 3874  91630 inter and intradivision   5579   5579 External revenue 19977 7904 54296 3874  86051 Divisional expenses 18055 6017 42719 2881 1342 71014
1922 1887 11577 993 1342 15037 EBITDA% 9.6% 23.9% 21.3% 25.6%  17.5% Depreciation and amortisation 545 335 1776 310 431 3397 Operating profit before amortisation of acquired intangible assets Amortisation of acquired intangible assets gain on bargain purchase and goodwill impairment Operating profit 1377 1552 9801 683 3229 10184 Operating profit margin % 6.9% 19.6% 18.1% 17.6%  11.8% Add back amortisation of intangibles impairment of goodwill gain on bargain purchase and nonrecurring items Adjusted operating profit 1485 1605 10761 720 313 14258 Adjusted profit margin % 7.4% 20.3% 19.8% 18.6%  16.6% Finance costs     88 88 Profit before income tax expense 1377 1552 9801 683 3317 10096 EBITDA  Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Management have added back the amortisation of intangibles gain on bargain purchase impairment of goodwill restructuring costs provision for export compliance risk and transaction fees in the above analysis.
This has been shown because the Directors consider the analysis to be more meaningful excluding the impact of these nonrecurring expenses.
All of the amounts recorded are in respect of continuing operations.
Analysis of net assets  liabilities by location
Liabilities
Net Assets
Liabilities
Net Assets United Kingdom 75104 32612 42492 70336 30580 39756 USA 73641 18477 55164 59077 9112 49965 Continental Europe 545 98 447 726 318 408 Asia Pacific 46 13 33 48 5 43 149336 51200 98136 130187 40015 90172 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS For the year to 30 September 2017 noncurrent asset additions were 1.9m 2016 2.0m for the UK and for the USA 4.5m 2016 7.3m.
There were no additions to noncurrent assets in respect of Europe 2016 nil or the Asia Pacific region 2016 nil.
The value of noncurrent assets in the USA was 47.9m 2016 34.7m the United Kingdom 29.0m 2016 30.1m and Europe nil 2016 nil.
There were no noncurrent assets in the AsiaPacific region.
Analysis of revenue by destination United Kingdom 18624 17247 USA 45485 34918 Continental Europe 24233 19189 Asia Pacific and Other 23674 14697 112016 86051 Expenses by Nature
Raw materials and consumables 35598 27424 Changes in inventory 710 1357 Employee costs 10 47290 38280 Other operating charges 12209 6429 Depreciation 3664 3042 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 2202 1263 Amortisation of other intangible assets 199 355 Gain on bargain purchase  Alfalight  578 Impairment of goodwill 615 771 Release of accrued contingent consideration 615 Other income and expenses 9 1714 2476 98738 75867 Other Income and Expenses Grants receivable 1285 2220 Amounts claimed under the RDEC 370 270 Other income  expense 59 14 1714 2476 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Employee Benefit Expense Wages and salaries 37841 30971 Social security costs 3434 2551 Share based payment charge 587 638 Medical and other insurance 4015 2851 Other pension costs 1413 1269 47290 38280 The average monthly number of employees during the year was
Number
Manufacturing 512 471 Sales finance and administration 26telKey management compensation Salaries and other shortterm benefits 5732 4908 Share based payments 587 638 Other pension costs 187 230 6506 5776 Key management comprise the Executive Board and the senior operational staff.
Directors remuneration including the highest paid Director has been included on page 39 of the Remuneration Committee
These disclosures have been audited.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Operating Profit Operating profit is stated after charging  crediting Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent company and consolidated financial statements 45 45 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 105 110 taxation compliance services 82 78 taxation advisory services 66 117 taxation advisory services related to abortive acquisitions  10 due diligence services related to grant funding 45 97 Net losses  gains on foreign exchange 225 860 Operating lease rentals 1732 1520 Transaction fees 390 466 Impairment of goodwill 615 771 Release of accrued contingent consideration 615 Restructuring costs of 536000 were incurred in the year 2016 1652000.
These related to the Palo Alto site move 180000 and redundancy costs of 356000.
The costs have been included in the income statement within cost of revenue administration costs and other income and expenses as appropriate.
Finance Income and Costs Finance income comprises Bank interest 27 39 Finance costs comprise Bank interest 321 126 Finance lease interest 1 1 Interest on discounted deferred consideration 381 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Income T ax Expense Analysis of tax charge in the year Current taxation UK Corporation tax 1318 1760 Overseas tax 2165 887 Adjustments in respect of prior year tax charge 1315 77 Total current tax 2168 2570 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 227 218 Adjustments in respect of prior year deferred tax 1315 290 Impact of change in the UK tax rate  30 Total deferred tax 1542 478 Income tax expense per income statement 3710 3048 The taxation expense for the year is higher 2016 higher than the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK.
An explanation of the differences is detailed below Profit before income tax 12602 10096 Profit at the effective standard rate of tax of 19.5% for the year 2016 20.0% 2457 2019 Income not subject to tax 72 116 Permanent differences 132 134 Adjustments in respect of foreign tax rates 1457 828 Remeasurement of deferred tax  change in UK tax rate  30 Adjustments in respect of prior year  213 Total tax expense 3710 3048 Factors Affecting the Future Tax Charge Overseas tax losses of 3.7m 2016 3.8m and UK tax losses of 0.8m 2016 0.8m are available against future profits of the
The utilisation of these losses is not sufficiently certain to recognise a deferred tax asset.
Changes to the UK corporation tax rates were substantively enacted as part of the Finance Act 2016 in September 2016.
These included the replacement of the 18% rate from 1 April 2020 with a lower rate of 17%.
To date no further changes have been announced.
The Group operates internationally as a result it is subject to various overseas tax rules and regulations.
A change in the assessment of their implementation could result in an increase in GandHs liability though no such change is currently considered necessary.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS
Final 2016 dividend paid in 2017 5.7p per share Final 2015 dividend paid in 2016 5.2p per share 1383 1254 2017 Interim dividend paid 3.7p per share 2016 3.3p 906 801 2289 2055 The Directors propose a final dividend of 6.5p per share making the total dividend paid and proposed in respect of the 2017 financial year 10.2p 2016 9.0p.
Earnings Per Share The calculation of earnings per 20p Ordinary Share is based on the profit for the year using as a divisor the weighted average number of Ordinary Shares in issue during the year.
The weighted average number of shares for the year ended 30 September is given below
Number
Number of dilutive shares 24457701 22248471 Dilutive shares 412901 436112 24870602 24684583 A reconciliation of the earnings used in the earnings per share calculation is set out below 2017 2016 000 pence per share 000 pence per share Basic earnings per share 8892 36.4p 7048 29.1p Amortisation of acquired intangible assets net of tax 2034 8.3p 930 3.8p Goodwill impairment 615 2.5p 771 3.2p Release of accrued contingent consideration 615 2.5p Gain on bargain purchase of Alfalight   578 2.4p Provision for regulatory compliance   500 2.1p Restructuring costs net of tax 431 1.8p 1261 5.2p Transaction fees net of tax 314 1.3p 373 1.5p Interest on deferred consideration 381 1.6p Total adjustments net of income tax expense 3160 13.0p 3257 13.4p Adjusted basic earnings per share 12052 49.4p 10305 42.5p Basic diluted earnings per share 8892 35.8p 7048 28.6p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 12052 48.5p 10305 41.7p Basic and diluted earnings per share before amortisation and other adjustments has been shown because in the opinion of the Directors it provides a useful measure of the trading performance of the Group.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Property  Plant and Equipment Capital work in progress
Leasehold property Plant and machinery
Motor vehicles
Cost or valuation At 1 October 2015 3713 9001 3163 25451 2868 50 44246 Additions 6894  4 1247 217  8362 Acquired   22 290 112  424 Disposals    4 4  8 Reclassification 8013  7636 359 40  22 Exchange rate differences 255 12 1180 1842 122 2 3413 At 30 September 2016 2849 9013 12005 29185 3355 52 56459 Additions 3374  139 1866 385  5764 Acquired   5 67 26  98 Disposals   43 326 71 8 448 Reclassification 656  93 510 53 Exchange rate differences 214 3 371 448 42 1 1079 At 30 September 2017 5353 9010 11828 30854 3706 43 60794 Accumulated depreciation At 1 October2015  1471 1335 14762 1728 35 19331 Charge for the year  168 401 2190 277 6 3042 Acquired  7 151 68  226 Disposals     4  4 Exchange rate differences  13 227 1156 83 1 1480 At 30 September 2016  1652 1970 18259 2152 42 24075 Charge for the year  168 773 2361 359 3 3664 Disposals   42 326 71 8 447 Exchange rate differences  3 95 267 23  388 At 30 September 2017  1817 2606 20027 2417 37 26904 Net book value At 1 October 2015 3713 7530 1828 10689 1140 15 24915 At 30 September 2016 2849 7361 10035 10926 1203 10 32384 At 30 September 2017 5353 7193 9222 10827 1289 6 33890 At 30 September 2017 plant and machinery purchased under a hire purchase or finance lease agreement had a cost of 38000 2016 38000 and net book value of 19000 2016 25000.
No interest was capitalised in the year 2016 Nil.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Intangible Assets
Acquired intangible assets
RandD Patents and licences
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 October 2015 22035 11471 2404 1733 37643 Additions   624 70 694 Acquired 4620 4768 52 5 9445 Disposals   3 1 4 Reclassification   22  22 Exchange rate differences 1885 At 30 September 2016 28625 17044 3123 1849 50641 Additions   584 102 686 Acquired 6099 7986   14085 Disposals   23 44 67 Exchange rate differences 838 757 27 9 1631 At 30 September 2017 33886 24273 3657 1898 63714 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 1 October2015 5654 9640 729 1465 17488 Charge for the year 771 1263 218 137 2389 Acquired   3 3 6 Disposals   3 1 4 Exchange rate differences  At 30 September 2016 6425 11681 976 1643 20725 Charge for the year 615 2202 83 116 3016 Disposals   3 43 46 Exchange rate differences  218 5 8 231 At 30 September 2017 7040 13665 1051 1708 23464 Net book value At 1 October 2015 16381 1831 1675 268 20155 At 30 September 2016 22200 5363 2147 206 29916 At 30 September 2017 26846 10608 2606 190 40250 Goodwill is allocated to operating sites as follows Cleveland 2.1m Ilminster 1.5m Torquay 1.6m Moorpark 6.2m Boston 4.9m Palo Alto 0.9m St Asaph 4.0m and Keene 5.7m.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
The impairment testing requires an estimation of the value in use of the CGU.
The value in use calculations use posttax cash flow projections based on the latest projections approved by the Board for year one.
For the purposes of the impairment review the following key assumptions were made in respect of the cash flows beyond year one Projected gross profit margins of 22% to 44% Average growth in EBITDA to 2022 of up to 10% and 2% thereafter 8.3% post tax discount rate used to discount cash flows The projected gross profit margin and average growth is based on past performance and the Directors expectations for the foreseeable future.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS The Boston cash generating units performance improved significantly over FY16 reflecting the effect of the Alfalight acquisition in the prior year and improved sales of the Boston sites existing products and services.
Management expect the new combined business to continue to grow profitably and it remains a key part of the Groups Space Photonics activities.
The impairment calculation for the Boston cash generating unit utilises a specific set of growth assumptions based on revenue increasing by an average of 6% per annum in the period to 30 September 2022 which results in an average annual forecast EBITDA of 1.5m over the same period.
Management do not consider any impairment of goodwill to have arisen in the year because of the significantly improved result and the growth opportunities of the new enlarged business.
If the discount rate were increased to 9.7% or if the average annual EBITDA were reduced by 0.3m the headroom on the impairment calculation would be reduced to zero.
The impairment calculation for the Moorpark cash generating unit is based on an average annual forecast EBITDA to 2022 of 1.2m.
The headroom on the calculation of 2.1m would be reduced to zero if the average annual EBITDA to 2022 were reduced by 0.3m or the discount rate increased to 9.4%.
The Directors are satisfied that no impairment is necessary.
Kent Periscopes performance in the year was lower than the targets set for the deferred consideration which was potentially payable in the year.
Accordingly a release of the accrued contingent consideration of 0.6m has been credited to the income statement.
Management performed an impairment review of the goodwill based on an average annual EBITDA to 2022 of 0.7m.
Following this review the Directors consider it appropriate to impair the goodwill by 0.6m.
If the discount rate were increased to 9.3% then a further impairment of 1.0m would arise.
However the Directors expect a significant improvement in the results going forward and are therefore satisfied no further impairment is necessary.
Inventories
Raw materials 7374 6955 Work in progress 9819 8689 Finished goods 3885 3329 21078 18973 The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of revenue amounted to 67.0m 2016 56.8m.
The movement in the inventories provision is as follows At 1 October 4208 3582 Acquired 328 264 Increase in provision 783 71 Exchange rate movement 59 291 At 30 September 5260 4208 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Trade and Other Receivables Trade receivables 20504 20451 Other receivables 2025 1326 Grant funding held in trust account 1535 230 Prepayments 659 672 24723 22679 The carrying amount of the Groups trade and other receivables is denominated in the following currencies Pound Sterling 9041 9929 US Dollar 14334 11861 Euro 1342 884 Yen 6 5 At 30 September 24723 22679 The ageing of trade receivables by due date is as follows Current 15417 14567 1 to 3 months 4139 4701 Over 3 months 1327 1402 20883 20670 Less provision for impairment 379 219 Net trade receivables 20504 20451 None of the trade receivables are with customers where we have had any history of default.
The movement on the provision for impairment of trade receivables is as follows At 1 October 219 183 Utilisation of provision 35 Increase in provision 198 28 Exchange rate movement 3 8 At 30 September 379 219 Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash at bank and on hand 26425 23167 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Trade and Other Payables Trade payables 6610 6386 Other taxation and social security 1095 553 Grant funding held in trust account 1535 230 Accruals 14518 12455 23758 19624
Current
Finance leases Noncurrent Bank borrowings 11480 11473 Finance leases 12 21 11492 11494 Total borrowings 11498 11498 The carrying values of the bank borrowings and finance leases are not materially different from their fair values and are included as part of the fair value disclosure for all financial instruments in note 29.
Gooch and Housegos primary lending bank is The Royal Bank of Scotland plc.
The Groups facilities comprise a 15m dollar revolving credit facility and a 20m flexible acquisition facility.
At 30 September 2017 the balance drawn on the revolving credit facility was 8m 2016 15m and on the flexible acquisition facility 7.5m 2016 nil.
The facilities above are committed until 30 April 2019 and attract an interest rate of between 0.9% and 1.8% above LIBOR dependent upon the Companys leverage ratio payable on rollover dates typically quarterly.
Maturity Profile of Bank and Other Borrowings Within one year 6 4 Between one and five years 11492 11494 11498 11498 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Provision for Other Liabilities and Charges The movements in the Group provision for other liabilities and charges during the year are as follows At 1 October 940 342 Acquired 80 38 Utilised during year 135 Charged to the income statement 13 556 Exchange movements 10 4 At 30 September 888 940 The Group provision for other liabilities and charges includes amounts provided for the anticipated cost of repair and rectification of products under warranty based on known exposures and historical occurrences.
In 2016 a provision for 500000 was recorded in respect of a potential penalty related to two isolated potential violations of export control laws which were voluntarily disclosed to the relevant authorities after having been identified by an internal review.
This matter is ongoing and therefore the provision has been retained.
Deferred T ax Assets and Liabilities The movements in the Groups deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year are as follows At 1 October 2132 480 Charged to the income statement 1542 478 Acquired 146 28 Arising on acquired intangible assets  1121 Credited directly to equity 148 45 Exchange movements 145 70 Net liability at 30 September 3235 2132 The deferred tax provided for in the financial statements is disclosed under the following balance sheet headings and can be analysed as follows Deferred income tax assets Intangible assets 906 1071 Share options 721 573 Provisions 814 788 Other timing differences 262 242 2703 2674 Deferred income tax liabilities Property plant and equipment 3827 2446 Intangible assets 2111 2360 5938 4806 Deferred tax balance at 30 September 3235 2132 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Overseas tax losses of 3.7m 2016 3.8m and UK tax losses of 0.8m 2016 0.8m are available to offset against future profits of the Group.
The Group has not recognised a deferred income tax asset of 1.4m 2016 1.4m in respect of these losses due to uncertainty as to whether they would be utilised within the foreseeable future.
No deferred tax has been provided in relation to unremitted earnings from overseas subsidiaries on the basis that no incremental tax charge is currently anticipated to arise upon remittance of these earnings to the UK.
Called Up Share Capital
Number
Issued and fully paid At 1 October 24260024 24091118 4852 4818 Shares issued and fully paid 254537 168906 51 34 At 30 September 24514561 24260024 4903 4852 During the year 72734 shares 2016 168906 shares were allotted under share option schemes.
Reserves
Share premium account
Cumulative translation reserve
At 1 October 2016 15530 2671 6984 60135 Profit for the financial year    8892 Dividends paid    2289 Shares issued  1969  15 Fair value of share options    587 Tax credit relating to share options    179 Currency translation differences   1410 At 30 September 2017 15530 4640 5574 67489 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Share Options The Company operates the Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan the 2013 L TIP.
The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan was adopted on 9 April 2013.
Under the plan awards are made annually to key employees based on a percentage of salary.
Subject to the satisfaction of the required TSR performance criteria and EPS financial performance these grants will vest upon publication of the results of the Company three years after the grant date.
There have been five grants of options under the 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan.
The remuneration report provides further details on the share options awarded and exercised during the financial year.
The 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan Awards were valued using the Monte Carlo option pricing model.
The expected volatility used in the model was based on the historical volatility of the Companys share price over the three years prior to the grant date.
The details of awards extant as at 30 September 2017 are summarised below Grant date 10 Mar 2017 23 Dec 2015 17 Dec 2014
Expected volatility 26% 25% 29% Risk free rate 0.9% 0.9% 0.8% Fair value  784041 629506 878475 A reconciliation of total share option movements is shown below 2017 2016 Number Weighted average exercise price Number Weighted average exercise price Outstanding at 1 October 512852  546300 Awarded 133146  147458 Exercised 72734  168906 Lapsed 87256  12000 Outstanding at 30 September 486008  512852 Exercisable at 30 September The weighted average fair value of options granted in the year was 589.0p per option 2016 427.0p per option.
For the options exercised the average market price was 1238.0p per share.
Share options outstanding at the end of the year have the following expiry dates and exercise prices Expiry date Weighted average exercise price Number of share optionstel L TIP 8Apr2023 0.0p 486008 512852 The total charge for the year relating to share options was 587000 2016 638000 all of which related to equitysettled share based payment transactions.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Operating Leases The future aggregate minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows Within one year 1166 1199 Between one to five years 3900 3652 5066 4851 Financial Instruments The Groups financial instruments comprise bank borrowings cash at bank finance leases and various items such as trade receivables and trade payables that directly arise from its operations.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are interest rate risk liquidity risk and foreign currency risk.
The Boards policy on these risks is set out in note 5.
Operations are financed through a mixture of retained profits cash reserves bank borrowings and finance leases.
Other than finance leases the Boards policy is to use variable rate borrowings whenever possible.
The currency profile for the Groups financial assets and liabilities are set out below.
Financial assets Financial liabilities Pound Sterling 16438 11269 18 24 US Dollar 8101 9999 11480 11474 Euro 1849 1857 Yen 37 42 26425 23167 11498 11498 The financial assets listed in the above table are subject to floating rates of interest.
The interest rates on the financial liabilities are provided in Note 22.
The financial assets include cash at bank but exclude shortterm receivables prepayments and other receivables.
The financial liabilities includes bank borrowings and finance leases.
Other shortterm payables are excluded from this disclosure.
Capital Commitments Authorised and contracted but not provided for 1440 264 All capital commitments relate to property plant and equipment.
Related Party Transactions No contracts or arrangements have been entered into during the year nor existed at the end of the year in which a director or key manager had a material interest.
Details of key management compensation are given in note 10.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Acquisition of StingRay Optics LLC On 21 February 2017 the Group completed the acquisition of the entire unit capital of StingRay Optics LLC a Keene New Hampshire based specialist designer and manufacturer of high performance optical and optomechanical subsystems for demanding defence and commercial applications.
The acquisition strengthened the Groups position in the aerospace and defence sector.
The consideration for the acquisition will be up to 20m comprising initial consideration of 7.5m paid in cash and 2.5m paid in new GandH ordinary shares.
There is also deferred contingent consideration of up to 10m payable in cash based on the performance of the business for a period of up to three years post acquisition.
The fair value of the assets acquired is summarised as follows Provisional fair value Property plant and equipment 98 Intangible assets 7986 Cash 231 Trade and other receivables 655 Inventory 1058 Trade and other payables 1274 Current and deferred tax assets 156 Net assets acquired 8910 Consideration paid Cash and shares paid on completion 7996 Deferred consideration 7013 Goodwill 6099 The fair value of the intangible assets represents the estimated fair value of StingRays order book its customer relationships and its brand.
These have been valued using a discounted cash flow model.
The deferred consideration has been discounted using the companys weighted average cost of capital.
The goodwill arising on acquisition reflects items not separately recognised including the expertise of StingRays employees and their contacts in target markets.
Postacquisition the acquired business contributed 5.3 million of revenue and 1.0 million of profit after tax to the consolidated income statement.
Post Balance Sheet Events In October 2017 the Company concluded a legal dispute with the landlord of its Fremont facility.
As a result of this a Californian court has awarded GandH in the region of 2 million in damages arising from the landlords nonperformance in respect of the lease.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS 2017 2016 Noncurrent assets Investments 5 28811 27169 Property plant and equipment 6 7104 7482 Intangible assets 7 47 156 Deferred income tax assets 9 793 681 36755 35488 Current assets Other receivables 8 3974  2769 Cash and cash equivalents 10298  7211 14272  9980 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 10 5301  3774 Net current assets 8971 6206 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred income tax liabilities 9 61 101 Deferred consideration 1641 Net assets 44024 41593 Shareholders equity Called up share capital 11 4903 4852 Share premium account 15530 15530 Merger reserve 1969 Retained earnings 21622 21211 Total equity 44024 41593 The financial statements on pages 77 to 88 were approved by the Board of Directors on 28 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Mark Webster Andrew Boteler
Director
COMPANY BALANCE SHEET As at 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 30 September 2017
Called up Share capital Share premium account
Reserve
Retained earnings
At 1 October 2015 4818 15530  18611 38959 Profit for the financial year    3750 3750 Total comprehensive income for the year    3750 3750 Dividends 4    2055 2055 Proceeds from shares issued 34   34 Fair value of employee services    638 638 Tax credit relating to share option schemes    301 301 T otal contributions by and distributions to owners of the parent recognised directly in equity 34   1150 1116 At 30 September 2016 4852 15530  21211 41593 At 1 October 2016 4852 15530  21211 41593 Profit for the financial year    1962 1962 Total comprehensive income for the year    1962 1962 Dividends 4    2289 2289 Proceeds from shares issued 51  1969 15 2005 Fair value of employee services    587 587 Tax credit relating to share option schemes    166 166 T otal contributions by and distributions to owners of the parent recognised directly in equity 51  1969 1551 469 At 30 September 2017 4903 15530 1969 21622 44024 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 30 September 2017 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 1461 4280 Income tax paid  41 Net cash generated from operating activities 1461 4239 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired  7999 Purchase of property plant and equipment 106 15 Purchase of intangible assets  13 Interest received 21 36 Net cash used in investing activities 85 7991 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends received from subsidiary companies 4000 4905 Dividends paid to ordinary shareholders 2289 2055 Interest paid  13 Net cash generated from financing activities 1711 2387 Net increase  decrease in cash 3087 915 Cash at beginning of the year 7211 8126 Cash at the end of the year 10298 7211 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 30 September 2017 Reconciliation of cash generated from operations Profit before income tax 1549 2561 Adjustments for Dividends received from subsidiaries 4000 4905 Amortisation of other intangible assets 109 154 Depreciation 483 469 Share based payment charge 587 638 Finance income 21 36 Finance costs  13 Total 2842 3667 Changes in working capital Trade and other receivables 209 4038 Trade and other payables 2545 1348 Total 2754 5386 Cash generated from operating activities 1461 4280 Analysis of net cash At 1 Oct 2016 Cash flow At 30 Sep 2017 Cash at bank and in hand 7211 3087 10298 Net cash 7211 3087 10298 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 Company Accounting Policies Basis of Preparation These financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by financial assets and liabilities including derivative financial instruments at fair value and in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS and IFRIC interpretations in issue at 30 September 2017 and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies preparing financial statements in accordance with IFRS.
The financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The accounting policies have been consistently applied over the period reported.
Adoption of New Standards There has been no material impact from the adoption of new standards or revised standards or interpretations which are relevant to the Group Annual Improvements 20122014 Amendment to IAS16 Property plant and equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets on depreciation and amortization Amendments to IAS27 Separate financial statements on equity accounting Amendments to IFRS10 Consolidated financial statements and IAS28 Investments in associates and joint ventures on applying the consolidation exemption Amendments to IAS1 Presentation of financial statements disclosure initiative The following standard will apply to the Company in future accounting periods IFRS 9 Financial Instruments This standard will apply for the first time in the year ending 30 September 2019.
Management do not currently envisage this standard having a material effect on the financial statements.
Pension Schemes The Company operates a money purchase pension scheme for Directors and staff.
The assets of the scheme are held in separately administered funds.
Contributions are recognised as an employee benefit expense in the income statement when they are due.
Prepaid contributions are recognised as an asset to the extent that a cash refund or a reduction in the future payments is available.
Share Options The Company operates a number of share option schemes.
In accordance with IFRS 2 the fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is recognised as an expense in the income statement.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions for example profitability targets.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to vest.
Employers National Insurance in the United Kingdom and equivalent taxes in other jurisdictions are payable on the exercise of certain share options.
In accordance with IFRS 2 this is treated as a cashsettled transaction.
A provision is made calculated using the fair value of the Companys shares at the balance sheet date prorated over the vesting period of the options.
At each balance sheet date for awards with non market vesting conditions the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
The fair value of the options under the Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan are determined by using the Monte Carlo option pricing model.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium when the options are exercised.
Foreign Currency Translation a.
Functional and presentation currency The financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is the Companys presentation currency.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS b.
Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at balance sheet exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the income statement except when deferred in equity as qualifying cash flow hedges and qualifying net investment hedges.
Property Plant and Equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at historical purchase cost less accumulated depreciation.
Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the items.
No depreciation is charged on freehold land or capital work in progress.
Depreciation on other assets is calculated to allocate their cost over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold buildings 23% Straight line Plant and machinery 1020% Straight line Fixtures fittings and computers 1033% Straight line Capitalised software and licences 2533% Straight line
Investments are stated at cost less provision for any impairment in value.
Where overseas borrowing is required to finance the investment in overseas subsidiaries the investment is retranslated at the exchange rate ruling at the balance sheet date.
Deferred Tax Deferred income tax is provided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However the deferred income tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss.
Deferred income tax is determined using tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Group and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income and equity in which case it is recognised in other comprehensive income and equity.
In the UK and US the Company is entitled to a tax deduction for amounts treated as compensation on exercise of certain employee share options under each jurisdictions tax rules.
As explained under Share options below a compensation expense is recorded in the Companys income statement over the period from the grant date to the vesting date of the relevant options.
As there is a temporary difference between the accounting and tax bases a deferred income tax asset is recorded.
The deferred income tax asset arising is calculated by comparing the estimated amount of tax deduction to be obtained in the future based on the Companys share price at the balance sheet date with the cumulative amount of the compensation recorded in the income statement.
If the amount of estimated future tax deduction exceeds the cumulative amount of the remuneration expense at the statutory rate the excess is recorded directly in equity.
Trade Payables T rade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of past events it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
Dividend Distribution Dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Financial Instruments The Company has not used derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to currency risk.
Share Capital Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Company Profit and Loss Account Gooch and Housego PLC has taken advantage of section  of the Companies Act 2006 and has not included its own profit and loss account in these financial statements.
The Companys profit after tax was 1962000 2016 3750000 profit.
Fees payable to the Company auditors for the statutory audit for the year amounted to 16000 2016 16000.
Employee Benefit Expense Wages and salaries 2035 1635 Social security costs 443 170 Medical and other insurances 26 33 Share based payments 587 638 Pension costs 38 100 3129 2576 The average number of employees during the year was 13 2016 12 all of whom were administrative.
Directors Remuneration Directors remuneration 1409 1192 Relocation allowance  23 Medical and other insurances 26 33 Directors pension scheme contributions 20 80 1455 1328 The aggregate emoluments of the highest paid Director including gain on exercise of share options were 504000 2016 617000.
Further information is included in the Remuneration Committee report on page 37.
The aggregate gain on Directors share option exercises in the year was 393000 2016 807000.
The number of Directors who are accruing retirement benefits under a money purchase pension scheme is 2 2016 2.
These disclosures have been audited.
Dividends
Final 2016 dividend paid in 2017 5.7p per share.
Final 2015 dividend paid in 2016 5.2p per share 1383 1254 2017 Interim dividend paid 3.7p per share 2016 3.3p 906 801 Cost and net book value at 30 September 2289 2055 The Directors propose a final dividend of 6.5p per share making the total dividend paid and proposed in respect of the 2017 financial year 10.2p 2016 9.0p.
Should the final dividend be approved at the Company Annual General Meeting cutoff dates for payment are Record date 26 January 2018 Payment date 2 March 2018 NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS
Cost and net book value at 1 October 27169 19170 Additions 1642 7999 Cost and net book value at 30 September 28811 27169 The subsidiary companies at 30 September 2017 all of which are wholly owned either directly or indirectly are listed below Company Name % ownership of ordinary shares Registered Office Activity Gooch and Housego UK Limited 100% Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF Manufacturer of acoustooptic products and precision optics Gooch and Housego T orquay
100% Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF Manufacturer of fibreoptic products Spanoptic Limited 100% T elford Road Glenrothes KY7 4NX Manufacturer of precision optics Kent Periscopes Limited 100% 6 Ffordd Richard Davies St Asaph LL17 0LJ Manufacturer of periscopes and vehicle sights Gooch and Housego Deutschland
100% Berliner Allee 55 22850 Norderstedt Germany Provider of sales and customer service functions Constelex T echnology Enablers
100% Sarou 12 Athens 15125 Greece Designer and manufacturer of advanced photonic systems Gooch and Housego Ohio LLC 100% 676 Alpha Drive Highland Heights OH44143 USA Manufacturer of electrooptic products and crystals Gooch and Housego California LLC 100% 5390 Kazuko Court Moorpark CA93021 USA Manufacturer of precision optics Gooch and Housego Florida LLC 100% 676 Alpha Drive Highland Heights OH44143 USA Nontrading company Optronic Laboratories LLC 100% 4632 36th St Orlando FL32811USA Manufacturer of instruments for measuring optical radiation EM4 Inc.
100% 7 Oak Park Drive Bedford MA 01730 USA Manufacturer of fibre optics products Gooch and Housego Palo Alto LLC 100% 44247 Nobel Dr Fremont CA94538 USA Manufacturer of acoustooptic electrooptic and fibre optic components and systems StingRay Optics LLC 100% 17A Bradco Street Keene NH 03431 USA Designer and manufacturer of optical and optomechanical subsystems Gooch and Housego Japan KK 100% Level 4 Nikko Shiken Building 323 Sakae Nagoya Japan Provider of sales and customer service functions GandH Property Holdings Limited 100% Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF Property holding company GandH US Holdings Limited 100% Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF Holding company GandH Holdings Delaware Inc.
100% 676 Alpha Drive Highland Heights OH44143 USA Holding company GandH Capital Holdings Florida Inc.
100% 676 Alpha Drive Highland Heights OH44143 USA Nontrading company The directors believe that the carrying value of the investments is supported by their underlying net assets.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Property  Plant and Equipment Freehold land and buildings Plant and machinery Fixtures and fittings
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 October 2015 6183 3987 1392 483 12045 Additions    15 15 At 30 September 2016 6183 3987 1392 498 12060 Additions    105 105 At 30 September 2017 6183 3987 1392 603 12165 Accumulated depreciation At 1 October2015 1139 1790 704 476 4109 Charge for the year At 30 September 2016 1247 2055 797 479 4578 Charge for the year At 30 September 2017 1355 2320 890 496 5061 Net book value At 1 October 2015 5044 2197 688 7 7936 At 30 September 2016 4936 1932 595 19 7482 At 30 September 2017 4828 1667 502 107 7104 Intangible Assets
Other
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 October 2015 1216 452 1668 Additions  13 13 At 30 September 2016 1216 465 1681
At 30 September 2017 1216 465 1681 Accumulated depreciation At 1 October2015 1086 285 1371 Charge for the year 73 81 154 At 30 September 2016 1159 366 1525 Charge for the year 45 64 109 At 30 September 2017 1204 430 1634 Net book value At 1 October tel297 At 30 September At 30 September NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Other Receivables Amounts owed by Group undertakings 791 251 Prepayments and accrued income 102 86 Group tax relief receivable 3081 2432 3974 2769 Amounts owed by Group undertakings are unsecured and due within one year.
Nontrading amounts owed by US Group undertakings are charged interest at the US LIBOR rate applicable for the year.
Nontrading amounts owed by UK Group undertakings are charged interest at the UK LIBOR rate applicable for the year.
Deferred T ax The movement in the deferred tax asset  liability during the year was as follows At 1 October 580 394 Credited to the income statement 17 61 Credited directly to reserves 135 125 At 30 September 732 580 The deferred tax provided for in the financial statements can be analysed as follows Property plant and equipment 61 101 Share options 632 497 Other timing differences 16telFactors Affecting the Future Tax Charge UK tax losses of 0.8m 2016 0.8m are available against future profits of the Group.
The utilisation of these losses is not sufficiently certain to recognise a deferred tax asset.
Changes to the UK corporation tax rates were substantively enacted as part of the Finance Act 2016 in September 2016.
These included the replacement of the 18% rate from 1 April 2020 with a lower rate of 17%.
To date no further changes have been announced.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Trade and Other Payables Trade payables 221 410 Amounts owed to Group undertakings 2593 1264 Taxation and Social Security 583 226 Accruals and deferred income 1904 1874 5301 3774 Amounts owed to Group undertakings are unsecured and due within one year.
Nontrading amounts owed to US Group undertakings are charged interest at the US LIBOR rate applicable for the year.
Nontrading amounts owed to UK Group undertakings are charged interest at the UK LIBOR rate applicable for the year.
In 2016 a provision for 500000 was recorded in respect of a potential penalty related to two isolated potential violations of export control laws which were voluntarily disclosed to the relevant authorities after having been identified by an internal review.
This matter is ongoing and therefore the provision has been retained.
Called Up Share Capital
Number
Allotted issued and fully paid At 1 October 24260024 24091118 4852 4818 Shares issued and fully paid 254537 168906 51 43 At 30 September 24514561 24260024 4903 4852 During the year 72734 shares 2016 168906 shares were allotted under share option schemes.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 FINANCIAL ST A TEMENTS Share Options The Company operates the Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan the 2013 L TIP.
The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan The Gooch and Housego 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan was adopted on 9 April 2013.
Under the plan awards are made annually to key employees based on a percentage of salary or management grade.
Subject to the satisfaction of the required TSR performance criteria and EPS financial performance these grants will vest upon publication of the results of the Company three years after the grant date.
There have been five grants of options under the 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan.
The remuneration report provides further details on the share options awarded and exercised during the financial year.
The 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan Awards were valued using the Monte Carlo option pricing model.
The expected volatility used in the model was based on the historical volatility of the Companys share price over the three years prior to the grant date.
Details of awards extant as at 30 September 2017 are summarised below Grant date 10 Mar 2017 23 Dec 2015 17 Dec 2014
Expected volatility 26% 25% 29% Risk free rate 0.9% 0.9% 0.8% Fair value  784041 629506 878475 A reconciliation of total share option movements is shown below 2017 2016 Number Weighted average exercise price Number Weighted average exercise price Outstanding at 1 October 512852  546300 Awarded 133146  147458 Exercised 72734  168906 Lapsed 87256  12000 Outstanding at 30 September 486008  512852 Exercisable at 30 September The weighted average fair value of options granted in the year was 589.0p per option 2016 427.0p per option.
For the options exercised the average market price was 1238.0p per share.
Share options outstanding at the end of the year have the following expiry dates and exercise prices Expiry date Weighted average exercise price Number of share optionstel L TIP 8Apr2023 0.0p 486008 512852 The total charge for the year relating to share options was 587000 2016 638000 all of which related to equitysettled share based payment transactions.
Related Party Disclosures The company recharges certain costs and provides financing to its subsidiaries in the ordinary course of business.
The closing balances due from and to the subsidiary companies are shown in notes 8 and 10 respectively.
No other material contracts or arrangements have been entered into during the year nor existed at the end of the year in which a director or key manager had a material interest.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 September 2017 GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION Nominated Adviser and Broker Investec Bank plc 2 Gresham Street
EC2V 7QP Legal Advisers Burges Salmon LLP One Glass Wharf
BS2 0ZX Independent Auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory
2 Glass Wharf
BS2 0FR
Link Asset Services 65 Gresham Street
EC2V 7NQ Company Secretary and Registered Office COMPANY SECRETARY Gareth J Crowe REGISTERED OFFICE Dowlish Ford
Somerset
T A19 0PF United Kingdom COMPANY NUMBER COMPANY INFORMATION Expected Financial Calendar Annual General Meeting 21 February 2018 Payment date for final dividend for the year ended 30 September 2017 to shareholders on the register at close of business 26 January 2018.
Subject to approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
2 March 2018 Interim Results announcement June 2018 Financial Year End 30 September 2018 Preliminary announcement of results for the year ending 30 September 2018 November 2018 For further information please contact Gooch and Housego PLC Mark Webster  Andrew Botelertel40 Investec Bank plc Nomad and Broker Patrick Robb  David Andersontel Buchanan Mark Court  Sophie Cowlestel GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING Notice is hereby given that the Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held at Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF on 21 February 2018 at 11.00 a.
To consider and if thought fit to pass the following resolutions as Ordinary Resolutions To receive the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 together with the Directors Report and Auditors Report thereon.
To receive and approve the Remuneration Committee Report set out on pages 37 to 41 excluding page 38 of the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
To declare a final dividend as recommended by the Directors of 6.5 pence per ordinary share for the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
4 To reelect Mark Webster as a Director.
5 To reelect Alex Warnock as a Director.
6 To reelect Andrew Boteler as a Director.
7 To reelect Peter Bordui as a Director.
8 To reelect Brian Phillipson as a Director.
9 To elect David Bauernfeind as a Director To reappoint Messrs PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as
To authorise the Directors to fix the remuneration of the
THA T the Directors of the Company be and they are hereby generally and unconditionally authorised in accordance with section 551 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act in substitution for any existing authority to the extent unused to exercise all the powers of the Company to allot shares in the Company or grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company on and subject to such terms as the Directors may determine.
The authority hereby conferred shall subject to section 551 of the Act be for a period commencing on the date of the passing of this Resolution and expiring at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or 21 May 2019 whichever is the earlier unless reviewed varied or revoked by the Company in General Meeting and the maximum nominal amount of shares which may be allotted pursuant to such authority shall be 1634304 representing approximately one third of the total ordinary share capital of the Company in issue at 28 November 2017.
The Directors shall be entitled under such authority to make at any time prior to the expiry of such authority any offer or agreement which would or might require shares in the Company to be allotted after the expiry of such authority and the Directors may allot shares in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if such authority had not expired.
To consider and if thought fit to pass the following resolutions as Special Resolutions THA T the Directors of the Company be and they are hereby generally and unconditionally empowered pursuant to section 570 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act in substitution for any existing authority to the extent unused to allot equity securities as defined in section 560 of the Act for cash pursuant to the authority conferred by Resolution 12 above as if section 561 of the Act did not apply to such allotment provided that the power hereby conferred shall be limited to the allotment of equity securities in connection with an offer of securities open for acceptance for a period fixed by the Directors by way of rights to the holders of ordinary shares in proportion as nearly as may be to the respective numbers of ordinary shares held by them on a record date fixed by the Directors and subject to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors may deem necessary or expedient to deal with legal or practical problems under the laws of any overseas territory or the requirements of any regulatory body or any stock exchange in any territory or in connection with fractional elements or otherwise howsoever and ii otherwise than pursuant to subparagraph i above the allotment of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal amount of 490291 representing approximately 10 per cent.
May 2019 whichever is the earlier save that the Company may before such expiry make an offer or agreement which would or might require equity securities in the Company to be allotted after such expiry and the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of such offer or agreement as if the power conferred hereby had not expired.
GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION NOTICE OF ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING THA T the Company be and is hereby generally and unconditionally authorised for the purposes of section 701 of the Companies Act 2006 the Act to make one or more market purchases within the meaning of section  of the Act of fully paid ordinary shares of 0.20 each in the capital of the Company on such terms and in such manner as the Directors may determine provided that a the maximum aggregate number of ordinary shares hereby authorised to be purchased is 2451456 representing approximately 10 per cent of the total ordinary share capital of the Company in issue at 28 November 2017 b the minimum price exclusive of expenses which may be paid for each ordinary share is 20 pence per share c the maximum price exclusive of expenses which may be paid for each ordinary share shall not be more than 5 per cent.
London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the five business days immediately preceding the date on which the ordinary share is contracted to be purchased d unless previously renewed varied or revoked the authority hereby conferred shall expire at the conclusion of the next Annual General Meeting of the Company or 21 May 2019 whichever is the earlier e the Company may pursuant to the authority hereby conferred enter into a contract to purchase ordinary shares which would will or might be executed wholly or partly after the expiry of such authority and the Company may make a purchase of ordinary shares in pursuance of such contract as if the authority conferred hereby had not expired.
By order of the Board Gareth J Crowe Company Secretary 28 November 2017 Registered Office Dowlish Ford Ilminster Somerset T A19 0PF Registered Number  GOOCH and HOUSEGO PLC ANNUAL REPORT 2017 SHAREHOLDER INFORMA TION Explanatory note on Resolution 2 Resolution 2 is an advisory vote only.
The Remuneration Committee Report is set out on pages 37 to 41 of the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
Pages 37 39 40 and 41 of the Remuneration Committee Report set out the pay and benefits received by each of the directors for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The Companys policy on remuneration and potential pay outs to directors in the future which is set out on page 38 of the Annual Report and Financial Statements for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 is specifically excluded from this Resolution.
Resolutions 1 to 12 inclusive are proposed as Ordinary Resolutions.
This means that for those resolutions to be passed more than half of the votes cast on such resolutions must be in favour of such resolutions.
Resolutions 13 and 14 are proposed as Special Resolutions.
This means that for those resolutions to be passed at least threequarters of the votes cast on such resolutions must be in favour of such resolutions.
A member entitled to attend and vote at the meeting is entitled to appoint one or more proxies to exercise all or any of the members rights to attend speak and vote at the meeting or any adjournment of the meeting.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
If a member appoints more than one proxy in relation to the meeting each proxy must be appointed to exercise the rights attached to a different share or shares held by that member.
If a member submits more than one valid proxy appointment in relation to the same share the appointment received last before the latest time for receipt of proxies will take precedence.
A member may only appoint a proxy in accordance with the procedures described in notes 45 and 6.
To appoint a proxy outside of the CREST system a form of proxy is enclosed for use.
To be valid this form of proxy and any power of attorney or other authority if any under which it is signed must by duly completed and signed and sent to or deposited at the office of the Companys registrars Link Asset Services PXS 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU so as to be received not less than 48 hours before the time for holding the meeting or any adjournment of the meeting.
Completion of a form of proxy does not preclude a member from attending and voting in person at the meeting if that member so wishes.
T o appoint as a proxy a person other than the Chairman of the meeting a member must insert the proxys full name in the box on the proxy form.
If a member signs and returns a proxy form with no name in the box the Chairman of the meeting will be deemed to be the members proxy.
Where a member appoints as a proxy someone other than the Chairman the member is responsible for ensuring that the proxy attends the meeting and is aware of the members voting intentions.
If a member wishes a proxy to make any comments on the members behalf the member will need to appoint someone other than the Chairman and give them the relevant instructions directly.
To appoint a proxy or to give or amend an instruction to a previously appointed proxy via the CREST system Link ID RA10 the CREST message must be received by the issuers agent by 11.00 a.
February 2018.
For this purpose the time of receipt will be taken to be the time as determined by the timestamp applied to the message by the CREST Applications Host from which the issuers agent is able to retrieve the message.
After this time any change of instructions to a proxy appointed through CREST should be communicated to the proxy by other means.
CREST Personal Members or other CREST sponsored members and those CREST Members who have appointed voting service providers should contact their CREST sponsor or voting service providers for assistance with appointing proxies via CREST .
For further information on CREST procedures limitations and system timings please refer to the CREST Manual.
The Company or its Registrars may treat as invalid a proxy appointment sent by CREST in the circumstances set out in Regulation 355 a of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001.
In any case your Form of Proxy must be received by the Companys Registrars by no later than 11.00 a. on 19 February 2018.
A member which is a corporation is entitled to appoint one or more corporate representatives to exercise the same powers on behalf of the corporation as the corporation could exercise if it were an individual member.
If a member which is a corporation appoints more than one corporate representative in relation to the meeting or any adjournment of the meeting each such corporate representative shall be entitled to exercise the same powers on behalf of that corporation as that corporation could exercise if it were an individual member provided that if such persons purport to exercise those powers the same way those powers shall be treated as exercised in that way but if those persons purport to exercise those powers in different ways those powers shall be treated as not exercised.
In the case of a member which is a corporation the proxy form must be executed under the corporations common seal or signed on its behalf by a duly authorised officer of the corporation or an attorney for the corporation.
Pursuant to Regulation 41 of the Uncertificated Securities Regulations 2001 the Company specifies that only those members entered in the Companys register of members at close of business on 19 February 2018 shall be entitled to attend and vote at the meeting in respect of the number of shares registered in their names at that time.
Changes in the Companys register of members after that time shall be disregarded in determining the rights of any person to attend and vote at the meeting.
If the meeting is adjourned the time which is 48 hours disregarding any part of a day which is not a working day before the time fixed for the adjourned meeting shall apply for the purpose of determining the entitlement of members to attend and vote at the adjourned meeting.
Copies of Directors service agreements and letters of appointment and the rules of the Companys share option schemes will be available for inspection at the registered office of the Company from the date of this Notice of AGM until the date of the meeting during normal business hours and at the place of the meeting from 10.45 a. until its conclusion.
NOTES
Gooch and Housego PLC Dowlish Ford Ilminster TA19 0PF United Kingdom tel email GOOCH and HOUSEGO ANNUAL REPORT 2017 ANNUAL REPORT SEPTEMBER 2017
