easyHotel plc
Annual report and accounts 2017 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Total system sales 2017 29.7 2016 21.3 Total revenue 2017 8.4 2016 6.0 Adjusted EBITDA 2017 2.3 2016 1.6 Earnings per share 2017 0.7 2016 1.4
Strategic report
IFC Highlights
01 About easyHotel 02 easyHotel at a glance 03 Chairmans statement
04 Chief Executive Officers review
06 Our strategy and business model
08 Chief Financial Officers review
10 Risk management and principal risks
13 Board of Directors 14 Chairmans corporate governance report 15 Directors report 16 Audit Committee report 17 Remuneration report 20 Statement of responsibilities Financial statements 22 Independent auditors report 25 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 26 Consolidated statement of financial position 27 Consolidated statement of cash flows 28 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 29 Company statement of financial position 30 Company statement of cash flows 31 Company statement of changes in equity 32 Notes forming part of the financial statements 55 Directors Secretary and advisers Total system sales is a nonstatutory measure and represents the full amount that the customer pays for our owned and franchised hotels including initial signon fees paid by franchisees to the Company.
Adjusted EBITDA is a nonstatutory measure that represents earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation adjusted for preopening costs related to the development of hotels organisational restructuring costs share based payments and other nonrecurring items.
Impact of enlarged share base from placing of 38m ordinary shares in October 2016.
Business highlights Owned hotels likeforlike revenue growth of 13.7% with franchised hotels likeforlike revenue growth of 8.6%.
Successful opening of owned hotels in Birmingham and Manchester 201 rooms and franchised hotels in Brussels Amsterdam Arena and Amsterdam Zaandam 334 rooms with a combined occupancy of over 85%.
Significant expansion of our development pipeline with 404 owned and 835 franchised rooms added to the pipeline.
On 17 October 2016 easyHotel completed the placing of 38000000 new ordinary shares to raise 38.0m before expenses.
New fiveyear facility of 12.0m bearing interest at LIBOR 2.50% refinancing previous 7 .2m bank facility.
New Eurodenominated mortgage facility of 8.3m bearing interest at EURIBOR 2.25% for development of our Barcelona hotel.
Postyearend developments Opening of Liverpool 78 rooms on 1 November 2017 .
Acquired site in Cardiff to develop a 120room easyHotel subject to planning permission.
Agreed to take over a 25year lease of the 104room Tune hotel in Newcastle opening as an easyHotel in December 2017 .
A further 162 franchised rooms two hotels under development in The Hague and Maastricht to open in the second half of 2018.
2015 20.0 2015 5.5 2015 1.5 2015 1.0 Profitable growth Highlights 3 new cities extra rooms additional hotels Accelerated growth 201 7 highlights easyHotel is for people who believe that life is for living.
The type of person who lives for experiences and wants to make the most of every moment.
They want to be out and about getting amongst it and making sure that they dont miss a thing.
Our hotels are perfectly located to help them get out there Guy Parsons Chief Executive Officer Ipswich
Manchester
Amsterdam
Amsterdam
Zaandam
Lisbon
Barcelona
Zurich
Frankfurt
Brussels
City Centre South Arena Boulevard Rotterdam The Hague
BernkastelKues
Budapest
Soa
Basel
Birmingham
Heathrow
Reading
Luton
Glasgow
Edinburgh
Cardi
Oxford
Leeds
Sheeld
Belfast
Maastricht
As of 30 November 2017.
Croydon
Old Street South Kensington
Earls Court
Iran
Sri Lanka owned hotels 598 rooms.
By early 2019 13 additional hotels five owned eight franchised will open.
Revenue by property type Current portfolio
Pipeline
Owned 6.6m Franchised 1.8m Revenue by geography UK 7.2m EU 1.1m ROW 0.1m hotels rooms countries cities
Owned open Owned development Franchised open Franchised development 2 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report easyHotel at a glance Growing our pipeline I am delighted to report that easyHotel has made great progress in implementing its strategy for growth.
Strong trading across both the existing estate and the Groups newly opened hotels has delivered increases not only in total systems sales but likeforlike revenues as well.
Strategy
We continue to target carefully selected locations to build our portfolio of owned and franchised hotels adopting a methodical approach to the assessment of individual pipeline opportunities and applying strict investment return criteria.
In addition a number of initiatives have been progressed during the year to optimise the value of existing assets including investments to improve our revenue management systems and processes and our customers online booking experience.
The equity capital and bank debt we raised last year have enabled us to commit to a strong pipeline of new sites.
Following recent acquisitions those funds are now substantially committed.
Further refinements to our hotel development processes and design standards will deliver a lower risk higher performing model for new projects.
During the year two new owned hotels have been opened in Birmingham and Manchester and both are trading strongly.
Since the year end our new owned hotel in Liverpool was opened on 1 November 2017 and further projects are in progress in Newcastle Barcelona Leeds Sheffield Ipswich Oxford and
This significant increase in our owned estate together with new franchised hotels opened in Brussels Amsterdam Arena and Amsterdam Zaandam and with others on the way is providing an ever more solid foundation for our strengthening brand.
The benefit of our new look room design is evidenced by the abovebudget performance we are seeing from our newly launched hotels which continue to exceed our own expectations.
A programme to refresh two of three legacy owned assets Croydon and Glasgow will be completed within the coming months and we expect to see a similar positive impact on the revenues of those hotels.
In addition we have plans to upgrade our London Old Street 92room hotel and subject to planning consent exploit the value of the remainder of the building through development of office accommodation.
Dividend
An interim dividend of 0.1 1p per ordinary share was paid on 30 June 2017 .
The Board is now pleased to recommend to shareholders the payment of a final dividend of 0.22p per share on the basis of our enlarged share capital.
Subject to shareholder approval at our forthcoming AGM this dividend will be paid on 15 February 2018 to shareholders on the register on 19 January 2018.
Board and management team The Board would like to thank everyone in easyHotels team for their part in delivering another successful year for the business.
In particular the Company has benefited from continuity within our skilled executive team.
Chief Executive Officer Guy Parsons
We are very fortunate to have Scott Christies wise and pragmatic contribution as NonExecutive Director and Chairman of our Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Outlook
Whilst the wider macroeconomic uncertainty continues to impact consumer confidence we believe easyHotel is well positioned.
The refinements that have been introduced to the business over the course of the last year are further strengthening our brand and ensuring that the easyHotel offering is one that can support delivery of the Boards ambitious longterm strategy for growth.
Jonathan Lane OBE NonExecutive Chairman 5 December 2017
Trading slightly ahead of Board expectations and particularly strong across newly opened hotels Growth strategy underpinned by high quality pipeline and strong assetbacked balance sheet Disciplined and wellfinanced approach taken to deployment of capital with strict investment criteria 3 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017
Chairmans statement
Continued focus Summary Strong trading across existing hotels Continued outperformance against our competitive set Excellent progress achieved across all areas of the business Five new hotels opened and trading strongly Positive customer reaction to stylish new easyHotel format Significantly accelerated pipeline in place to deliver longterm shareholder value
I am delighted to be leading this ambitious business at such an exciting time in its history.
201617 was a significant year for easyHotel with excellent progress achieved across all areas of the business.
Impressive likeforlike sales growth was delivered underpinned by the smooth implementation of our new booking engine and yield management system across the entire easyHotel network.
We opened five new hotels during the year in our new stylish brand format all of which have traded strongly from opening.
The increase in sales and new openings together with our focus on reducing costs improving efficiencies and maximising the returns from our investments have produced a significant growth in our underlying profits.
Our pipeline of new hotels is accelerating.
The successful equity fundraise in October 2016 is enabling us to develop and open more owned hotels and such investment in the brand and estate should in turn encourage more franchisees to join the brand.
With the experienced team we now have in place continued high levels of staff engagement and improving customer satisfaction we are in an excellent position to expand the easyHotel brand and deliver improving returns for our shareholders.
Trading review Total system sales grew by 39.2% to 29.7m with Company revenues increasing by 39.7% to 8.4m.
This was achieved through likeforlike owned and franchised hotel sales growth of 9.8% as well as the opening of new owned hotels in Birmingham and Manchester and franchised hotels in Brussels Amsterdam Arena and Amsterdam Zaandam.
Occupancy for all owned and franchised hotels was 79.7% 2016 76.2%.
The five hotels opened in the new brand style have all traded very strongly since opening with a combined occupancy in excess of 85%.
We will continue to monitor their progress closely and the impact on the time taken for new hotels to reach maturity in future.
Our strong sales performance led to a 48.3% increase in adjusted EBITDA to 2.30m 2016 1.55m.
Owned hotels Our owned hotels continued to win market share with revenue growing by 13.7% on a likeforlike basis.
The new booking engine and revenue management system rollout together with selling an allocation of rooms via selected online travel agencies OTAs resulted in our owned hotels significantly outperforming their competitive set as measured by STR throughout the year.
As previously announced the Board plans to retain a 92room hotel at Old Street and is applying for planning permission to add additional floors to the building for use as office accommodation which should maximise value from this freehold property.
We have started a 1.5m refurbishment of our other two legacy owned assets in Croydon and Glasgow to improve the quality of the hotels and to bring them into line with our new brand look.
We expect their refurbishment to be revenue enhancing during the current financial year.
Franchise partners Likeforlike revenue at our franchised hotels increased by 8.6% during the financial year with total currency adjusted sales increasing by 32.2%.
The hotels in Continental Europe performed particularly strongly.
Dubai Luton and Heathrow were refurbished during the year and we are discussing refurbishment plans with a number of other franchisees to introduce the new brand look and feel.
There were 20 franchised hotels operating in our network at 30 September 2017 .
Market outlook The UK hotel market performed strongly in 201 7 with Sterlings weakness versus the US Dollar and Euro resulting in an increase in staycations and inbound tourism.
Londons RevPAR growth was particularly strong during the first half of the year and encouragingly regional RevPAR has also improved.
The European hotel market continued to perform strongly during the financial year.
Growth in Europe is still being predominantly driven by occupancy which suggests a healthy supply and demand balance and scope for further rate increases.
The Board remains confident that despite any uncertainties surrounding the current Brexit negotiations the easyHotel brand will continue to outperform its hotel sector as consumers seek out the best value for money.
Development review Development of owned hotels We have a growing pipeline of hotels under development.
Barcelona and Ipswich both acquired last year will open in mid2018.
During the year and post year end we secured a further five new hotel sites in aggregate which are listed below Lands Lane Leeds acquired under a 250year ground lease.
The 93room hotel will open in mid2018.
High Street Sheffield acquired on a freehold basis.
The 131room hotel will open in mid2018.
Oxford a 25year lease subject to planning permission.
The 180room hotel should open during the next financial year.
Central Cardiff acquired on a freehold basis subject to planning permission.
The 120room hotel will open in 2019.
Tune hotel in Newcastle  we agreed to take over a 25year lease of a 104room hotel opening as an easyHotel this month.
Recently opened hotels with our new and improved design are performing better than their original business case whilst industry wide construction cost inflation has generally added to our owned hotel project costs.
On aggregate these projects are still expected to deliver an unlevered return on capital employed ROCE of 1213%.
4 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Transforming our business Strategic report Chief Executive Officers review Together with leased hotel projects considered on a limited and specific basis where the acquisition of a suitable freehold site is not currently available or does not meet our investment return targets and our new franchised hotels which are delivering more fees than initially anticipated we expect to deliver a 15% unlevered blended ROCE at Group level.
We have 921 owned rooms under development and following the successful 38m gross equity placing in October 2016 and the 12m refinancing of an existing bank facility the Groups assetbacked balance sheet remains strong but with our current development pipeline we are only able to finance one further owned hotel.
We continue to see a good number of attractive potential development opportunities to further accelerate the Groups growth.
Consequently the Board is considering its financing options which may include new equity and debt to fund these opportunities.
Development of franchised hotels There are 1798 franchised rooms currently under development.
The 101room hotel in Lisbon the 100room hotel in BernkastelKues the 81room hotel in Belfast the 87room hotel in The Hague  Scheveningen the 75room hotel in Maastricht and the 54room hotel in Reading will all open in 2018.
We also announced the development of hotels in Bur Dubai 300 rooms Istanbul 300 rooms Iran 500 rooms and Sri Lanka 200 rooms beyond 2018.
These hotel openings will enhance our position as the super budget hotel brand of scale in the UK Europe and the Middle East.
Pipeline
In addition to the 2719 owned and franchised rooms we currently have under development we have extended our pipeline during the year with over 2300 owned and leased rooms under negotiation including c.1000 owned and leased rooms approved by the Board as well as a further c.1300 franchised rooms under negotiation.
This confirms our strategic analysis that there is the potential in the UK and Europe for a total of 12000 owned and leased rooms and for a total of 15000 franchised rooms.
The potential for franchised development outside the UK and Europe is yet to be fully assessed however recent franchised activity and enquiries in the Middle East Africa and Asia have indicated that there is strong demand for the easyHotel brand outside Europe.
Capability review It is essential that we continue to build the capability of the business ensuring we have the right platform in place to support our ambitious growth plans.
Organisation and culture To grow as a business and succeed on all fronts we continue to enhance our organisation and culture.
We fully recognise and endorse the need for dynamic leadership with clear executive accountability and a relentless customer focus.
Having appointed a new senior team last year to ensure that we have the right breadth of talent in place to deliver our growth plans going forward our focus this year has been on ensuring that all our team members feel valued and recognised and have the opportunity and support to reach their full potential.
With such an exciting future it is perhaps not surprising that our staff engagement score was 82% during the year.
At the year end the Group employed 50 staff 2016 45.
Brand strength easyHotels core strength is our ability to leverage the recognised and trusted easy brand.
We know that improving customer recommendation is a priority for our future success and finding out what our customers think is central to our business.
Our operations teams focus on customer feedback via social media sites in general and TripAdvisor in particular and our hotels are ranked against a competitive set on a monthly basis.
The Group TripAdvisor score at the year end was 3.5 2016 3.3.
This relentless focus on customer feedback is already paying off and will remain an integral part of the way we do things in the future.
Technology
Although we are now selling a controlled number of rooms via OTAs we remain focused on driving sales via our own website.
Our new booking engine will allow us to launch a new website and mobile app and introduce automated checkin kiosks to improve every stage of the customer journey online and at our hotels.
Our marketing campaigns will be further refined to maximise the traffic to our website and improve the return on our marketing investment.
With a new revenue management system in place we will be in an excellent position to make further improvements to our customers web journey as well as introduce a more dynamic pricing strategy to further drive RevPAR growth.
By offering our customers a good nights sleep at a super price and a quick and easy way to make a booking we believe that we will attract new customers and encourage significant repeat visits.
Our values At easyHotel we believe that its not just what we do but how we do it.
We believe in providing our teams an opportunity to build a great career in providing our customers with a truly super budget stay and giving our shareholders a great return on their investment.
I want to take this opportunity to thank every employee across the Group and our business partners for making easyHotel as good as it is.
Im confident that together we can continue to deliver on our strategic objectives in the months and years ahead.
Guy Parsons
Chief Executive Officer
5 December 2017 5 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Our Board believes we have the right strategy in place to achieve our long term growth targets.
Our business model Customer understanding Budget hotels are chosen because of location and price consumers choose them because theyre close to where they need to be.
Customer needs are relatively simple a great bed welltrained friendly staff and welldesigned rooms.
A brand that is easy and simple to do business with.
A market opportunity The significant independent sector is in structural decline.
The branded budget sector has grown faster than any other sector in the UK hotel industry for the last 30 years and is forecast to continue doing so.
8000 owned rooms and 4000 franchised rooms in the UK 4000 owned rooms in Europe and 11000 franchised rooms opportunities in Europe.
Further opportunities exist in Africa the Far East Australasia and North South and Central America.
Maximising revenues We dont have restaurants in our hotels  we use every available space to sell bedrooms.
We offer a consistent good quality room at a low price.
As a result our occupancies are high.
Revenues are maximised via the revenue management and eCommerce strategy.
Delivering shareholder returns Our operating margins are high.
We outsource our cleaning to specialists and keep our staffing levels to a minimum.
We use a combination of owned and franchised hotels.
Franchised hotels build a brand presence without the need for capital investment deliver a high incremental margin and increase Group ROCE.
The Group adopts strict investment criteria for owned hotel development including leased hotels that will contribute towards the Group ROCE target of 15%.
With a strategy to dispose of noncore assets in place maximising the capital available to build bedrooms.
Delivering value
Maximising revenues A market opportunity Delivering value Our strategy
Shareholder
Returns
6 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategy at the heart of our business model Strategic report Our strategy and business model  We celebrate simplicity.
Were all about making it simple for our customers to do what they want to do when they want to do it.
We believe in making being there possible for everyone.
Guy Parsons Chief Executive Officer
European tourism has strong longterm structural growth drivers.
D elo i t te  29th European Hotel Investment Conference November 2017 Development pipeline We have some really exciting hotels opening soon easyHotel Bur Dubai easyHotel Cardiff easyHotel Istanbul easyHotel Oxford easyHotel Liverpool easyHotel BernkastelKues easyHotel Belfast easyHotel Reading easyHotel Lisbon easyHotel Ipswich easyHotel Sheffield easyHotel Leeds easyHotel Barcelona easyHotel Newcastle easyHotel Maastricht easyHotel The Hague  Scheveningen Beyond 2019
Sri Lanka Revenue Total revenue increased by 39.7% to 8.42m 2016 6.02m driven by the strong performance of our owned hotels which significantly outperformed the market and the opening of new owned and franchised hotels during the period.
Total revenue from our owned hotels was up by 39.7% to 6.60m 2016 4.73m.
Likeforlike revenue growth was 13.7%.
In our owned estate average occupancy was 86.7% 2016 82.1% and average daily rate ADR per room was 41.9 2016 40.0.
Revenue from our franchised hotels was up by 39.8% to 1.81m 2016 1.30m including a oneoff exit fee of 0.15m relating to the Earls Court franchisee.
Likeforlike growth in franchised hotels revenue was 8.6%.
Average occupancy was 77 .7% 2016 74.5% and ADR per room was 49.4 2016 42.6 in our franchised estate. on 30 June 2017 .
Cash flow and balance sheet Net cash generated from operations was 2.22m 2016 0.85m.
Net cash used in investing activities was 23.13m 2016 9.65m reflecting the costs incurred during the year of our owned hotel and IT development projects.
Net cash generated from financing activities was 40.57m 2016 0.27m used in financing activities primarily relating to the completion in October 2016 of a 38.0m placing 36.6m after expenses plus the refinancing of our existing 7 .2m bank facility with a new 12.0m facility in November 2016 and the arrangement of an 8.25m mortgage facility to finance the construction of our first owned hotel in Spain in January 2017 .
As at 30 September 2017  total bank borrowings were 12.03m 2016 7 .20m.
The Group ended the financial year with net assets of 70.18m 2016 33.21m of which 33.26m comprised cash and cash equivalents 2016 13.66m.
The Group accounts for its assets using the historical cost method however if our hotel portfolio was valued on the open market the Board expects the corresponding value of this portfolio to be materially above its current net book value underpinning the strength of the Groups balance sheet.
1125000 ordinary shares in the Company were held by the Employee Benefit Trust 2016 1125000.
Postbalance sheet events On 30 October 2017  the Group announced the acquisition of a site in Cardiff to develop a new 120room freehold easyHotel subject to planning permission.
On 15 November 2017 the Group announced the takeover of a 25year lease of the 104room Tune hotel in Newcastle opening as an easyHotel in December 2017 .
On 16 November 2017  the Group announced a further 162 franchised rooms two hotels under development in The Hague and Maastricht to open in the second half of 2018.
Marc Vieilledent Chief Financial Officer 5 December 2017
Owned
Revenue 6.6m 2016 4.7m Adjusted EBITDA 3.2m 2016 2.6m
Revenue 1.8m 2016 1.3m Adjusted EBITDA 1.0m 2016 0.6m
Revenue 8.4m 2016 6.0m Adjusted EBITDA 2.3m 2016 1.6m Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA before oneoff items increased by 48.3% to 2.30m 2016 1.55m.
Our owned and franchised businesses contributed an improvement of 1.07m to 4.28m 2016 3.21m partly offset by our corporate office expenses increasing by 0.32m to 1.98m 2016 1.66m on the back of continued investment in our team to deliver our ambitious growth plans.
Profit before tax Profit before tax PBT decreased by 21.1% to 0.86m 2016 1.09m.
Despite the increase in adjusted EBITDA the decrease in profit before tax was mainly driven by a 0.24m loss related to writing down the net book value of the 3rd and 4th floors of our Old Street hotel following their previously announced closure 2016 Nil and no capital gain this year contrary to the capital gain on the Liverpool ground floor disposal in 2016 for 0.28m.
Other factors driving PBT include Preopening costs increased to 0.22m 2016 0.09m in the year following an increase in new hotel openings.
Depreciation and amortisation also increased to 0.83m 2016 0.45m following the opening of our owned hotels and IT investments made.
Share based payments expense of 0.17m 2016 0.16m was recorded during the year.
Other nonrecurring net costs incurred note 5 in the year amounted to 0.
Finance income was 0.27m 2016 0.25m including interest on cash deposits and foreign exchange gains and a finance expense of 0.09m 2016 0.20m related to interest on borrowings incurred during the year net of borrowing costs attributable to the construction of new owned hotels capitalised as required by IAS 23.
Taxation
The effective tax charge for the period was 25% 2016 20%.
Earnings per share and dividend The profit for the year was 0.64m 2016 0.88m with the impact of our enlarged share base giving rise to basic earnings per share of 0.7p 2016 1.4p.
The Board is proposing a final dividend of 0.22p per ordinary share or a total dividend for the financial year of 0.33p 2016 0.33p including 8 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report
Chief Financial Officers review
Delivering strong performance Occupancy 2017 86.7% 2016 82.1% Owned hotels Franchised hotels
2017 41.9 2016 40.0
2017 77.7% 2016 74.5%
2017 49.4 2016 42.6 Operational risks Risk How we manage the risk Change of risk during the year Comment Failure to extend the hotel portfolio in line with strategic targets and funding and returns parameters Our executive and wider management teams have the extensive sector experience needed to both identify good opportunities and deliver development and franchising initiatives.
We actively seek to identify potential sites and franchisees in the UK Europe and beyond to develop our hotel portfolio.
We keep resources under review to avoid overstretching the team.
No change in risk Significant pipeline of franchised hotels currently in place versus the prior year.
Brand reputational damage The Group operates to defined brand standards and carries out brand audits to ensure they are maintained.
Responsibility is clearly defined within both the owned and franchised elements of the business to ensure brand standards are met.
No change in risk A stylish new brand format has been designed the brand manual has been reviewed and updated and an active programme of monitoring and enforcement is in place.
Failure to raise capital necessary for future development The Groups planned rate of growth is dependent on continued supply of external capital and management continues to work with advisers investors and banks to meet its longterm needs.
No change in risk The increasing strength of the brand and business and growing track record of delivering against targets have enhanced our reputation and credibility to raise finance however external factors such as Brexit remain a cause for caution.
Brexit increases uncertainty in the political or economic outlook adversely impacting the business Budget hotels have outperformed the rest of the sector and this trend would be expected to continue in a recessionary environment as consumers seek better value.
A weak Pound would be expected to increase staycations and inbound tourism benefiting our predominantly UK based business.
No change in risk Our owned hotels focus in the UK has been a benefit in the year under review and we continue to develop our portfolio in the UK and employment initiatives have been introduced to fill particularly hardtorecruitfor positions.
Disaster incidents that could seriously impact the business such as fire flood or terrorist attack A comprehensive disaster recovery plan with backup processes and facilities to ensure the business can continue to operate with minimal disruption is in place.
This combines with appropriate insurance cover to protect the business in the event of a disaster incident.
No change in risk Improved disaster recovery measures implemented and terrorist insurance cover reviewed.
Principal risks and uncertainties The Board has primary responsibility for ensuring the Groups risks are properly understood quantified and appropriately managed but it looks to the Audit Committee to provide assurance on risk management processes and controls.
The Audit Committee and the Board review the Groups risk register.
The actions proposed and taken by management to mitigate risk and to reduce the likelihood and impact of the risks faced by the business are considered regularly and are deemed satisfactory.
The principal risks and uncertainties of the business and how they are managed are set out in the table below.
10 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Strategic report Risk management and principal risks Managing our risks effectively Operational risks Risk How we manage the risk Change of risk during the year Comment Failure of information systems cyber attack or data protection breach The Group has specialist service providers which advise and support the business on its IT security.
Staff training data backup penetration testing and other security measures are also in place.
No change in risk Contractual obligations to ensure adequate IT security measures are in place and have been reviewed across key suppliers.
Old Street planning refusal negatively impacts EBITDA We continue to engage actively and constructively with Islington Council to develop valueoptimising plans for the future of the building.
No change in risk Failure of a key supplier Our business is reliant on a few key suppliers which provide services such as laundry housekeeping and reservation systems.
Regular supplier due diligence and contingency plans are in place to ensure operations can continue in the event of a supplier failure.
Decrease in risk Contingency plans have been enhanced.
Health and safety standards are compromised Risk assessments are completed documented and regularly reviewed for each location.
Staff training both during induction and on an ongoing basis the appointment of fire marshals and trained first aiders and the maintenance of appropriate accident reporting procedures safeguard our staff and guests.
Decrease in risk An improved regime of regular health and safety meetings and an increased focus on fire risk have been introduced.
Failure to comply with new GDPR requirements A detailed assessment of the readiness of the business has been performed and an action plan to address identified issues is being actively managed with the help of appropriate external advisers.
New risk Bimonthly meetings in place to address new GDPR requirements implementation date May 2018.
See also note 3 to the financial statements for further information on financial risks.
This Strategic Report has been approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 5 December 2017 and was signed on its behalf by Marc Vieilledent Chief Financial Officer 5 December 2017 11 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governance 13 Board of Directors 14 Chairmans corporate governance report 15 Directors report 16 Audit Committee report 17 Remuneration report 20 Statement of responsibilities 12 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Marc Vieilledent Chief Financial Officer Marc is a French Certified Public Accountant having previously qualified with Price Waterhouse.
Marc joined the Company following 16 years at Accor SA where he worked until 2013 with his most recent role being Executive Vice President of Asset Management.
Marc has previously served as a NonExecutive Director of the French shopping centre real estate owner Immochan SA.
Marc was appointed as easyHotels Chief Financial Officer in May 2015.
Guy Parsons
Chief Executive Officer
Guy has 27 years of hotel and leisure industry experience.
Having worked at divisional board level for Accor UK and Whitbread he joined the board of Travelodge in 2004 and was promoted to Chief Executive Officer in 2010 leading the successful growth of the business to over 500 hotels in the UK Ireland and Spain.
Guy is also a NonExecutive Director of the Yorkshire Building Society.
Guy was appointed as easyHotels Chief Executive Officer in August 2015.
Jonathan Lane OBE NonExecutive Chairman Jonathan a Chartered Surveyor was NonExecutive Chairman of Shaftesbury PLC a FTSE 250 real estate investment trust until his retirement in September 2016.
Until 201 1 he was Shaftesburys Chief Executive.
Jonathan is Vice President of the Tennis Foundation and a Trustee of the Royal Theatrical Support Trust.
Jonathan was appointed as a NonExecutive Director of the Company in June 2014 and became NonExecutive Chairman in July 2015.
He is a member of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Scott Christie NonExecutive Director Scott qualified as a Chartered Accountant with Coopers and Lybrand.
He went on to spend ten years in senior financial and change management roles with Diageo plc.
He then joined Macdonald Hotels PLC as Group Finance Director and then Chief Operating Officer.
Since then Scott has held a number of roles in private equitybacked technology and healthcare businesses.
Scott was appointed as a NonExecutive Director of the Company in June 2014 and chairs both the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Board of Directors The Company currently has four Directors of whom two are independent NonExecutives.
13 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 The Board is committed to effective corporate governance as the basis for delivering longterm value growth and is meeting shareholder expectations for proper leadership and oversight of the business.
Accordingly the Board has adopted processes which reflect the principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code and QCA Corporate Governance Guidelines for Smaller Quoted Companies.
Not all of the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code are appropriate to easyHotel and accordingly the Company does not comply fully with the Code electing instead to adopt practices that are proportional and reflect the Companys culture and circumstances including size complexity and risk.
As the business continues to develop those practices will evolve and for this reason governance arrangements are kept under review.
The Board The Board comprises two Executive Directors together with two NonExecutive Directors.
Our Directors biographical details can be found on page 13.
Both NonExecutive Directors are considered to be independent and free from any material business or other relationships which could materially interfere with the exercise of their independent judgement.
The Board is responsible for the overall strategy of the business and oversight of the Companys performance risks financial matters and other significant issues.
The Companys strategy is summarised on page 6 and elsewhere in the Strategic Report.
Supported by the Company Secretary the Board meets monthly and its agendas are set to focus on strategy and key decisions and to enable proper monitoring and oversight of the business to be undertaken.
There is a schedule of matters which are reserved for the Board and documentation in place to clarify the nature and extent of delegations.
In particular the division of responsibility between the Chairman who is responsible for leading the Board and its governance of the Company and the Chief Executive Officer who is responsible for management of the business and delivery of the Companys strategy is clear.
The Board has formally evaluated its performance and effectiveness and during the year an action plan was developed to address issues identified as part of the evaluation process.
The overall conclusion reached was that as a unit the Board operates effectively.
Under its leadership the business has made significant progress during the year and has a clear strategy in place to accelerate that growth.
A key reason for this success has been the Boards focus on ensuring the Company employs the right people and has access to the necessary skills and resources to deliver its objectives.
Committees
The Board has established an Audit Committee comprising the Companys two NonExecutive Directors which is chaired by Chartered Accountant Scott Christie who has recent and relevant financial experience both as a result of his formal qualifications and his roles elsewhere.
The Committee is responsible for oversight of the Companys financial statements risk management audit and auditor relationship and internal controls and procedures.
The Audit Committee supported by the Company Secretary plans appropriately on an annual basis in order to enable it to discharge its duties as set out in its terms of reference.
A more detailed report from the Audit Committee can be found on page 16.
The Board has also established a Remuneration Committee to oversee remuneration policy and determine the remuneration and benefits of the Companys Executive Directors as well as other terms relevant to their appointment.
This Committee also comprises the Companys two NonExecutive Directors and is chaired by Scott Christie.
Amongst other things during the year the Committee has taken external advice on the Companys share based incentive plans and has made recommendations to the Board to ensure that relevant performance targets are aligned with the Companys strategy and are sufficiently stretching.
Further details of the Remuneration Committees work and the Companys remuneration arrangements can be found on pages 17 to 19.
Approval of the Remuneration Report will be sought at the Companys AGM.
The Board has chosen not to establish a Nomination Committee and instead deals with such matters including succession planning and reviewing the balance of the Board itself.
Shareholder relationships As well as through formal events such as the AGM and the presentation of the annual and halfyear results the Board primarily through the Executive Directors seeks to build a constructive and transparent dialogue with the Companys shareholders in order to appreciate better shareholders views and expectations and to enhance investors understanding of the Companys strategy and how that strategy will be delivered and implemented.
Information on the Companys investor relations website is kept updated and provides details of relevant developments regulatory announcements key forthcoming dates and the results of general meetings.
Board attendance The Directors of the Company are committed to sound governance of the business and they each devote sufficient time to ensure this happens.
The table below sets out the attendance statistics for each Director at Board and where relevant Committee meetings held during the financial year.
Director
Board attendance 10 meetings held
Committee attendance 3 meetings held
Committee attendance 6 meetings held Scott Christie 10 3 6 Jonathan Lane OBE 10 3 6 Guy Parsons 10 Marc Vieilledent 10 Chairmans corporate governance report 14 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governance The Directors are pleased to submit their report on easyHotel plc for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 .
Review of the business The Group is required to set out a fair review of the business and future developments of the Group during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 and the position of the Group at the year end.
This information can be found in the Chairmans Statement on page 3 the Chief Executive Officers Review on pages 4 and 5 and the Chief Financial Officers Review on page 8 and in the rest of the report.
Postyearend developments easyHotel Liverpool opened in November 201 7 adding a further 78 rooms to the network.
On 30 October 2017  the Group announced the acquisition of a site in Cardiff to develop a new 120room freehold easyHotel subject to planning permission this was followed by the announcement on 15 November 2017 of the takeover of a 25year lease of the 104room Tune hotel in Newcastle opening as an easyHotel in December 201 7 .
Finally on 16 November 201 7 the Group announced a further 162 rooms two hotels under development in The Hague and Maastricht to open in the second half of 2018.
Dividends
A final dividend of 0.22p per ordinary share has been recommended by the Directors for the financial year ended 30 September 2017 .
Subject to approval at the Companys Annual General Meeting the dividend will be paid on 15 February 2018 to all shareholders on the register on 19 January 2018.
This is in addition to the interim dividend of 0.
1 1p per share already paid resulting in a total dividend for the year of 0.33p per ordinary share.
Charitable and political donations There were no charitable or political donations made during the financial year ended 30 September 2017 .
Directors indemnity provisions As permitted by the Articles of Association the Directors have the benefit of an indemnity which is a qualifying third party indemnity provision as defined by s236 of the Companies Act 2006.
The indemnity was in force throughout the financial period and at the date of approval of the financial statements.
The Group also purchased and maintained throughout the financial period Directors and Officers liability insurance in respect of itself and its Directors.
Auditors
BDO LLP have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditors and a resolution to reappoint BDO LLP will be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
Corporate governance statement The Chairmans Corporate Governance Report which describes the practices and responsibilities of the Board and its Committees can be found on page 14.
Financial risk management objectives and policies Further information has been set out in note 3 to the financial statements.
Disclosure of information to auditors All of the current Directors have taken all the steps they ought to have taken to make themselves aware of any information needed by the Companys auditors for the purposes of their audit and to establish that the auditors are aware of that information.
The Directors are not aware of any relevant information of which the auditors are unaware.
This Directors Report has been approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 5 December 2017 and was signed on its behalf by Marc Vieilledent
Directors
The Directors who served during the year ended 30 September 2017 were as follows Jonathan Lane OBE NonExecutive Chairman Scott Christie NonExecutive Director
Guy Parsons Chief Executive Officer
Marc Vieilledent Chief Financial Officer Directors report 15 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Audit Committee The Audit Committee members are Scott Christie who is its Chairman and Jonathan Lane OBE.
Scott is a Chartered Accountant who has recent and relevant financial experience.
The Committee is supported by the Company Secretary and held three meetings during the year ended 30 September 2017 .
The Groups external auditors and Executive Directors attend the Committees meetings by invitation and the Committee ensures that the auditors also have regular opportunities to speak to the Committee in the absence of management.
The Committees agendas are planned on an annual basis to ensure all the Committees duties are discharged in a timely manner in accordance with its terms of reference.
As the Group has no separate risk committee the Audit Committee also has responsibility for oversight of the Groups risk management activities and these areas are reported on pages 10 and 1 1.
The Audit Committee also reviews arrangements for colleagues to report matters of concern in confidence and to detect fraud as well as the Groups ethical and anticorruption policies.
The Audit Committees terms of reference which clearly set out its responsibilities and procedures are available on the Group website.
Financial statements During the year the Committee reviewed both the annual and halfyear financial statements.
The audit plan including its scope was discussed with the external auditors as were the findings from their audit work.
In particular the auditors views on the Groups results and accounting policies and the adequacy of financial controls any unadjusted audit differences postyear end events and management responses and materiality judgements were examined and following consideration and discussion were considered satisfactory.
The Audit Committee paid particular attention to those risks that were considered to be significant either because of the nature of the Companys activities or because they generally apply to all businesses.
These risks included revenue recognition management override and capitalisation of hotel development costs.
The Audit Committee satisfied itself through discussion of the audit plan and financial controls that these risks were adequately addressed.
Auditor objectivity The Committee recognises the importance of auditor objectivity and independence in providing assurance to investors about the integrity of the Groups financial statements.
The Committee receives information in writing from the auditors on their fees audit and nonaudit and the firms internal procedures to ensure that the independence of the firm including that of its audit staff audit manager and audit partner is reviewed and properly assessed.
The Committee has discussed and appropriately challenged such issues with the audit partner and deemed the responses to be satisfactory.
BDOs audit partner was rotated in 2016.
The Committee has considered whether an audit retender should be recommended to the Board but concluded that a recommendation at this time for the reappointment of BDO LLP as the Companys auditors was in the Companys best interests.
The Committee will continue to keep matters under review.
Audit Committee report 16 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governance As an AIM company easyHotel plc is not required to comply with Schedule 8 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
However the Board is committed to transparency of its remuneration arrangements and accordingly an expanded disclosure has been provided on a voluntary basis in order to provide shareholders with an overview of our remuneration practices.
The content of this report is unaudited unless stated.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is made up of the Companys NonExecutive Directors Scott Christie who chairs the Committee and Jonathan Lane OBE.
The Committee reviews the performance of the Executive Directors and sets the scale and structure of their remuneration and the basis of their service agreements with due regard to the interests of shareholders and to the pay and conditions of other Group staff members.
The Committee seeks support from external advisers as necessary and during the year Deloitte continued to advise the Committee on its review of certain elements of the Groups incentive arrangements.
No other services were provided by Deloitte to the Group during the year.
The Remuneration Committee also makes recommendations to the Board concerning the structure of the Groups bonus and longterm incentive schemes the awards made under such plans and the performance conditions attached to them.
During the year ended 30 September 2017  the Committee met six times.
The Remuneration Committees terms of reference are available on the Companys website.
Remuneration policy The objective of the Groups remuneration policy is to ensure that the overall remuneration of the Executive Directors is aligned with the strategy performance and risk tolerance of the Group whilst preserving an appropriate balance of profit delivery and shareholder value.
The overall arrangements are designed to support the delivery of the Companys longterm strategic goals.
The remuneration arrangements for Executive Directors consist of basic salary payment in lieu of pension contribution annual performance related bonuses and longterm performance share awards.
In common with other employees the Executive Directors are also entitled to participate in the easyHotel plc ShareSave Plan note 27.
In determining the remuneration of the Executive Directors the Remuneration Committee seeks to enable the Group to attract retain and motivate Executives of the highest calibre but without paying more than is necessary for this purpose.
During the year a 7 .74% basic salary increase was awarded to the Chief Financial
A 10% increase was awarded to the Chief Executive Officer in February 2017  this being the first pay increase awarded to him in the 18 months since his appointment.
The Remuneration Committee has worked to establish performance related incentives that support the delivery of easyHotels strategic goals ensuring that individual rewards are linked to clear and stretching corporate and individual targets.
These performance related elements of pay described further on the following page are intended to represent a significant proportion of each Executive Directors overall remuneration.
Annual bonus The annual bonus payable for 2017 was based upon achievement of EBITDA and profit before tax targets together with new hotel developments.
Details of the payments made are provided on page 19.
In addition the Remuneration Committee determined that an additional discretionary oneoff bonus of 33% of basic salary should be paid to the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer in April 2017 in recognition of the successful 38m placing in October 2016 made at a substantial premium to prevailing market rates and also their contribution to securing the Companys successful bank refinancing at the same time.
When reviewing the basis for annual bonus awards for 2018 the Committee has determined that at this stage in the Groups development an appropriate emphasis for the performance measures will be delivery of EBITDA and PBT targets and measurable development growth in both the owned and franchised hotel elements of the Groups portfolio.
For ontarget performance Executive Directors will be rewarded with a cash bonus equivalent to 50% of base salary with a 100% bonus being the maximum payable in the event that stretch targets are achieved.
Performance Share Plan Upon the recommendation of the Committee the Board has previously established the easyHotel Performance Share Plan in 2015.
This plan enables conditional share awards to be granted which are subject to achievement of performance criteria typically measured over a threeyear performance period.
Awards of up to 200% of salary can be granted under the plan however it is expected that normal awards will be capped at 100% of salary.
Remuneration report
17 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Performance Share Plan continued 2016 awards The performance criteria for the awards made under the easyHotel Performance Share Plan in 2016 were based on performance over the 2016 2017 and 2018 financial years and are summarised in the table below.
Weighting
30% 30% 20% 10% 10% Shareholder returns Rooms Profitability Absolute TSR
Cumulative franchised rooms approved for development ROCE on mature owned properties Group net
Vesting of element on straight line basis Performance is below threshold level Nil Threshold level performance is achieved 30% Performance is on target 65% Performance achieves or exceeds stretch target 100% 2017 awards At the time of the Companys issue of new capital completed in October 2016 the Remuneration Committee undertook that having generated momentum in the Companys development programme the award under the Performance Share Plan would be subject predominantly 75% minimum to earnings per share performance targets and that future awards would be subject to shareholder approval.
The performance criteria for the awards made under the Performance Share Plan in 2017 were based on performance over the 2017  2018 and 2019 financial years and are summarised in the table below.
Weighting
80% 10% 10% Earnings per share Cumulative owned rooms in operation Cumulative franchised rooms in operation Vesting of element on straight line basis Performance is below threshold Nil Threshold level performance is achieved 35% Performance is on target 65% Performance achieves or exceeds stretch target 100% It is expected that there will be a further award under the Performance Share Plan in 201718 but the Remuneration Committee has not yet determined the precise terms that will apply.
Details will be disclosed at the time of grant and will be subject to shareholder approval.
Executive Directors service contracts The Executive Directors have service contracts setting out the terms of their employment.
In each case the contract may be terminated on six months notice.
NonExecutive Directors Remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Board as a whole with the relevant NonExecutive Director taking no part in the discussions or decision in relation to his own fees.
The NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to annual bonuses or employee benefits.
Each of the NonExecutive Directors has a letter of appointment stating amongst other things annual fees the time commitment expected for the role and that the appointment may be terminated by either party giving one months prior written notice.
Remuneration report continued 18 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governance Directors remuneration in  audited To aid shareholders understanding in the table below we provide the remuneration for each Director.
Year ended 30 September 2017
Payment in lieu of pension
Termination payments Other payments
NonExecutive Chairman Jonathan Lane OBE 75000     75000 Executive Directors Guy Parsons 224000 22400 216909  1484 464793 Marc Vieilledent 181000 18100 169959  1293 370352 NonExecutive Directors Scott Christie 40000     40000 Total Directors remuneration for the year ended 30 September 2017 520000 40500 386868  2777 950145 The Companys Chief Executive Officer Guy Parsons holds a nonexecutive directorship detailed on page 13 with one other company and is permitted to retain the fees received in respect of this appointment.
Directors interests as at 30 September 2017
Guy Parsons 226885 0.22 Scott Christie 89700 0.08 Jonathan Lane OBE 448000 0.44 Marc Vieilledent 10000 0.009 A further purchase of 105000 ordinary shares on 10 October 2017 increased Jonathan Lanes interests in the Companys shares to 553000 ordinary shares 0.55%.
As at 30 September 201 7  the interests of the Directors in ordinary shares pursuant to options granted under the Performance Share Plan were as follows Option holder
30 September Shares under option granted during the year Lapsed during the year
30 September Guy Parsons 470324 233333  703657 Marc Vieilledent 376259 201111  577370 More information on the easyHotel Performance Share Plan can be seen in note 27 to the financial statements.
As at 30 September 2017  the interests of the Directors in ordinary shares pursuant to options granted under the easyHotel ShareSave Plan detailed further in note 27 were as follows Option holder
30 September Shares under option granted during the year Lapsed during the year
30 September Guy Parsons  20361  20361 Marc Vieilledent  20361  20361 19 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Internal control The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups internal control systems and for reviewing the effectiveness of the systems taking into account the size of the Group and the nature of its activities.
Such systems are only designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure and will only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Going concern In considering the going concern basis for preparing the financial statements the Directors have considered the Groups objectives and strategy the risks and uncertainties to achieving the objectives and the review of the business performance all of which are set out in the Strategic Report section of this report and accounts.
The Groups liquidity and funding arrangements are set out in notes 17 and 19 to the financial statements.
The Directors consider that the Group has significant cash and borrowing facilities for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly after reviewing the Groups expenditure commitments current financial projections and expected future cash flows together with available cash resources and undrawn committed borrowing facilities the Directors have considered that adequate resources exist for the Group to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
On this basis the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the annual report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group and Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
The Directors are also required to prepare financial statements in accordance with the rules of the London Stock Exchange for companies trading securities on AIM.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Website publication The Directors are responsible for ensuring the annual report and the financial statements are made available on a website.
Financial statements are published on the Companys website in accordance with legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements which may vary from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The maintenance and integrity of the Companys website is the responsibility of the Directors.
The Directors responsibility also extends to the ongoing integrity of the financial statements contained therein.
Further information and investor updates can be found on our website at httpir.
Statement of responsibilities 20 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Governance Financial statements 22 Independent auditors report 25 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 26 Consolidated statement of financial position 27 Consolidated statement of cash flows 28 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 29 Company statement of financial position 30 Company statement of cash flows 31 Company statement of changes in equity 32 Notes forming part of the financial statements 55 Directors Secretary and advisers 21 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Opinion We have audited the financial statements of easyHotel plc the parent company and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 30 September 201 7 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated statement of changes in equity the consolidated and Company statements of financial position the consolidated and Company cash flow statements and notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group and parent company financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the Directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the Directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the Groups or the parent companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud we identified including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
The following matter was identified by us as the most significant assessed risk of material misstatement Revenue recognition  deferral of revenue and change in revenue systems As noted in the Strategic Report the Group has implemented new revenue management systems in the period and this has involved a change in the systems and processes used to record revenue data.
The accounting policy for revenue recognition is explained in note 2 to the financial statements. easyHotel or their franchise partners receive cash in advance of the customer stay which results in significant deferred revenue balances.
The systems in place capture all relevant data including receipts value and stay dates and calculates the appropriate revenue and deferred income balances at each reporting date.
An error in the underlying data could lead to inappropriate recognition of revenue.
The change in revenue systems during the year created a heightened risk that data had not been appropriately captured during the transition between systems and increased the risk of revenue recognition errors.
To address the risk of data migration issues as a result of the change in system our IT audit specialists reconciled the extracted data sets from the old revenue system to the new one and significant variances were investigated.
In addition we confirmed that all deferred income balances were for stay dates after the period end including reviewing these positions at the point of system migration.
22 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of easyHotel plc Key audit matters continued Revenue recognition  deferral of revenue and change in revenue systems continued To address the risk of inappropriate revenue recognition at year end we reconciled all cash receipts during the year with revenue recognised and the corresponding deferred income balance and tested the year end deferred income balance on a sample basis.
In addition we confirmed with franchisees the revenue for the year and the corresponding royalties which supported the period end deferred income balances.
Our application of materiality and overview of the scope of our audit The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality which together with qualitative considerations help us to determine the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement areas and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
The Groups business is in a development stage and recent acquisitions and development of sites have resulted in significant assets which are not yet income generating.
In these circumstances we assess materiality for the financial statements as a whole to be 520000 based on 1% of total assets excluding long term deposits.
However we used a lower specific materiality of 121000 which represents 5% of adjusted EBITDA for the trading related items included within the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and related balances in the consolidated statement of financial position.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 6000.
The Group includes one trading subsidiary easyHotel UK Limited and an entity which is currently in the process of constructing a hotel easyHotel Spain S.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we completed a full scope audit on easyHotel UK Limited and performed desk top review procedures and specific audit procedures on easyHotel Spain S.
The Group audit team obtained an understanding of the internal control environment related to the financial reporting process and assessed the appropriateness completeness and accuracy of Group journals and other adjustments performed on consolidation.
Other information The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report or the Directors Report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
23 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Responsibilities of Directors As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement as set out in the Directors Report the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Mark RA Edwards Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of BDO LLP Statutory Auditor London UK 5 December 2017 BDO LLP is a limited liability partnership registered in England and Wales with registered number OC.
24 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of easyHotel plc 2017 2016
System sales 29672176 21315210 Revenue 4 8416257 6024255 Cost of sales 3257780 2150528 Gross profit 5158477 3873727 Administrative expenses 4477957 2832382 Operating profit 5 680520 1041345 Analysed as Adjusted EBITDA 2300283 1551092 Nonrecurring items 5 398464 187105 Hotel preopening and development costs 5 217934 89157 Depreciation and amortisation 831414 446518 Share based payments 171951 161177 680520 1041345 Finance income 8 270992 248934 Finance expense 9 91193 200078 Profit before taxation 860319 1090201 Taxation 10 217458 213429 Profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the Company 642861 876772 Other comprehensive income Items that will or may be reclassified to profit or loss Exchange loss arising on retranslation of foreign operations 78958 Total comprehensive income attributable to equity holders of the Company 563903 876772 Earnings per share for profit attributable to the ordinary equity holders of the Company Basic pence 11 0.7 1.4 Diluted pence 11 0.7 1.4 System sales is a nonstatutory measure and represents the full amount that the customer pays for our owned and operated hotels as well as in respect of franchiseeowned and operated hotels excluding VAT and similar taxes.
It also includes initial signon fees paid by franchisees to the Company.
Adjusted EBITDA is a nonstatutory measure that represents earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation adjusted for preopening costs related to the development of hotels organisational restructuring costs share based payments and other nonrecurring items see note 5 for details.
The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
25 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year ended 30 Septembertel
Assets
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 13 51141920 30463074 Intangible assets 14 1014325 149433 Longterm deposits 15 Total noncurrent assets Current assets Trade and other receivables 16 2723821 1243243 Cash and cash equivalents 17 33255253 13659018 Total current assets Total assets
Noncurrent liabilities Trade and other payables 18 376928 85679 Bank borrowings 19 Deferred tax liability 20 351488 193792 Total noncurrent liabilities Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 5804807 4706215 Bank borrowings 19 360000 7200000 Corporate taxation 31003 119314 Total current liabilities Total liabilities 18590315 12305000 Total net assets
Equity attributable to owners of the Company Share capital 21 1005000 625000 Share premium 22 64775791 28592036 Merger reserve 22 2750001 2750001 Employee Benefit Trust EBT reserve 22 1067405 1067405 Currency translation reserve 22 78958 Retained earnings 22 Total equity The financial statements on pages 22 to 54 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 5 December 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Marc Vieilledent
The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
26 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Consolidated statement of financial position as at 30 September 2017 Company numbertel 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Profit before taxation for the year 860319 1090201 Adjustments for Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 239615 282675 Depreciation and amortisation 831414 446518 Share based payment charge 171951 161177 Finance income 206999 248934 Finance expense 91193 200078 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 1987493 1366365 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 928125 48692 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables 1449051 503052 Cash generated from operations 2508419 912005 Corporation tax paid 148667 21887 Net cash flows from operating activities 2359752 890118 Interest received 194743 156351 Interest paid 337599 200078 Net cash generated from operations 2216896 846391 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment and intangibles 22709420 9227574 Proceeds from property plant and equipment  590009 VAT on investing activities 415660 1007908 Net cash used in investing activities 23125080 9645473 Financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary share capital 38000000 Capitalised costs related to issue of ordinary share capital 1436245 Dividends paid 327939 270049 Repayment of loans 7560000 Net proceeds from new loans 11890176 Net cash generated fromin financing activities 40565992 270049 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 19657808 9069131 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year 13659018 22635566 Exchange lossesgains on cash and cash equivalents 61573 92583 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 33255253 13659018 The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
27 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Currency Share Share Merger EBT translation Retained capital premium reserve reserve reserve earnings Total
At 30 September 2015 625000 28592036 2750001 1067405  1542236 32441868 Total comprehensive income for the year      876772 876772 Share based payment charge 27      161177 161177 Dividends paid      270049 270049 At 30 September 2016 625000 28592036 2750001 1067405  2310136 33209768 Profit for the year      642861 642861 Other comprehensive income     78958  78958 Total comprehensive income for the year     78958 642861 563903 Share based payment charge 27      171951 171951 Dividends paid      327939 327939 Issue of shares 380000 36183755     36563755 At 30 September 2017 1005000 64775791 2750001 1067405 78958 2797009 70181438 The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
28 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 Septembertel
Assets
Noncurrent assets Investment 28 3825683 3825683 Loan to related companies 28 67210995 29911292 Loan to Employee Benefit Trust 28 1300000 1300000 Deferred tax 20 20773 Total noncurrent assets 72357451 35036975 Total assets 72357451 35036975
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 325384 302878 Total current liabilities 325384 302878 Total liabilities 325384 302878 Total net assets 72032067 34734097
Equity attributable to owners of the Company Share capital 21 1005000 625000 Other reserves 22 3575683 3575683 Share premium 22 64775791 28592036 Retained earnings 22 Total equity The Company has taken up its exemption for filing an individual profit and loss account according to s468 of the Companies Act 2016.
For the year ended 30 September 2017 the Company made a profit of 890203 2016 1308861.
The financial statements on pages 22 to 54 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 5 December 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Marc Vieilledent
The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
29 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Company statement of financial position as at 30 September 2017 Company numbertel 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Profit before tax for the year 869430 1308861 Adjustments for Share based payment charge 171951 161177 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 1041381 1470038 Increase in amount due from subsidiary 1063887 1704375 Increase in trade and other payables 22506 234337 Net cash used in operations Net increase in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year During the year the net proceeds as the result of the issue of ordinary share capital of 36563755 was paid directly to a subsidiary of the Company.
Includes a 2000000 dividend received from its subsidiary easyHotel UK Ltd 2016 2600000.
Includes a dividend of 327 939 paid by easyHotel UK Ltd on behalf of easyHotel plc 2016 270049.
The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
30 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Company statement of cash flows for the year ended 30 September 2017 Share Other Share Retained capital reserve premium earnings Total
At 30 September 2015 625000 3575683 28592036 741389 33534108 Dividends paid    270049 270049 Share based payment charge 27    161177 161177 Total comprehensive income for the year    1308861 1308861 At 30 September 2016 625000 3575683 28592036 1941378 34734097 Dividends paid    327939 327939 Issue of shares 380000  36183755  36563755 Share based payment charge 27    171951 171951 Total comprehensive income for the year    890203 890203 At 30 September 2017 1005000 3575683 64775791 2675593 72032067 The notes on pages 32 to 54 form part of these financial statements.
31 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Company statement of changes in equity for the year ended 30 September 2017 1 Statement of compliance easyHotel plc the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries easyHotel UK Ltd and easyHotel Spain S. operator and franchisor of easyHotel branded hotels.
The Company is a public limited company whose shares are listed on AIM under the ticker symbol EZH and is incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The address of the registered office is 80 Old Street London EC1V 9AZ.
The consolidated and parent company accounts are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union taking into account IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations and those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
2 Significant accounting policies Basis of preparation The accounts are prepared based on the historical cost convention.
The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all years presented in these accounts unless otherwise stated.
The Company has taken up its exemption for filing an individual profit and loss account according to section 408 of the Companies Act 2006.
The Companys profit or loss for the financial year has been approved by the Directors in accordance with section 414 of the Companies Act 2006 total comprehensive income for the year ended 30 September 2017 of 890203 and total comprehensive income of 1308861 for the year ended 30 September 2016.
The accounts have been prepared on a going concern basis as the Group generates net profits on an annual basis and has sufficient cash reserves in place to continue operating for the foreseeable future.
Details on going concern are provided in the Statement of Responsibilities on page 20.
All amounts are presented in Pound Sterling GBP  except where otherwise indicated.
Basis of consolidation The consolidated accounts incorporate those of easyHotel plc and its subsidiaries for the years ended 30 September 2016 and 2017 .
The financial statements of the subsidiaries are prepared for the same reporting period as the parent company using consistent accounting policies.
On acquisition of its subsidiary easyHotel UK Ltd merger accounting was the basis of consolidation.
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised gains and losses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated accounts.
Investment in subsidiary easyHotel plc has an investment in easyHotel UK Ltd a wholly owned subsidiary of 3825683 2016 3825683.
This investment is held at cost less any reasonable provisions for impairment against the investment of which there are currently none. easyHotel UK Ltd has an investment in easyHotel Spain S. a wholly owned subsidiary of 7 583664 2016 2358.
This investment is held within easyHotel UK Ltd at cost less any reasonable provisions for impairment against the investment of which there are currently none.
The investment eliminates out for the purpose of the consolidation.
Employee Benefit Trust EBT The EBTs assets other than investments in the Companys shares liabilities income and expenses are included on a linebyline basis in the consolidated financial statements and its investment in the Companys shares is deducted from equity in the consolidated statement of financial position as if they were treasury shares.
The EBT is not consolidated in the Companys own financial statements but the Company recognises any transactions between itself and the EBT in accordance with the relevant accounting policy.
Foreign currency The primary economic environment in which a subsidiary operates determines its functional currency.
The consolidated accounts of easyHotel are presented in Sterling which is the Companys functional currency and the Groups presentation currency.
Transactions arising in foreign currencies are recorded using the rate of exchange ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling using the rate of exchange ruling at the balance sheet date and the gains or losses on translation are included in the income statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Sterling at foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates the transactions were effected.
On consolidation the results of overseas operations are translated into British Pounds at rates approximating to those ruling when the transactions took place.
All assets and liabilities of overseas operations are translated at the rate ruling at the reporting date.
Exchange differences arising on translating the opening net assets at opening rate and the results of overseas operations at actual rate are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the currency translation reserve.
32 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements for the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued System sales System sales arises from the sale of goods and the provision of services where these activities give rise to economic benefits received and receivable by the Company and its franchisees.
System sales is the full amount that the customer pays for our owned and operated hotels as well as fees in respect of franchiseeowned and operated hotels excluding VAT and similar taxes including initial signon fees paid by franchisees to the Company.
Revenue
Revenue arises from the provision of services where these activities give rise to economic benefits received and receivable by the Company on its own account and result in increases in equity.
Revenue is the full amount that the customer pays for our owned and operated hotels plus fees that we charge to our franchisees excluding VAT and similar taxes.
Provided the amount if applicable can be measured reliably and it is probable that the Company will receive the consideration revenue for services is recognised as follows Owned  primarily derived from hotel operations including the rental of rooms and ad hoc utility services sales from owned hotels operated under the easy brand name.
Revenue is recognised when rooms are occupied and ad hoc utility services are provided.
Franchise fees  received in connection with the licence of the Companys brand name usually under longterm contracts with the hotel owner.
The Company charges franchise royalty fees and processing fees as a percentage of room revenue and in some cases receives an upfront fee on the grant of a franchise.
Revenue is earned and recognised when the customer has occupied the room at the franchisees operated hotel accommodation.
Upfront fees are generally recognised immediately as an initial signon income with portions relating to legal contractual marketing or similar items recognised over the period from signing to opening.
Where upfront fees specifically relate to exclusivity these fees are recognised over the franchisee exclusivity period.
Consideration received in advance for which the revenue recognition criteria above have not been satisfied are deferred until such time as the revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied.
Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA is a nonstatutory measure that represents earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation adjusted for preopening costs related to the development of hotels organisational restructuring costs share based payments and other nonrecurring items.
Intangible assets Intangible assets are initially recognised at cost and subsequently amortised so as to write off their carrying value less their residual value on a straight line basis over the expected useful lives of the assets as follows Website and systems development costs  over 5 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Intangible assets are reviewed for indicators of impairment where their value is lower than their recoverable value.
Any impairment in value is charged to the statement of comprehensive income.
Property plant and equipment Items of property plant and equipment are initially recognised at cost and subsequently stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and where appropriate provision for impairment in value.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is provided on all other items of property plant and equipment so as to write off their carrying value less their residual value over their expected useful economic lives.
It is provided at the following rates Building core over 50 years Building surface finishes over 20 years Plant and machinery over 815 years Furniture and equipment over 35 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Property plant and equipment are reviewed for indicators of impairment where their value is greater than their recoverable value.
Any impairment in value is charged to the statement of comprehensive income.
33 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued Financial assets The Company has not classified any of its financial assets at fair value through profit or loss as available for sale or as held to maturity.
The Companys accounting policy for loans and receivables is as follows The Companys loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents in the Company statement of financial position.
These assets are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of goods and services to customers e. asset.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Cash and cash equivalents include cash in hand cash in transit restricted cash deposits held at call with banks and other shortterm highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as significant financial difficulties on the part of the counterparty or default or significant delay in payment that the Company will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the difference between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash flows associated with the impaired receivable.
For trade receivables which are reported net such provisions are recorded in a separate allowance account with the loss being recognised within administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
On confirmation that the trade receivable will not be collectable the gross carrying value of the asset is written off against the associated provision.
Financial liabilities The Group classifies its financial liabilities depending on the purpose for which the liability was acquired.
The Group has not classified any of its financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
The Groups accounting policy for other financial liabilities is as follows Trade payables and other shortterm monetary liabilities are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Taxation
The current tax is based upon the taxable profit for the period together with adjustments where necessary in respect of prior periods.
The Groups asset or liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the financial year end date.
Current tax is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income except to the extent that it relates to items recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognised where the carrying amount of an asset or liability in the consolidated statement of financial position differs from its tax base.
Recognition of deferred tax assets is restricted to those instances where it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the difference can be utilised.
The amount of the asset or liability is determined using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date and are expected to apply when the deferred tax liabilitiesassets are settledrecovered.
Share capital Financial instruments issued by the Group are classified as equity only to the extent that they do not meet the definition of a financial liability.
The Groups ordinary shares are classified as equity instruments.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised when they become legally payable.
In the case of interim dividends to equity shareholders this is when they are paid by the Directors.
In the case of final dividends this is when approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting AGM.
Segmental reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker has been identified as the Board of Directors.
34 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued Borrowing costs Borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of qualifying assets which are assets that necessarily take a substantial period of time to get ready for their intended use or sale are added to the cost of those assets until such time as the assets are substantially ready for their intended use or sale.
Investment income earned on the temporary investment of specific borrowings if any pending their expenditure on qualifying assets is deducted from the borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred.
Provisions
Provisions are recognised for liabilities of uncertain timing or amounts that have arisen as a result of past transactions and are discounted at a pretax rate reflecting current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the liability.
Standards amendments and interpretations to published standards not yet effective The following standards interpretations and amendments have been published but have not been endorsed by the European Union or are not effective for the periods presented and the Group has chosen not to early adopt.
All standards listed have to be applied at the latest from financial years starting on or after 2 October 2015 unless otherwise stated.
No new standards in the year have had a material impact on the financial statements.
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments from 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases from 1 January 2019 IFRS 14 Regulatory Deferral Accounts from 1 January 2016 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers from 1 January 2018 IFRS 10 Amendment Consolidated Financial Statements from 1 January 2016 IFRS 1 1 Amendment Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations from 1 January 2016 IFRS 12 Amendment Disclosure of Interests in Other Entities from 1 January 2016 IAS 1 Amendment Presentation of Financial Statements from 1 January 2016 IAS 16 Amendment Property Plant and Equipment from 1 January 2016 IAS 27 Amendment Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements from 1 January 2016 IAS 28 Amendment Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures from 1 January 2016 IAS 38 Amendment Intangible Assets from 1 January 2016 Annual improvements to IFRS from 1 January 2016 The Directors have reviewed the new interpretations and amendments in particular IFRS 15 and IFRS 16.
In particular they have reviewed the treatment of certain franchise fees in relation to IFRS 15 and any potential lease arrangements in relation to IFRS 16.
The Directors do not anticipate that the adoption of these standards and interpretations will have a material impact on easyHotels accounts based on the state of operations and assets at 30 September 2017 .
Certain of these standards and interpretations will when adopted require addition to or amendment of disclosures in the accounts.
Critical accounting estimates and judgements The Group makes certain estimates and assumptions regarding the future.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
In the future actual experience may differ from these estimates and assumptions.
The estimates and assumptions that have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are discussed below.
The Group is required to consider assets for impairment where such indicators exist using value in use calculations or fair value estimates.
The use of these methods may require the estimation of future cash flows and the choice of a discount rate in order to calculate the value in use or fair value.
Property plant and equipment are depreciated over their useful lives.
Useful lives are based on the managements estimates for the period that the assets will generate revenue which along with their estimated residual values are periodically reviewed for continued appropriateness.
Changes to estimates can result in significant variations in the carrying value and amounts charged to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in specific periods.
More details including carrying values are included in note 13.
35 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 2 Significant accounting policies continued Critical accounting estimates and judgements continued c Taxation The Group is subject to income tax and significant judgement is required in determining the provision for income taxes.
During the ordinary course of business there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain.
As a result the Group recognises tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due.
These tax liabilities are recognised when the Group believes that certain positions are likely to be challenged and may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities.
The Group believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its assessment of many factors including past experience and interpretations of tax law.
This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgements about future events.
To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different to the amounts recorded such differences will impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
3 Financial instruments  risk management The Group and the Company are exposed through their operations to the following financial risks credit risk interest rate risk foreign exchange risk and liquidity risk.
In common with all other businesses the Group and the Company are exposed to risks that arise from their use of financial instruments.
This note describes the Group and the Companys objectives policies and processes for managing those risks and the methods used to measure them.
Further quantitative information in respect of these risks is presented throughout these financial statements.
There have been no substantial changes in the Group and the Companys exposure to financial instrument risks their objectives policies and processes for managing those risks or the methods used to measure them from previous periods unless otherwise stated in this note.
Principal financial instruments The principal financial instruments used by the Group and the Company from which financial instrument risk arises are as follows trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents trade and other payables and loans and borrowings.
A summary of the financial instruments held by category is provided below Group Group Company Companytel 2016 Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 33255253 13659018 Trade receivables 93591 20941 Amounts due from franchisees 1004939 Accrued income Related party loan   67210995 29911292 Longterm deposits 636434 Total financial assets classified as loans and receivables 35006218 13679959 67210995 29911292 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 3191029 2765141 325384 302878 Bank borrowings 12026089 7200000 Total financial liabilities classified as amortised cost 15217118 9965141 325384 302878 Financial instruments measured at fair value No financial instruments are measured at fair value accordingly no hierarchy information is presented.
36 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 3 Financial instruments  risk management continued General objectives policies and processes The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Group and the Companys financial instrument risk management objectives and policies and whilst retaining ultimate responsibility for them it has delegated the authority for designing and operating processes that ensure the effective implementation of the objectives and policies to the Groups finance function.
The Board receives reports from the Groups finance function through which it reviews the effectiveness of the processes put in place and the appropriateness of the objectives and policies it sets.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups competitiveness and flexibility.
Further details regarding these policies are set out below.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group and the Company if a customer or a counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations.
On the basis that customers primarily prepay for hotel occupancy and after carefully reviewing the financial performance and forecasts of counterparties to financial instruments as well as holding security over their trading accounts the Group and the Companys exposure to credit risk from trade and other receivables is considered insignificant.
Credit risk also arises from cash and cash equivalents and deposits with banks and financial institutions.
For banks and financial institutions only independently rated parties with minimum rating A are accepted.
The Group and the Company do not enter into derivatives to manage credit risk.
The maximum amount of credit risk exposure is reflected in the carrying amount of financial assets held at the year end excluding cash and cash equivalents of 11 14531 2016 20941.
Market risk Market risk arises from the Group and the Companys use of interest bearing tradable and foreign currency financial instruments.
It is the risk that the fair value or future cash flows of a financial instrument will fluctuate because of changes in interest rates interest rate risk or foreign exchange rates currency risk.
The Company has no fair value and cash flow interest rate risk to disclose.
Interest rate risk The Group is partially funded through bank borrowings.
During the financial year the Group completed the refinancing of its existing 7 200000 bank facility with a new fiveyear facility.
The full 12000000 available was drawn down in November 2016.
Following the first four quarterly repayments of 90000 each the outstanding balance at 30 September 2017 was 1 1640000.
Any amount borrowed bears interest at 2.5% above LIBOR.
In addition the Group arranged an 8250000 Eurodenominated mortgage facility to finance the construction of its new hotel in Barcelona.
As at 30 September 2017  the balance drawn down was 715372.
Any amount borrowed bears interest at 2.25% above oneyear EURIBOR.
A 50basispoint increase in the interest rates would all other variables kept constant have decreased the profit before tax by 57 482 for the year ended 30 September 2017  while a 50basispoint decrease would have increased profit before tax by the same amount.
Foreign exchange risk Foreign exchange risk arises because the Group has franchisees located outside the UK whose functional currency is not the same as the functional currency of the Group and the Group takes bookings on their behalf in foreign currencies.
The Group maintains bank accounts in these currencies to provide a natural hedge.
Foreign exchange risk also arises when the Group enters into transactions denominated in a currency other than its functional currency.
The volume of such transactions is not considered sufficient to warrant hedging the risk exposure.
The Groups policy is where possible to settle liabilities denominated in foreign currency primarily the Euro with the cash generated from its own operations in that currency.
37 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 3 Financial instruments  risk management continued Foreign exchange risk continued The Groups financial assets and financial liabilities were denominated in the following currencies EUR USD CHF AED Total At 30 September 2017 Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 61505  694125 Trade and other receivables Total financial assets Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 573840 Total financial liabilities At 30 September 2016 Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents 872796 288391 197610  1358797 Trade and other receivables  13156   13156 Total financial assets 872796 301547 197610  1371953 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 93008  24692  117700 Total financial liabilities 93008  24692  117700 The effect of a 10% strengthening of the Pound Sterling at the reporting date on the foreigndenominated financial instruments carried at that date would all variables held constant have resulted in a decrease in total comprehensive income for the period and a decrease in net assets of 37 050 2016 20290.
A 10% weakening in the exchange rate would on the same basis have increased total comprehensive income and net assets by 37 050 2016 20290.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk arises from the Group and the Companys management of working capital and the finance charges and principal repayments on their debt instruments.
It is the risk that the Group and the Company will encounter difficulty in meeting their financial obligations as they fall due.
The Group and the Companys policy is to ensure that they will always have sufficient cash to allow them to meet their liabilities when they become due.
To achieve this aim the Group and the Company finance their operations through a mix of equity and borrowings.
The Group and the Companys objective is to provide funding for future growth and achieve a balance between continuity and flexibility through their bank facilities and intergroup loans.
The Group has a 12000000 Sterling bank facility in place which has been fully drawn and an 8250000 Euro facility of which 715372 has been drawn.
The Board receives cash flow projections on a regular basis as well as information regarding cash balances.
At the end of the financial year these projections indicated that the Group and the Company expected to have sufficient liquid resources to meet their obligations under all reasonably expected circumstances.
38 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 3 Financial instruments  risk management continued Liquidity risk continued The following table sets out the contractual maturities representing undiscounted contractual cash flows of financial liabilities
Up to Between Between Between Over 3 months 3 and 12 months 1 and 2 years 2 and 5 years 5 years At 30 September 2017 Trade and other payables 2933688 38752   218589 Bank borrowings
3023688 308752 At 30 September 2016 Trade and other payables 2785510 Bank borrowings 43560 7200000 Total 2829070 7200000
Up to Between Between Between Over 3 months 3 and 12 months 1 and 2 years 2 and 5 years 5 years At 30 September 2017 Trade and other payables 325384 Total 325384 At 30 September 2016 Trade and other payables 302878 Total 302878 More details in regard to the line items are included in the respective notes Trade and other payables  note 18.
Capital disclosures The Group and the Company monitor capital which comprises all components of equity i. share capital share premium and retained earnings.
The Group and the Companys objectives when maintaining capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
The Group and the Company set the amount of capital they require in proportion to risk.
The Group and the Company manage their capital structure and make adjustments to it in light of the changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group and the Company may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
39 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 4 Revenue 2017 2016 Revenue arises from Owned hotel revenue 6489245 4715845 Franchised hotel revenue 1812159 1296104 Other income 114853 12306 8416257 6024255 Includes a franchise agreement termination fee of 150000 2016 Nil and an accelerated fee release of Nil 2016 49130.
5 Operating profit and adjusted EBITDA 2017 2016 The following have been included in arriving at operating profit before tax Auditors remuneration includes Company audit fees 15000 15000 Subsidiary audit fees 34500 29500 Fees for audit related assurance services 20000 20000 Total auditors remuneration 69500 64500 2017 2016 Nonrecurring items from reportable segments include Net accelerated initial fee release  29630 Other nonrecurring items include Net franchise termination proceeds 133060 Recruitment fees 51000 Legal and other costs 167414 44041 Abortive fees 63627 6109 Systems restructuring 9868 75050 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 239615 282675 398464 157475 Total nonrecurring costsincome 398464 187105 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment relates to the partclosure of operations at the Old Street hotel following an adverse planning result 2016 sale of the ground floor unit in the Liverpool property.
2017 2016 Hotel preopening and development costs include Rental income  12306 Preopening operational costs 217934 101463 Total hotel preopening and development costs 217934 89157 Hotel preopening and development costs relate to expenses incurred or income received in running a property prior to commencement of trading as a hotel or otherwise.
Adjusted EBITDA which is a nonstatutory measure is shown on the face of the consolidated statement of comprehensive income as it reflects the profits from underlying operations only and is the best indicator of easyHotels financial performance.
40 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 6 Staff and key management The aggregate amounts payable to people employed by the Group including Directors during the year were as follows Group Group 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 2274488 1831348 Social security costs 271754 208611 Loss of office payments 2546243 2039959 The average number of employees during the year in hotel operations was 32 2016 26.
The average number of employees during the year in head office was 15 2016 12.
The aggregate amounts payable to people employed by the Company including Directors during the year were as follows Company Company 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 816657 809655 Social security costs 108618 100016 Loss of office payments 925275 909671 The average number of employees during the year was 6 2016 6.
Key management personnel compensation Key management personnel are those persons having authority and responsibility for planning directing and controlling the activities of the Group and are considered to be the Directors of the Group.
Amounts disclosed below include social security costs.
2017 2016 Aggregate emoluments 950145 770830 In addition there were total employers National Insurance expenses of 126957 2016 71290.
The remuneration of the highest paid Director amounted to 464793 2016 364350.
Details by Director can be seen in the Remuneration Report page 17.
7 Segment information The Group has two main reportable segments Owned properties  This division is involved in hotel operations carried out in the Groups owned hotels and properties.
Franchising  This division involves the Groups franchised hotel operations in connection with the licence of the Groups brand name.
Factors that management used to identify the Groups reportable segments These segments are considered on the basis of different products and services.
They are managed separately because each business requires different management strategies and poses different business risks.
Measurement of operating segment profit or loss assets and liabilities The accounting policies of the operating segments are the same as those described in the summary of significant accounting policies.
The Group evaluates performance on the basis of adjusted EBITDA which is a nonstatutory measure described in note 2.
Segment assets exclude tax assets.
Segment liabilities exclude tax liabilities.
Even though loans and borrowings arise from finance activities rather than operating activities they are allocated to the segments based on relevant factors e. funding requirements.
Details are provided in the reconciliation from segment assets and liabilities to the Group position.
41 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 7 Segment information continued
At 30 September 2017
Total revenue from external customers 6604098 Adjusted EBITDA 3239960 Profit before taxation excluding preopening costs 2632860 Segment assets 85213653 Segment liabilities 15048156 2335555 17383711
Additions to noncurrent assets 22582910 Disposals of noncurrent assets 239615  239615 Finance income 206999 Finance cost 91193  91193 Depreciation and amortisation 831414  831414 At 30 September 2016
Total revenue from external customers 4728151 1296104 6024255 Adjusted EBITDA 2570677 636385 3207062 Profit before taxation 2014925 666015 2680940 Segment assets 43013707 2174506 45188213 Segment liabilities 9303902 2174506 11478408
Additions to noncurrent assets 10237533  10237533 Disposals of noncurrent assets 307334  307334 Finance income 59341  59341 Finance cost 200078  200078 Depreciation and amortisation 415015  415015 42 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 7 Segment information continued Reconciliation of reportable adjusted EBITDA profit or loss assets and liabilities to the Groups corresponding amounts is shown below 2017 2016 Adjusted EBITDA of reportable segments 4282377 3207062 Adjusted EBITDA of corporate office 1982094 1655970 Total adjusted EBITDA 2300283 1551092 Profit before income tax Total profit of reportable segments 3675277 2680940 Corporate office expenses and net interest 2026609 1497880 Other nonrecurring net costs see note 5 158849 125200 Hotel preopening and development costs 217934 89157 Share based payments 171951 161177 Disposals of noncurrent assets 239615 282675 Profit before tax per statement of comprehensive income 860319 1090201
Total assets for reportable segments 87822063 45188213 Cash in Employee Benefit Trust 1643 1693 Corporate office assets 948047 324862 Total assets per statement of financial position 88771753 45514768
Total liabilities for reportable segments 17383711 11478408 Corporation tax 31003 119314 Corporate office liabilities 824113 513486 Deferred tax liabilities 351488 193792 Total liabilities per statement of financial position 18590315 12305000 Geographical information 2017 2016 Revenue by location United Kingdom 7209316 5144034 Europe 1073830 774413 Rest of the world 133111 105808 8416257 6024255 Total noncurrent assets by location United Kingdom 44828465 29112878 Spain 7964214 1499629 52792679 30612507 43 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 8 Finance income 2017 2016 Finance income Interest income on financial assets measured at amortised cost 206999 59341 Foreign exchange gain 63993 189593 Total finance income recognised in profit or loss 270992 248934 9 Finance expense 2017 2016 Finance expense Interest expense on financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 356165 200078 Amount capitalised 264972 Total finance expense recognised in profit or loss 91193 200078 Interest expense attributable to construction works has been capitalised to property plant and equipment.
10 Income tax 2017 2016 Current tax expense Current tax on profits for the year 55674 148329 Adjustment in respect of prior year 4087 221 Total current tax 59761 148108 Deferred tax expense Deferred tax charge for the year 158455 102010 Adjustment in respect of prior year 19547 2491 Rate change 20305 34198 Total income tax expense 217458 213429 44 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 10 Income tax continued The reasons for the difference between the actual tax charge for the year and the standard rate of corporation tax in the United Kingdom applied to profits for the year are as follows 2017 2016 Profit before tax 860319 1090201 Expected tax charge based on the standard rate of United Kingdom corporation tax at the domestic rate of 19.5% 2016 20.0% 167762 218040 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 65341 68267 Tax losses carried forward  4823 Impact of chargeable gains  40791 Deferred tax on share options 23826 Deferred tax not recognised 4852 Prior year current tax adjustment 4087 221 Prior year deferred tax adjustment 19547 2491 Effect of change in tax rate 20305 34198 Total income tax expense 217458 213429 11 Earnings per share 2017 2016 Number Number Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue excluding those held by the Employee Benefit Trust used as the denominator in calculating basic earnings per share 97709247 Options granted under the Employee ShareSave Plan 120747 Weighted average number of ordinary shares and potential ordinary shares used as the denominator in calculating diluted earnings per share 97829994 Options granted to Executives under the Companys Performance Share Plan are not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share as the performance conditions attached to them have not yet been met.
Earnings consists of profit for the period attributable to the shareholders amounting to 642861 2016 876772.
12 Dividends An interim cash dividend of 0.1 1p per ordinary share totalling 109313 was paid by the Group during the period under review 2016 67 512.
A final cash dividend of 0.22p per ordinary share totalling 218625 is proposed by the Group during the period under review 2016 218625.
45 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 13 Property plant and equipment Land and Building building surface Plant and Furniture and core finishes machinery equipment Total
At 30 September 2015 18252499 2883259 470248 369813 21975819 Additions 9241177 737543 211755 52550 10243025 Disposals 307334    307334 At 1 October 2016 27186342 3620802 682003 422363 31911510 Additions 19792918 416306 175915 1183992 21569131 Disposals  228330 69030 21240 318600 Foreign exchange differences 33314    33314 At 30 September 2017 47012574 3808778 788888 1585115 53195355 Accumulated depreciation At 30 September 2015 423812 400961 53061 147539 1025373 Charge for the year 165641 139144 49375 68903 423063
At 1 October 2016 589453 540105 102436 216442 1448436 Charge for the year 306261 161099 66160 149007 682527 Disposals  39958 24160 14867 78985 Foreign exchange differences 1457    1457 At 30 September 2017 897171 661246 144436 350582 2053435 Net book value At 30 September 2015 17828687 2482298 417187 222273 20950446 At 30 September 2016 26596890 3080697 579567 205920 30463074 At 30 September 2017 46115403 3147532 644452 1234533 51141920 The property plant and equipment listed above are held as security against bank facilities referred to in note 19.
As at 30 September 2017 there are 9201187 2016 1 1405779 of assets relating to assets under the course of construction included within the above table.
The cost of the assets will be depreciated once the asset is complete and available for use.
46 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 14 Intangible assets Website and
Cost
At 1 October 2015 75097 75097 Additions 105622 105622 At 1 October 2016 180719 180719 Additions 1013779 1013779 At 30 September 2017 1194498 1194498 Accumulated amortisation At 1 October 2015 7831 7831 Amortisation charge for the year 23455 23455 At 1 October 2016 31286 31286 Amortisation charge for the year 148887 148887 At 30 September 2017 180173 180173 Net book value At 30 September 2016 149433 149433 At 30 September 2017 1014325 1014325 15 Longterm deposits 2017 2016 Security deposits 636434 There is currently a 500000 440956 security deposit that has been provided over relating to the Eurodenominated mortgage facility which will be fully reimbursed upon the Barcelona hotel reaching predefined trading targets.
There is currently a 221652 195478 security deposit that has been given to the city council as a guarantee over construction works that will be occurring during the construction of the Barcelona hotel.
These monies are expected to be reimbursed after completion.
47 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 16 Trade and other receivables Group Group Company Companytel 2016 Trade receivables 93591 20941 Amounts due from franchisees 1004939 Accrued income Total financial assets other than cash and cash equivalents classified as loans and receivables 1114531 20941
274203 291064 VAT receivable 1305201 931238 Other receivables 29886 Total trade and other receivables 2723821 1243243 Classified as follows Current portion 2723821 1243243 There is no material difference between the net book value and the fair values of trade and other receivables due to their shortterm nature.
An analysis of the Groups trade and other receivables classified as financial assets by currency is provided in note 3.
Other classes of financial assets included within trade and other receivables do not contain impaired assets.
17 Cash and cash equivalents For the purpose of the cash flow statement cash and cash equivalents comprise the following balances with original maturity less than 90 days Group Group Company Companytel 2016 Cash at bank and in transit 33255253 13659018 An analysis of the Groups cash by currency is provided in note 3.
18 Trade and other payables Group Group Company Companytel 2016 Trade payables 697963 1683444 Other payables 30489 31257 Amounts payable to franchisees in future 998962 450964 Accruals 1463615 619845 325384 302878 Total financial liabilities classified as financial liabilities measured at amortised cost 3191029 2785510 325384 302878 Other taxation and social security 56636 49276 VAT payable Bookings in advance 2554677 1833070 Deferred income 204521 124038 Total trade and other payables 6181735 4791894 325384 302878 Classified as follows Noncurrent portion 376928 85679 Current portion 5804807 4706215 325384 302878 There is no material difference between the net book value and the fair values of current trade and other payables due to their shortterm nature.
48 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 18 Trade and other payables continued Maturity analysis of the financial liabilities classified as financial liabilities measured at amortised cost is as follows the amounts shown are undiscounted and represent the contractual cash flows 2017 2016 Up to three months 2972440 2785510 Between three and twelve months More than twelve months 218589 Total 3191029 2785510 An analysis of the Groups trade and other payables classified as financial liabilities by currency is provided in note 3.
19 Bank borrowings The carrying value and fair value of borrowings are as follows Group Group Company Companytel 2016 Noncurrent bank loan Current bank loan 360000 7200000 In November 2016 the Group completed the refinancing of its existing 7 200000 bank facility with a new fiveyear facility due 2021 of 12000000 amortising at 3% per annum and bearing interest at LIBOR 2.50%.
The facility is secured by a fixed charge over all of easyHotel UK Ltds property plant and equipment note 13 as well as a floating charge over all other assets of easyHotel UK Ltd as per the banks debenture terms.
During the year the Group also arranged an 8250000 Eurodenominated mortgage facility bearing interest at 2.25% above oneyear EURIBOR.
There is currently a 500000 security deposit that has been provided over relating to the Eurodenominated mortgage facility which will be fully reimbursed upon the Barcelona hotel reaching predefined trading targets note 15.
20 Deferred tax Deferred tax is calculated in full on temporary differences under the liability method using a tax rate of 19.5% 2016 20%.
2017 2016
At the beginning of the year 193792 128472 Adjustment in respect of the prior year 19547 2491 Recognised in comprehensive income 158454 102010 Rate change 20305 34199 At the end of the year 351488 193792
At the beginning of the year Recognised in comprehensive income 23826 Rate change 3053 At the end of the year 20773 Deferred tax assets have been recognised in respect of all tax losses and other temporary differences giving rise to deferred tax assets where the Directors believe it is probable that these assets will be recovered.
49 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 20 Deferred tax continued The movements in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the period are shown below.
Details of the deferred tax liabilityasset and amounts recognised in profit or loss are as follows
Other Crediteddebited temporary to consolidated Accelerated and statement of capital Share comprehensive deductible allowances options differences income At 1 October 2015 128472   128472 Impact of rate change on opening balance 31837  2362 34199 Prior year adjustment 2491   2491 Comprehensive income debit 86266  15744 102010 At 30 September 2016 180410  13382 193792 Impact of rate change 23418 3053 60 20305 Prior year adjustment 18544  1003 19547 Comprehensive income debit 182749 23826 469 158454 At 30 September 2017 358285 20773 13976 351488
Other Crediteddebited temporary to consolidated Accelerated and statement of capital Share comprehensive deductible allowances options differences income At 1 October 2015 Comprehensive income debit At 30 September 2016 Impact of rate change  3053  3053 Comprehensive income credit  23826  23826 At 30 September 2017  20773  20773 50 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 21 Share capital Authorisedtel 2016 Number Number Ordinary shares of 1p each 100500000 62500000 1005000 625000 Allotted called up and fully paidtel 2016 Number Number Ordinary shares of 1p each 100500000 62500000 1005000 625000 During the financial year the Group issued 38000000 new ordinary shares 2016 Nil via a placing raising 38.0m 36.6m after expenses.
Following Admission the number of ordinary shares in issue is 100500000.
As at 30 September 2017  1125000 shares were held by the Employee Benefit Trust 2016 1125000.
22 Reserves The following describes the nature and purpose of each reserve within equity Reserve Description and purpose Share premium Amount subscribed for share capital in excess of nominal value net of share issue costs.
Merger reserve Difference between nominal value of shares issued to effect the merger and capital reserves of the subsidiary.
Other reserve Difference between the net assets of the subsidiary acquired and the nominal value of shares issued during the merger.
EBT reserve Shows the value of easyHotel plc shares held by the Employee Benefit Trust at cost.
Currency translation reserve Records the exchange differences arising from the translation of the financial statements of nonSterling functional currency subsidiaries into the Groups reporting currency of Sterling.
Retained earningsaccumulated losses All other net gains and losses and transactions with owners e. dividends not recognised elsewhere.
23 Subsidiaries easyHotel UK Ltd a company incorporated in the United Kingdom is a wholly owned subsidiary of easyHotel plc and is consolidated into the accounts of easyHotel plc with its principal place of business being 80 Old Street London EC1V 9AZ United Kingdom. easyHotel Spain S. of easyHotel plc with its principal place of business being Paseo de la Castellana numero 53 planta 8 28046 Madrid.
51 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 24 Related party transactions Trading transactions During the year the Group entered into various transactions with related parties in the normal course of its business.
Prices and terms of payment are approved by the Groups management.
All significant related party transactions and balances are listed below 2017 2016 Amounts recognised in profit or loss Royalties paid 222541 172548 Brand protection costs 15000 20000 Outstanding balance at year end Amount owed to related parties Services between related parties were made at market related prices.
Amounts recognised in profit or loss in 2017 were as a result of transactions with easyGroup Limited.
The Group has not made any provision for bad or doubtful debts in respect of related party debtors nor has any guarantee been given or received regarding related party transactions.
On 24 June 2014 easyHotel entered into a 50year global brand licence agreement with easyGroup Limited.
In December 2013 easyGroup Limited granted easyHotel a lease of the Croydon property for a term of 999 years.
The lease was granted to easyHotel upon payment of a premium of 1626000 by easyHotel to easyGroup Limited and provides for a nominal initial rent of 25 per annum.
25 Contingencies and commitments There are no contingencies or commitments of a material nature at the date of approval of these financial statements that the Directors believe are necessary to draw attention to.
26 Events after the reporting date On 30 October 2017  the Group announced the acquisition of a site in Cardiff to develop a new 120room freehold easyHotel subject to planning permission.
On 15 November 2017  the Group announced the takeover of a 25year lease franchised of the 104room Tune hotel in Newcastle opening as an easyHotel in December 2017 .
On 16 November 2017  the Group announced a further 162 franchised rooms two hotels under development in The Hague and Maastricht to open in the second half of 2018.
There are no other matters that occurred between the reporting date and the date of approval of these financial statements that the Directors believe are necessary to draw attention to.
52 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 27 Share Option Scheme Performance Share Plan The easyHotel Performance Share Plan is a longterm incentive scheme for the Executive Directors and certain senior managers.
Share options are granted which vest after 32 months subject to both the employee remaining employed by easyHotel and the achievement of a variety of performance conditions.
The first awards were granted in January 2016 further awards were granted in January 2017 .
ShareSave Plan The easyHotel Employee ShareSave Plan was launched during the financial year.
The first options under the Plan were granted on 27 July 2017 and all UK employees of easyHotel plc and its subsidiaries who had been in continuous employment for three months as at that date were eligible to join.
Employees enrolled in the plan enter into a savings contract for three years during which they save a fixed sum each month between 5 and 500.
At the maturity date of 1 September 2020 participants can choose to use the sum saved to buy shares in easyHotel at the exercise price fixed upfront.
The movement in the number of share options outstanding under either scheme during the year was as follows Performance Employee Share Plan ShareSave Plan Number of options Number of options Outstanding at 1 October 2016 846583 Nil Forfeitedlapsed during the period Nil Nil Granted during the period 490059 Outstanding at 30 September 2017 1336642 Exercisable at 30 September 2017 Nil Nil The Group recognised total expense of 171951 2016 161177 related to the share options in 2017 this was determined using the Black Scholes model using the following assumptions
Share Plan
Share Plan
ShareSave Plan Options Options Options granted granted grantedtel Share price at grant date 89.3p 89.3p 101.0p Weighted average exercise price 71.0p  88.4p Riskfree rate 3.00% 3.00% 3.00% Dividend yield 0.35% 0.35% 0.33% Volatility 38.31% 38.31% 23.42% The assumptions used in the Black Scholes model for the 2016 awards were updated in January 2017 .
Specifically share price at grant date was updated from 91.0p to 89.3p and volatility was updated from 36.41% to 38.31%.
53 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 28 Further notes to the Company balance sheet Investment in subsidiary On 14 May 2014 the Company acquired 100% of the share capital of easyHotel UK Ltd. a wholly owned subsidiary as at 30 September 2017 for an amount of 3825683 2016 3825683.
This investment is held at cost less any reasonable provisions for impairment against the investment of which there are currently none.
The investment eliminates out for the purpose of the consolidation.
United Kingdom.
In November 2015 easyHotel UK Ltd acquired 100% of easyHotel Spain S. easyHotel UK Ltd had an investment in easyHotel Spain S. a wholly owned subsidiary as at 30 September 2017 for an amount of 7 583664 2016 2358.
This investment is held at cost less any reasonable provisions for impairment against the investment of which there are currently none.
The investment eliminates out for the purpose of the consolidation. easyHotel Spain S.
28046 Madrid.
Loan to related company easyHotel plc had a loan due from easyHotel UK Ltd a wholly owned subsidiary as at 30 September 2017 for an amount of 67 210995 2016 2991 1292.
The loan is unsecured and interest free and is repayable on demand.
However easyHotel plc does not expect to demand repayment of the loan within the next twelve months.
The loan eliminates out for the purpose of the consolidation.
Loan to Employee Benefit Trust The Company made a loan of 1300000 to the Employee Benefit Trust for the purchase of ordinary shares in easyHotel plc in accordance with provisions set out in the easyHotel plc 2015 Performance Share Plan.
Pursuant to a trust deed dated 25 June 2014 and made between the Company and Sanne Fiduciary Services Limited the Company established the Employee Benefit Trust.
The Employee Benefit Trust is a discretionary trust which is structured so as to constitute a trust for the benefit of employees and former employees of easyHotel their spouses former spouses civil partners former civil partners and dependants within the meaning of section 86 of the Inheritance Act 1984 and also to fall within the definition of an employees share scheme in section 1 166 of the Companies Act 2006.
It is intended that the Employee Benefit Trust will be funded by the Company to purchase ordinary shares from time to time in the market which will be used to satisfy all options and other rights granted for existing employees share plans or any other employees share plans established in the future under the easyHotel plc Performance Share Plan.
In accordance with current institutional investor guidelines the deed establishing the Employee Benefit Trust provides that the prior approval of shareholders must be obtained before more than 5% of the Companys share capital at any one time may be held within it.
The loan is unsecured and interest free and is repayable on demand.
However easyHotel plc does not expect to demand repayment of the loan within the next twelve months.
As at 30 September 2017  1125000 shares were held by the Employee Benefit Trust 2016 1125000.
54 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes forming part of the financial statements continued for the year ended 30 September 2017 Jonathan Lane OBE NonExecutive Chairman Guy Parsons
Chief Executive Officer
Marc Vieilledent Chief Financial Officer Scott Christie NonExecutive Directorsite ir.
Nominated adviser and broker Investec Bank plc 2 Gresham Street London EC2V 7QP United Kingdom Principal legal advisers to the Company Stephenson Harwood LLP 1 Finsbury Circus London EC2M 7SH United Kingdom
BDO LLP 55 Baker Street London W1U 7EU United Kingdom
Capita Registrars Limited The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent BR3 4TU United Kingdom Financial PR Houston PR 44 0tel Franchising enquiries Wolfgang Gold Global Franchising Director email sitefranchising 55 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017 Directors Secretary and advisers 56 easyHotel plc Annual report and accounts 2017
80 Old Street
