ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Elegant Hotels Group plc Annual Report and Financial Statements 2017 2
Board of Directors 24 Corporate Governance Report 26 Report of the Audit Committee 28 Report of the Remuneration Committee 31 Statement of Directors Responsibilities 35
Independent Auditors Report
CORPORATE INFORMATION Directors Report 65 Company Information 67 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated and Company Statements of Financial Position Consolidated and Company Statements of Changes in Equity Consolidated and Company Statements of Cash Flows Notes to the Financial Statements 44
About Elegant Hotels Group 1 STRATEGIC REPORT At a Glance 2 Chairmans Review Business Model 6 Strategy and Operations 7
Chief Executive Officers Report 10
Key Performance Indicators 14
Chief Financial Officers Review
Principal Risks and Uncertainties 18 Corporate Social Responsibility 22 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 We are making good progress implementing our strategy to build a strong platform for future growth Revenue Per Available Room
Adjusted EPS down 3.0 Adjusted EBITDA down 7.6% Full year dividend Average Daily Rate
63.9%
Revenue up 5.1% Profit after tax down 6.1%
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS are alternative performance measures.
An explanation of these measures is included in the KPI section on page 14 and a reconciliation to statutory figures is included in the CFO section on page 16.
1 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Elegant Hotels Group owns and operates seven upscale freehold beachfront hotels and a beachfront restaurant on the island of Barbados.
Strategy is to leverage position as a leading hotel operator in Barbados and to expand both on the island and further into the Caribbean Floated on London Stock Exchanges AIM in May 2015 LSE EHG of the seven hotels Situated on Barbados prestigious Platinum Coast Portfolio of 588 rooms Twice as large as the closest competitor in the Barbados luxury hotel market Freehold hotels Owns and operates seven luxury hotels on the island of Barbados including the newly acquired Treasure Beach Hodges Bay Resort An exclusive luxury beachfront resort in Antigua opens under management contract in 2018 Aggregate plot size c.
23 acres Freehold properties and aggregate beachfront of c.2600 feet
Owns and operates Daphnes a wellknown beachfront restaurant 2 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 AT A GLANCE 2 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CRYSTAL COVE Crystal Cove is an allinclusive hotel which is popular with families.
It has three freshwater lagoon pools two restaurants two bars two floodlit tennis courts and a fitness centre.
32 suites 56 rooms 10.0m revenue 69% occupancy THE HOUSE The House is an adults only 34 suite boutique hotel situated on the Platinum
This exclusive property features an open plan relaxed atmosphere.
The hotel is close to Tamarind with the renowned Daphnes restaurant sitting between the two resorts.
34 suites 4.5m revenue 61% occupancy COLONY CLUB Colony Club is a AAA Four Diamond rated colonial style hotel spread across six acres of tropical gardens with 300 feet of beach frontage on the Caribbean Sea and lagoon style pools.
34 suites 62 rooms 14.0m revenue 71% occupancy
Management agreement for Hodges Bay Resort and Spa signed in 2016
LUCIA
Sales and Marketing agreement for The Landings Resort and Spa signed in 2017
Tamarind is a contemporary family friendly hotel on the Platinum Coast.
A dining platform allows guests to dine close to the beach and sea.
72 suites 32 rooms 9.6m revenue 55% occupancy TREASURE BEACH Treasure Beach is a 35 suite hotel situated on the Platinum Coast next to the Tamarind Hotel.
Refurbished as an adults only European plan art and food hotel.
35 suites The hotel was purchased and refurbished in 2017 Opened in December 2017
Daphnes is one of Barbados most acclaimed restaurants.
Located on the countrys Platinum Coast in Paynes Bay adjacent to The House and Tamarind.
Classic Italian favourites with island inspiration BARBADO S
GUADELOUPE
BARBUDA
GRENADA
ST.
VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES
MONTSERRAT
ST.
KITTS
AND NEVIS
VIRGIN
ISLANDS
US VIRGIN
TOBAGO
TRINIDAD
TURTLE BEACH Turtle Beach is an all inclusive property on the south coast of Barbados close to local nightlife and attractions.
161 suites 13.1m revenue 60% occupancy
Waves is an allinclusive contemporary property which was acquired and substantially refurbished in 2016.
13 suites 57 rooms Opened in August 2016 7.1m revenue 73% occupancy 3 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 3 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Our objective is to become one of the leading hotel groups in the Caribbean in order to deliver sustainable investor returns Simon Sherwood
2017 against a background of changed market conditions.
We were encouraged to see occupancy recover in H2 2017 which together with the addition of Waves Hotel to the portfolio led to a revenue increase of 5% over 2016.
The team remains firmly focused on delivering our strategy and we are pleased with the operational progress that has been made during the year.
We have continued to strive for daytoday excellence investing in our people and systems to ensure that our hotels continue to provide exceptional guest experiences as well as successfully expanding our sales and marketing presence in the US in order to drive further growth in visitor numbers from that market.
We have also continued with our programme of refurbishing repositioning and repricing elements of the existing portfolio.
This has included enhancements to The House which reopened in October 2017 after being closed for six weeks and the addition of new food and beverage outlets at two of our allinclusive properties  Crystal Cove and Turtle Beach.
Daphnes our beachfront restaurant was also closed for renovation for six weeks in H1.
During the year we expanded outside of Barbados through a management contract for Hodges Bay Resort and Spa Hodges Bay in Antigua and a sales and marketing contract for The Landings Resort and Spa The Landings in St Lucia.
The Landings contract is progressing well and enables us to expand our sales and marketing footprint.
The construction of Hodges Bay is currently taking longer than expected but were pleased that the owners are ensuring that this product is built to the highest standards.
We continue to believe that management contracts and sales and marketing agreements represent compelling opportunities.
In April we were pleased to acquire Treasure Beach hotel a 4star 35suite hotel next to our existing Tamarind hotel.
On its reopening towards the end of 2017 Elegant Hotels properties account for a continuous 300 metre stretch of the prestigious Platinum Coast of Barbados.
I was pleased to welcome two new additions to our Board this year.
Jeff Singleton joined the Group as Chief Financial Officer in December 2016 and was appointed to the Board in March 2017.
Jeff brings significant industry and listed company experience and since his arrival has focused on restructuring the finance function and improving risk management internal controls and management information.
Luke Johnson joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director in May 2017 adding his significant hospitality experience and business skills to the Board.
Details about how the Board and its Committees have discharged their corporate governance duties during the year are outlined in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 26 to 27.
As the business matures the Board is focussing on the continued development and dissemination of our corporate culture throughout the Group and looks forward to reporting on this further in the coming financial year.
4 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 CHAIRMANS REVIEW Elegant Hotels Group set out its dividend policy at the time of IPO in May 2015.
Since then we have paid cumulative dividends of 14 pence per share while seeing a significant shift in the market largely due to the devaluation of Sterling compared to the US dollar.
We have also taken advantage of multiple expansion and strategic opportunities including Waves Hotel and Spa and Treasure Beach.
Our objective is to become one of the leading hotel groups in the Caribbean in order to deliver sustainable investor returns.
To achieve this the Group must reinvest in its business model and ensure that it is well placed to capitalise on the numerous opportunities that we see for expansion.
Given the current market opportunities and the need to reinvest in our properties in an increasingly competitive market the Board is recommending a reduction in our final dividend to 1.75p for the year ended 30 September 2017 from 3.5p in the prior year.
This equates to a fullyear dividend of 5.25p for the year ended 30 September 2017 versus 7.0p in the prior year.
Going forward the Group intends to pay a full year dividend of 4.0p for the financial year ending 30 September 2018 split into a one third interim payment and two thirds final dividend payment.
As always the payment of dividends will be subject to the discretion of the Board and to the Company having sufficient distributable reserves.
Finally the Board and I would like to thank our customers management staff and shareholders for their continued support and contributions to the Groups success.
Simon Sherwood
8 January 2018
Revenue increase of 5% over 2016 Continued to strive for daytoday excellence investing in our people and systems Continued refurbishing repositioning and repricing elements of the existing portfolio Expanded outside of Barbados through a management contract for Hodges Bay in Antigua and a sales and marketing contract for The Landings in St Lucia Acquired Treasure Beach a 4star 35suite hotel Dividend per share 2016 7.0p Basics earnings per share 2016 restated 11.0 Adjusted basic earnings per share 2016 13.1 5 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Our objective is to become one of the leading hotel groups in the Caribbean in order to deliver sustainable investor returns while supporting our local people and places.
INPUTSRESOURCES
OUTCOMES
STRATEGY
Strong operating cash generation Sustainable returns to shareholders Reinvestment in inputs and resources Build a positive social and environmental legacy See our Chairmans Review on page 4 for more information.
See our CEOs report on page 10 for more information.
Day to day operational excellence
Expansion
OUR
BUSINESS
Engaged employees Quality freehold assets Sales and marketing experience and expertise Relationships with Tour Operators and Government Key management with strategic expertise Climate and natural attractions 6 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 BUSINESS MODEL HOW WE CREATE VALUE Our strategy utilises our inputs and resources to capture the market opportunity in three ways Firstly we leverage our existing properties our fantastic teams and the wonderful Caribbean climate to attract our guests and ensure they leave wanting to visit us again Secondly we look to enhance our existing portfolio by refurbishing repositioning and repricing to maximise guest experience profitability and occupancy And thirdly we actively seek out expansion opportunities within Barbados and in the wider Caribbean through acquisitions and management or sales and marketing agreements.
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES
OPERATIONAL
EXCELLENCE TO
PROFITABILITY
DEVELOP EXISTING PORTFOLIO TO
PROFITABILITY
EXPAND
THE PORTFOLIO WITHIN THE
Poolside service at Colony Club.
The recently opened Waves Hotels and Spa features a refurbished restaurant to maximise light and give guests a sense of space.
Artist rendering of Hodges Bay Resort and Spa in Antigua currently under construction.
STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS HOW OUR STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS SUPPORT OUR BUSINESS MODEL
STRATEGY
7 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 1.
DAYTODAY OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE TO MAXIMISE PROFITABILITY How we execute that strategy Progress in 2017 Key inputs Key risks Key KPIs
Maintain existing assets to a luxury standard with targeted repair and maintenance.
Continued to reinvest 4% of hotel revenue in targeted primarily guest facing capital expenditure.
Engaged employees
Sales and marketing experience and expertise Relationships with Tour Operators Relationships with
Climate and natural attractions Exchange rate volatility
Loss of key tour operator relationships Extreme weather and environmental degradation
Health and safety impacts Data protection or technology incident Increase in competition Read more about our key risks on page 18
ADR
Occupancy
RevPAR
Adjusted
EBITDA margin Room nights by geography Revenue from Tour Operators Read more about our key KPIs on page 14
Deliver friendly bestof theCaribbean service to maximise customer satisfaction and encourage repeat visits.
Delivered rolling programmes of staff training with focus on customer service.
Externally benchmarked guest satisfaction scores maintained at higher end of scale.
Target markets Maintain core UK market and actively target US and other additional markets.
Each hotel focuses on a different segment of the luxury tourist market.
Delivered targeted marketing campaigns to US consumers.
Proportion of North American room nights increased alongside maintenance of core UK base.
Rate and occupancy Balance rates and occupancy to maximise revenue and profitability.
Responded to rebased market with targeted and tactical rate reductions in certain cases to drive occupancy.
Go to market strategy Leverage relationships with existing Tour
Expand direct sales capabilities.
Launched new website to drive direct sales particularly in the US.
Bolstered sales teams in UK and US.
Hosted 300 familiarisation trips and conducted product training in the form of sales calls consumer and trade events and travel agents events with a reach of over 100000 participants.
Cost control Cost efficiencies and reduction programmes.
Rollout of centralisation and other cost control initiatives.
Central warehousing function operational from end of calendar year 2017.
8 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 STRATEGY AND OPERATIONS CONTINUED 2.
DEVELOP EXISTING PORTFOLIO TO ENHANCE PROFITABILITY How we execute that strategy Progress in 2017 Key inputs Key risks Key KPIs physical structure.
Significant renovations to public areas of The House including lobby bar and spa.
Key management with strategic expertise Sales and marketing experience and expertise
Reliance on key personnel Read more about our key risks on page 18
Adjusted
EBITDA margin Read more about our key KPIs on page 14 guest experience.
Added three new air conditioned outlets at two allinclusive properties in response to customer feedback.
Reprice to drive higher yields.
Increased rate further at Waves following successful refurbishment in 2016.
EXPAND PORTFOLIO WITHIN THE CARIBBEAN How we execute that strategy Progress in 2017 Key inputs Key risks Key KPIs the Caribbean.
Acquired Treasure Beach Hotel Barbados a 35suite adults only property in Barbados.
Key management with strategic expertise
Reliance on key personnel Read more about our key risks on page 18 Year end room count Net debt to adjusted
Read more about our key KPIs on page 14 Management contracts enabling low capital intensity expansion into new markets.
Established first management contract for Hodges Bay in Antigua.
Sales and marketing agreements to cost effectively increase presence in target markets.
Signed sales and marketing agreement for The Landings in St Lucia 9 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION T he rebased market has meant that it has been necessary for us to discount rates at certain of our properties on a targeted and tactical basis.
This has inevitably affected the profit margins of the business but we believe that the pricing environment is now much more stable.
As such these market conditions should be seen as the new normal.
OVERVIEW
MARKET OVERVIEW Barbados arrivals and competition As expected market conditions in Barbados remained challenging throughout the 2017 financial year.
While arrivals to Barbados were up 6.4% yearonyear for the January to October 2017 period 2016 5.5% this was the first full year of a rebased SterlingUSD exchange rate which has had a negative impact on our business the Groups rates are priced in USD while the majority of customers are from the UK around 75% on a room nights basis.
This affects both the rates the Group is currently able to achieve at some of its properties as well as demand for Barbados as a luxury tourist destination.
Recent data from the Barbados Tourism Marketing Inc shows that stayover tourist arrivals from the UK have grown 0.7% yearon year for January to October 2017 compared to growth of 2.2% for 2016.
In addition demand for luxury accommodation from UK travellers has declined despite the overall increase in numbers and the villa and value market have tended to benefit from increased visitor arrivals.
However we remain confident in the underlying attractiveness of Barbados for UK travellers given its reputation as a safe destination and the fact that it is fortunate to be located south of the hurricane belt.
Barbados is very rarely affected by hurricanes and during the recent hurricane season we experienced no disruption at the hotels and saw no material impact on bookings.
In addition to daily flights from London Gatwick and Manchester by a number of different carriers Virgin is running a new twice weekly service direct from London Heathrow from December 2017 to April 2018.
There are also significant opportunities outside the UK market which the Group is working to capture as set out further below.
In particular US arrivals to Barbados were up 14.2% yearonyear January to October compared to an 11.5% increase in the prior year.
REVIEW OF FY 2017 PERFORMANCE AGAINST
DAYTODAY EXCELLENCE Revenue  pricing and occupancy Revenue for 2017 was 59.9 million up 5.1% on the prior year 2016 57.0 million.
This reflected an improvement in occupancy in H2 2017 partially due to the timing of Easter which fell in H2 in 2017 as opposed to H1 in 2016.
Occupancy was 63.9% for the Group up from 62.9% in the prior year.
However ADR fell 6.3% in the period from 378 to 354.
This partially reflects the success of Waves Hotel and Spa which contributed strongly to occupancy but had a lower average rate especially in H1.
Excluding Waves ADR would have been 365 a reduction of 3%.
During the year the Group reviewed the pricing strategy for some of its properties in response to the weakening of Sterling.
Rates were discounted on a targeted and tactical basis in certain cases in order to drive occupancy in the context of the rebased market.
ADR was maintained at The House and Colony Club our properties with the highest rates.
For these properties maintaining rates has been a strategic objective in order to maintain differentiation among the hotels in the portfolio.
In 2018 We delivered a solid performance in 2017 against a background of changed market conditions Sunil Chatrani
Chief Executive Officer
10 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REPORT we intend to continue to review pricing strategies for each property to ensure that we effectively balance occupancy and rate.
During the year we used targeted promotions to boost occupancy during slower periods.
Over the high demand periods our specialised USbased revenue team continues to be disciplined and cautious with discounting leveraging both the Groups excellent relationships with tour operators as well as its scale and its substantial share of available luxury rooms in Barbados.
Target market and gotomarket strategy Throughout 2017 the Group expanded its target market focus in response to the weaker UK market conditions.
The sales teams in both the UK and the US were bolstered and during the year the Group launched a new website to target direct bookings from the
In addition new contracts were signed with tour operators in the US and Canada and the Group hosted a number of familiarisation trips for US operators.
As a result of this and the addition of Waves in 2016 the proportion of bookings from North America rose from 14% in 20152016 to 17% in 20162017.
There are also both opportunities and challenges in relation to changes in the demographic of visitors.
The number of older repeat guests is declining so attracting new guests is an area of growing focus.
An increasingly important market for us is the millennial segment including families and double income no kids who tend to value experiences and sustainability and for whom repeat visits are less common.
As a result when we are refurbishing our properties we continually focus on appealing to this segment as well as our more established guesttype.
In this regard the marketing of Waves as a contemporary all inclusive spa resort has been highly successful and resulted in an increase in the number of guests from the millennial category.
Given the success of this offering we have incorporated a new spa into the refurbished House and continue to assess additional spa opportunities throughout the Group.
COST CONTROL Implementing cost control measures has been a key area of focus for the Group during 2017 given the pressure on rates.
This has involved targeted streamlining and centralisation of back office functions and the setup of a central warehousing function which was operational from the end of calendar 2017.
The impact of these measures is expected to be seen in the financial year ending 30 September 2018.
11 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 12 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 12 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 EXISTING PORTFOLIO
We are continuously looking to improve the profitability of our hotels with our focussed three step programme of refurbishing repositioning and repricing.
These steps interplay to find the best combination of physical structure refurbish guest experience reposition and yield management reprice.
In addition to our regular capex spend of 4% of each hotels revenue we spent approximately 1.5m on special projects as planned.
The most significant project undertaken during the year was the refurbishment of the public areas at The House as well as the addition of a new spa.
The House was closed from midAugust to the beginning of October and since its reopening has seen a 9% increase in businesson the books driven by a stronger rate compared to the same time in 2016.
In addition we added a coffee shop and ice cream parlour to Turtle Beach and a coffee and wine bar to Crystal Cove.
These additions along with targeted discounting resulted in both of these hotels increasing their occupancy compared to the prior year and enhanced our offerings compared to new allinclusive competitors on the island.
The results of Waves Hotel and Spa following the postacquisition refurbishment also illustrate the success of this strategy.
Waves occupancy was the highest in the Group at 73% and it maintained ADR significantly in excess of pre acquisition levels.
EXPANSION
During 2017 we acquired Treasure Beach a 35 suite hotel located next to the Tamarind Hotel on the Platinum Coast of Barbados.
At the time of the IPO in 2015 we set out our acquisition plan  to add hotels that complement our portfolio and that benefit from the Groups scale.
Treasure Beach is a great geographic fit as well as meeting our criteria of acquiring underperforming hotels that can be refurbished repositioned and repriced in line with our enhancement strategy.
It reopened in December 2017 following 2.8m of refurbishments as a Europeanplan adults only resort.
As a result of our acquisition strategy our total room count is now 588 compared to 483 at the time of the
This is more than twice the nearest competitor on Barbados and gives the Group significant influence and leverage with tour operator partners.
During the year the Group added two properties to its portfolio via a management contract and a sales and marketing contract.
In October 2016 the Group entered into an agreement to manage Hodges Bay Resort a new 122room luxury hotel in Antigua.
In March 2017 the Group added The Landings Resort and Spa an 85 villa property in St.
Lucia with an agreement to provide a variety of services across the areas of sales marketing reservations revenue management and public relations across all key markets.
The Group is continually assessing potential acquisition targets both in Barbados and throughout the wider Caribbean.
We see a number of compelling opportunities ahead of us and are constantly managing our cash flow and debt availability in order to ensure that we can take advantage of them as they present themselves.
OUTLOOK
Trading since the start of the new financial year has remained in line with market expectations and our bookings are currently tracking ahead of the same period last year.
As a result the Group remains confident in its prospects for 2018 and beyond.
Sunil Chatrani
Chief Executive Officer
8 January 2018 13 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS REVIEW
CONTINUED KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS KPIs Calculated as average price for an occupied room after removing VAT and service charge.
This KPI only includes the Groups owned properties.
This KPI reflects the rooms revenue yield each hotel achieves relative to the rooms available in the hotel.
It is influenced by two factors being ADR and occupancy.
Demonstrates the growth of the business and the results of our three strategic priorities.
Calculated as the occupied rooms as a percentage of the available rooms.
It measures the success of selling the primary product of the Groups owned properties.
Reflects the number of rooms available in owned properties including those under refurbishment at the reporting date.
Growth in total room count reflects the success of our expansion strategy.
Defined as earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and excludes the impact of exceptional items the bargain purchase gain and nonexceptional sharebased payment charges.
Adjusted EBITDA margin demonstrates the Groups conversion of revenue into underlying profitability.
Calculated as occupied rooms by guest geography and reflects the progress of the Groups strategy to diversify the target market.
Calculated as net debt at the reporting date divided by adjusted EBITDA.
It indicates the current indebtedness of the Group and its capacity to pursue expansion and development opportunities.
Calculated as rooms revenue from tour operators as a percentage of total rooms revenue.
It reflects the balance between direct and tour operator driven sales.
Other
UK
US
Revenue m 5.1%tel
6.3%tel
4.6%tel Occupancy % 1.0 percentage pointtel Adjusted EBITDA margin % 4.2 percentage pointstel Net debt to adjusted EBITDA 0.8 timestel Total room count rooms 6%tel Revenue from tour operators % 1.1 percentage pointtel US room nights by geography % 3 percentage pointstel Management presents various key performance indicators to illustrate the Groups performance during the period and progress against strategic objectives.
During 2017 a number of KPIs have been added and explanations of these measures are provided below.
Due to the nature of the Groups operations and strategy the Group uses alternative performance measures including adjusted EBITDA and adjusted profit measures to present the underlying performance of the Group on a more consistent yearonyear basis.
These measures exclude exceptional items such as acquisition and restructuring costs the bargain purchase gain and sharebased payment costs.
A full reconciliation of alternative measures to statutory equivalents is provided on page 16.
14 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 The Group continues to generate significant free cash flow Jeff Singleton Chief Financial Officer
As outlined in the CEOs report there has been a good recovery in revenue in H2 2017 which has continued into 2018.
However lower rates at some of our properties have continued to put pressure on EBITDA and as a result cost control in the Group has been a key focus.
Specific activities in this area have included the streamlining and centralising of the finance functions in order to achieve economies of scale as well as enhancing the Groups risk management framework.
GROSS PROFIT Gross profit for the year was 35.5m 2016 35.1m while gross margin reduced from 61.6% to 59.3% due to a combination of lower rates and a greater relative contribution from lowermargin H2 revenue compared to 2016.
SELLING GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES Selling general and administrative expenses before exceptional items and the bargain purchase gain increased to 22.9m 2016 20.1m principally reflecting the addition of Waves Hotel and Spa.
Additionally the Group increased its corporate costs compared to the prior period with the appointment of a Chief Financial Officer and Group Operations Director.
Both of these appointments were necessary in order to fulfil the Groups strategic expansion strategies.
Depreciation and amortisation increased from 3.2m to 4.1m primarily due to the acquisition of Waves in the prior year.
Selling general and administrative expenses before exceptional items and the bargain purchase gain were 38% of revenue in 2017 2016 35%.
This reflects the above increased costs as well as the inclusion of Waves which as an allinclusive property has a lower operating profit margin and the flow through effect of rate reductions.
EXCEPTIONAL COSTS AND BARGAIN PURCHASE GAIN Exceptional costs were 1.1m in 2017 compared to 2.2m in the prior year.
Included within exceptional costs is a credit of 0.6m from the reversal of sharebased payment expense related to the share options issued on IPO which did not vest.
These awards had been treated as exceptional as they related to the IPO of the Group in 2015.
The remaining exceptional costs were 1.7m in 2017 and 2.0m in 2016 reflecting the acquisitions of Treasure Beach and Waves respectively as well as other exceptional costs including restructuring costs and professional fees.
The Group also recognised a bargain purchase gain in 2017 of 1.3m related to the acquisition of Treasure Beach refer to note 4 for further details.
The Group presents measures of Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted profit before tax and Adjusted EPS.
These measures exclude exceptional costs nonexceptional sharebased payment charges and the bargain purchase gain.
These items are excluded as they do not reflect the underlying performance of the
The tables opposite set out the calculation of these measures.
15 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW RECONCILIATION OF ADJUSTED PROFIT BEFORE TAX AND ADJUSTED EARNINGS PER SHARE
Adjustments
Adjusted
Reported restated
Adjusted
Gross profit 35.5  35.5 35.1  35.1 Selling general and admin expenses 22.7 0.1 22.6 22.3 2.4 19.9 Other operating income 1.0  1.0 1.1  1.1 Operating profit 13.8 0.1 13.9 14.0 2.4 16.3 Financial expenses 2.8  2.8 2.2  2.2 Profit before taxation 11.0 0.1 11.1 11.8 2.4 14.2 Taxation 1.8 0.3 2.1 2.0 0.5 2.5 Profit after tax 9.2 0.2 9.0 9.8 1.9 11.7 Weighted average number of shares Weighted average number of shares diluted m 89.1  89.1 89.0  89.0 Basic earnings per share cents 10.3 0.2 10.1 11.0 2.1 13.1 Diluted earnings per share cents 10.3 0.2 10.1 11.0 2.1 13.1 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
RECONCILIATION OF REPORTED AND ADJUSTED EBITDA
Adjustments
Adjusted
Reported restated
Adjusted
Operating profit 13.8 0.1 13.9 14.0 2.4 16.3 Depreciation and amortisation 4.1  4.1 3.2  3.2 Impairment of shortterm investments 0.0  0.0 Loss on disposal of assets 0.0  0.0 EBITDA margin 30.1% 30.2% 30.2% 34.4% The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
RECONCILIATION OF OPERATING PROFIT TO ADJUSTED OPERATING PROFIT restated Operating profit 13.8 14.0 Exceptional costs including sharebased payment amounts relating to IPO 1.1 2.2 Nonexceptional sharebased payment charges 0.3 0.2 Bargain purchase gain 1.3 Adjusted operating profit 13.9 16.3 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
RECONCILIATION OF NET DEBT AND NET ASSET VALUE Bank of Nova Scotia term loan due 2020 67.9 63.5 Bank of Nova Scotia revolving facility 4.8 Waves vendor loan 1.0 2.0 Total loans and borrowings 73.7 65.5 Bank overdraft 0.4 Cash and cash equivalents 1.0 3.7 Net debt 73.1 61.8 Implied total property value 267.2 257.5 Net asset value 194.1 195.7 16 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICERS REVIEW
CONTINUED OTHER OPERATING INCOME Other operating income of 1.0m 2016 1.1m principally comprises gains on foreign exchange on converting US dollars into Barbados dollars.
REPORTED AND ADJUSTED
Reconciliations of Reported and Adjusted EBITDA are set out in the table above.
After adjusting for oneoff items Adjusted EBITDA was 18.1m 2016 19.6m 7.6% lower than the prior period and Adjusted EBITDA margin was 4.2 percentage points lower than the prior period at 30.2%.
This reflects the abovementioned movements.
Daphnes contributed approximately 500k to the decrease in Adjusted EBITDA predominantly relating to its closure for renovation with the closure of The House accounting for approximately 250k.
FINANCE EXPENSES Interest on loans increased in the current year from 1.8m to 2.5m as a result of additional debt associated with the Waves and Treasure Beach acquisitions and movements in the US LIBOR rate from circa 50 basis points at the start of the year to 125 basis points at the end.
The Group continues to explore opportunities to convert variable interest rates to fixed rates in the future.
Finance expenses also included 0.3m of foreign exchange losses on forward contracts 2016 0.4m.
TAXATION
Taxation of 1.8m 2016 2.0m largely reflected lower profit before tax as well as changes in the relative level of bargain purchase gain and exceptional expenses compared to the prior year.
The adjusted effective tax rate on adjusted profit before tax was 18.7% compared to 17.6% in the prior year.
PROFIT AFTER TAX AND EARNINGS PER SHARE Profit after tax reduced to 9.2m compared to 9.8m in the prior year restated with diluted EPS at 10.3 cents per share compared to 11.0 cents per share restated.
Adjusted profit after tax decreased to 9.0 million 2016 11.7 million.
Adjusted diluted EPS reduced from 13.1 cents per share to 10.1 cents per share.
NONCURRENT ASSETS Property plant and equipment increased to 183.7m from 172.8m largely due to the purchase of Treasure Beach in May 2017.
In addition 0.1m of intangible assets were recognised in relation to the cost of the Groups new commercial website.
NET DEBT AND NET ASSET VALUES Net debt has increased from 61.8m to 73.1m at 30 September 2017 primarily due to the acquisition of Treasure Beach in May 2017.
An additional 8.4m was added to the Bank of Nova Scotia loan facility and was fully drawn down at that point.
In addition the Group drew down its 5.0m revolving facility and made total repayments of 5.2m against bank and vendor loans.
At 30 September 2017 the Group has an additional undrawn overdraft facility available of 9.6m and undrawn revolving facilities of 0.2m.
Treasure Beach Hotel was valued by Terra Caribbean at 9.7m at acquisition.
Combined with the valuation of Waves in June 2016 and the remaining properties in April 2015 total property valuation is 267.2m which is greater than its carrying value in these accounts.
Despite the shift in the market which has affected the cash flow valuation of the properties in the Directors opinion and based on internal impairment testing asset values remain significantly in excess of carrying values and no impairments are required.
The Group therefore has an implied net asset value of 194.1m at 30 September 2017 or 163 pence per share 218 cents per share.
CASH FLOW The Groups free cash flow defined as cash flow from operations less capital expenditure was 6.9m for 2017 2016 7.4m.
The increase comprises a reduction in cash from operations 12.5m compared to 17.0m offset by a reduction in capital expenditure 5.6m compared to 9.7m associated with the completion of the Waves renovation in late FY 16.
Capital expenditure on Treasure Beach renovations of 0.7m has been recognised in 2017.
As well as reduced EBITDA cash flow from operations was impacted by the first year of payments on account for Barbados tax expenses leading to a 2.5m cash tax payment compared to 0.7m in the prior year and an increase in trade and other receivables of 1.2m largely relating to VAT receivables and nontrade amounts associated with the new management contract and sales and marketing agreement.
The Group paid 8.2m in relation to consideration and fees for the Treasure Beach acquisition net of cash acquired which was financed through additional loan financing.
Dividends paid were 1.6m lower than the prior year at 7.9m largely due to changes in the SterlingUSD exchange rate however cash interest paid increased by 0.7m.
Overall cash and cash equivalents net of drawn overdraft decreased from 3.7m to 0.6m at 30 September 2017.
Jeff Singleton Chief Financial Officer 8 January 2018 17 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION PRINCIPAL RISKS The Group is exposed to a variety of uncertainties that could have a material adverse effect on the Groups financial condition operational results reputation and the value and liquidity of its shares.
As such the Group operates a robust framework for identifying risks assessing their impact and putting in place appropriate mitigating actions with clearly identified risk owners.
That process and the Groups principal risks and mitigating activities is set out in this section.
Our risk management process enables us to both reduce risks to our success and guide our future strategic objectives.
Risk
Reduction in airlift Increase in competition Exchange rate volatility Extreme weather and environmental degradation Health and safety impacts Loss of key tour operator relationships Customerfacing staff engagement Data protection or technology incident Reliance on key personnel Execution risk for new development RISK HEAT MAP Very low Unlikely Almost certain
Impact Severe 1 Biannual identification of risks and potential impacts in the absence of effective controls.
2 Assessment of effectiveness of existing mitigating activities and controls and determination of residual risk level.
3 Where management is not comfortable with residual risk identification of additional mitigating activities or controls required.
4 Assignment of risks mitigating activities and controls to senior management team owners.
5 Quarterly monitoring of progress on additional mitigation and controls and reassessment of residual risk level.
OPERATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT PROCESS OPERATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT AND MANAGEMENT PROCESS 18 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES Risk Impact Mitigation Trend Probability or impact change from 2016 Link to strategy THE MARKETPLACE
The Groups business is dependent on airlift to Barbados which serves as the primary means by which the Groups customers arrive in Barbados to stay at its hotels.
The Group has the largest proportion of quality room stock in Barbados.
It contracts business with tour operators on an annual basis who in turn take up seats on the main airlines into Barbados supporting the carriers.
The Group markets itself and participates in national marketing programmes for the island in the major feeder markets all of which assist in creating the demand for airline seats into Barbados.
Despite weakness in Sterling this risk is largely unchanged from the prior year
Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9
The Group operates in a competitive market and competes with a variety of operators of varying sizes and operational standards including international hotel chains regional and local site operators.
The Group continues to reinvest in its properties through targeted maintenance and the refurbish reposition and reprice strategy.
The Group also invests in employee engagement and training.
These actions are designed to maintain and improve service and offering standards and sets the Group apart from direct competitors.
There are several significant refurbishments and new resorts on the island of Barbados which are due to open in 2018 and are expected to increase the level of relevant competition.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9
The Group conducts its operations principally in US dollars and Barbados dollars and is consequently subject to currency risk due to fluctuations in exchange rates.
This includes longerterm weakness in Sterling leading to a perception of higher prices by UK customers and transactional currency risk.
In addition the Groups dividends are paid in Sterling.
The Groups top line is primarily earned in US dollars and the major expenses are in US dollars and Barbados dollars which is pegged to the US dollar.
The Group holds US dollar and Barbados dollar accounts in Barbados.
Transactional currency fluctuations against Sterling on booking are at the tour operators risk however any losses on currency by tour operators is ultimately factored into prices.
To counter longerterm weakness in Sterling the Group aims to grow the level of business from North
During 2017 the Group also reduced its rates on a targeted basis to maintain occupancy in a number of hotels.
Longerterm weakness in Sterling in 2016 and 2017 has led to a perception of higher prices and affected the rate the Group can charge.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 19 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Risk Impact Mitigation Trend Probability or impact change from 2016 Link to strategy
The Groups properties are situated on the coast and exposed to extreme weather in the medium term and erosion and other environmental degradation and climate impacts in the longer term.
Extreme weather pollution and the degradation of reefs and other natural attractions may reduce the attractiveness of Barbados and the wider Caribbean as a tourist destination.
The Group maintains appropriate disaster management procedures and insurance coverage to respond to extreme weather events and has in place a number of adaptation initiatives to combat erosion and other climate change related issues.
In addition the Group works in partnership with the Barbados government on nationwide environmental initiatives and has a strong focus on sustainability and environmental protection at the Grouplevel.
Please see our CSR report on pages 22 to 23 for further information.
While Barbados has not seen significant severe weather impacts during the 2017 hurricane season and may benefit slightly from damage on other Caribbean islands the risk of negative weather perception amongst customers has increased.
Longerterm climate related risks continue to increase incrementally.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 Health and safety impacts Disease outbreaks may make Barbados andor the wider Caribbean less attractive as a destination for international guests.
Even if not a significant health threat disease outbreaks can generate negative publicity that may affect pricing and demand for hotels.
The Group has implemented health and safety practices at the properties to minimise the risk of the spread of infections.
The Group also continues to work with Government Agencies to eradicate diseases and responds to any publicity with targeted marketing and promotional campaigns.
No new outbreaks of diseases have occurred in the year.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9
Loss of key tour operator relationships The Group derives the majority of its business from key tour operators.
As in most businesses key customer relationships could come to an end and materially affect the Groups business.
The Group maintains strong relationships with tour operators under an annual contract.
While these relationships can change there are always new entrants in the marketplace.
The Group has representation in the trade managing these relationships on a daily basis.
The senior sales and marketing team attend the major travel trade conferences each year and continue to manage existing relationships and develop new ones with the operators.
In addition during 2017 the Group launched a new website to encourage direct sales.
This risk is largely unchanged from the prior year.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 20 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Risk Impact Mitigation Trend Probability or impact change from 2016 Link to strategy
Customer service is a key element of the Groups proposition.
The unavailability of appropriate employees or employees who are not engaged or not properly trained risks bringing reputational damage to the Group and reducing repeat and new custom.
The Group conducts various staff training and engagement programmes.
In addition the Group runs apprenticeship programmes to strengthen the pipeline of new staff.
The Group has strengthened its mitigating activities in 2017 with the appointment of a Group Training Manager.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 Data protection or technology incident The Group depends on its information technology systems to operate its business.
Any failure data security breach or technological change could have a significant negative impact on the Groups business.
The Group continues to invest in both hardware and software to ensure business continuity in the event of a disaster.
Further investments are made to protect against viruses and cybercrime.
The new General Data Protection Regulations GDPR due to come into force in the EU in May 2018 significantly increase the penalties associated with protecting European customers data.
Dayto day operational excellence Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9
Reliance on key personnel Loss of key personnel including members of the Board and the senior management team could impact the Groups ability to expand and manage daytoday operations.
Sourcing appropriate replacements may be more challenging given the Groups location in Barbados.
In addition key personnel expertise and skill in identifying new acquisitions and opportunities and managing projects is critical to the Groups success.
The Group operates an LTIP which includes the senior management team.
This is expected to support retention and motivate the team to achieve strategic objectives.
The Board and senior management team have been strengthened in 2017 by the addition of a new Chief Financial Officer and NonExecutive Director.
The Board and Executive Directors also reassess the skills and experience of the senior management team on a regular basis and identify requirements and opportunities for additional training or support.
The Groups strategic focus has continued to broaden towards expansion and developing the existing portfolio increasing the reliance on key personnel and risks associated with skills and experience.
Develop existing portfolio
Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 Execution risk for new development Issues with project management or difficulties sourcing appropriate human and physical resources can cause delays to openings and refurbishments or affect the quality of the finished offerings.
This may impact the Groups reputation its achievement of strategic objectives and reduce revenue and profitability.
The Group prepares project management plans outsources elements of the project to design and construction firms and hires project managers where required.
The Group conducts return on investment analysis including sensitivity analysis on all major projects expansion and capital spending.
The Groups strategic focus has continued to broaden towards expansion and developing the existing portfolio increasing execution risk.
Develop existing portfolio
Read more about our strategy on pages 7 to 9 21 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Empowerment of women  The majority of senior management across the Elegant Hotels Group are female.
One of the key outcomes of the Groups value creation model is to build a positive social and environmental legacy.
In addition our critical resources and inputs to our business model include engaged employees and environmental and natural resources.
Therefore we always consider our impact on Barbados the Caribbean and its people in our operations and our strategic plans.
INVESTING IN OUR EMPLOYEES Elegant is the largest hotel operator on the island of Barbados employing over 1000 people local to the region.
We invest in the engagement and development of our team members in a number of ways.
TRAINING AND ADVANCEMENT
Regular training is undertaken by all team members using specialist internal and external trainers.
Training is provided to meet Hospitality Standards in areas of operations health and safety environmental and sociocultural.
The Group also places considerable emphasis on maintaining good relations with its employees.
Employees are consulted through their representatives so that their views may be taken into account in making decisions which may affect them.
We encourage our employees to achieve greatest productivity and personal satisfaction and we strive to ensure that our team members know that their hard work is valued by celebrating their performance.
We seek to enhance employee awareness of the business factors affecting the Group through meetings with employees and the dissemination of relevant information.
We are advocates of career advancement and providing opportunities for growth through key strategic initiatives including promotion to management positions from within the Group and our successful management trainee programme.
HEALTH AND WELLNESS The Group is committed to high standards in health and safety.
We seek to provide safe places and systems of work especially with plant and machinery and handling of materials.
Our Human Resources team ensure that appropriate information instruction and training required for an employee to perform their role is in place.
We have well established procedures relating to the reporting and monitoring of health and safety incidents and issues.
Emphasis is placed on all employees having a responsibility to maintain a safe working environment.
We encourage and support our employees to lead healthier lifestyles while at work and beyond.
We want to ensure our employees are happy healthy and engaged.
As part of this we host various health and wellness activities annually across the Group to promote healthy lifestyles including health checks cross country walks and educational seminars and workshops.
GENDER EQUALITY AND SOCIAL INCLUSION Elegant offers equal employment opportunities to all people regardless of colour race creed or gender.
The Group is committed to fair pay and treatment of all its employees and works closely with local unions to deliver on this.
Approximately 54% of the Groups employees and nine out of eleven senior managers excluding Directors across the Group are female a testament to our corporate culture of supporting gender equality and the empowerment of women in our workforce.
We are committed to the employment of people with disabilities and guarantee an interview for those who meet the minimum selection criteria.
We provide training and development for people with disabilities which is tailored where appropriate to ensure they have the opportunity to achieve their potential.
If a team member becomes disabled while in our employment we endeavour to retain them including consulting them about their requirements making reasonable and appropriate adjustments and providing alternative suitable employment where possible.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY Gender equality 54% female
54%
46% 22 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 Elegant Hotels Group team members cleaning the beaches of Barbados on Earth Day 2017.
The General Manager of Turtle Beach Adrian Grant meeting with the Transplant Links Community team.
PRESERVING OUR ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL ASSETS We support environmentally sustainable practices across the
It is our policy to act in a manner so as to minimise the effects of our operations on the environment.
The majority of our hotels are Green Globe certified a globally recognised certification reserved for companies who practice sustainable tourism and are committed to making positive contributions to people and the planet.
During the year we introduced a number of new initiatives such as our group wide beach cleanup in recognition of the globally observed Earth Day.
Over 200 Elegant team members played their part in keeping Barbados beaches clean collecting in excess of 200 bags of debris plastic and other garbage found along a 12kilometre stretch of beach.
As in prior years the Group has a number of initiatives including dedicated recycling programmes for materials such as cardboard plastic glass and paper waste and water management the use of energy efficient lighting systems to reduce energy consumption donation of shredded paper and gently used linens to various organisations and supporting the Barbados Sea Turtle Projects efforts to restore the turtle population to levels at which they can fulfil their ecological roles.
We also incorporate environmentally sustainable practices into the guest experience through our linen and towel reuse programme.
DELIVERING POSITIVE SOCIAL BENEFITS TO OUR COMMUNITIES Across the Group our commitment to bring positive change to the communities we work in is unwavering.
We continue to actively support a number of charitable organisations in Barbados and abroad.
In the year we provided more than 100 donations to local churches schools orphanages sports clubs and other non governmental organisations and fundraisers.
While Barbados was fortunate to escape damage from major storms in the region we supported emergency relief efforts with US10000 in a range of supplies for affected Caribbean islands.
This year we partnered with Transplant Links Community a UK charity which has started a living donor kidney transplant programme in Barbados aimed at saving lives on the island.
Seven members of the charity stayed at one of our allinclusive resorts Turtle Beach while they performed a successful transplant and conducted a week of training for staff at the Barbados Queen Elizabeth Hospital.
We continue to lend our support to local institutions including the Barbados Community College the University of West Indies and the Barbados Vocational Board by providing numerous internship opportunities across the Group.
This year a number of students completed internships across the Group gaining essential firsthand industry experience.
At Elegant we strongly believe that our rich heritage should be preserved and celebrated.
Guests are provided with opportunities to learn about the heritage and culture of Barbados through a variety of activities including community walks island tours cooking demonstrations and entertainment at the hotels showcasing local artists through dance and music.
We have established clear guidelines for guests wishing to visit culturally or historically sensitive sites in order to minimise visitor impact and maximise enjoyment.
23 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Simon joined the Elegant Hotels Group in 2009 and has over 20 years experience in the hospitality sector.
He was previously a manager at the Boston Consulting Group and holds an MBA from Harvard Business School.
Prior to joining Elegant he was CEO of OrientExpress Hotels now Belmond where he successfully led the groups IPO on the New York Stock Exchange.
At the time of his departure OrientExpress Hotels had a market capitalisation in excess of US2 billion.
Simon is also Chairman of Panther Partners Limited which is the holding company of DandD Restaurants who operate over 30 restaurants mostly located in London.
Jeff joined Elegant Hotels Group in 2016 having previously been Corporate Finance Director and Group Financial Controller of Rocco Forte Hotels.
Previous roles have included Finance Director of the De Vere Hotel Group Head of External Reporting at Cable and Wireless Group and Project Manager for the International Accounting Standards Board.
A Chartered Accountant Jeff started his career at KPMG in Australia before working with Deloitte in both Melbourne and London.
Sunil joined the Elegant Hotels Group in 2010 as CFO and became CEO in 2012.
He has over 15 years of leisure industry experience and is the former Chairman of the Barbados Hotel and Tourism Association.
Sunil is also a nonexecutive director of Royal Fidelity Merchant Bank Trust Limited.
Sunil is a Chartered Accountant and holds an MBA from the University of Bradford.
Steve has over 20 years of investment banking experience including 11 years at Cazenove and JPMorgan Cazenove four years at UBS and four years at Macquarie Capital where he was Head of European Equity Capital Markets and Corporate Broking.
Steve is also a non executive director of Plus500 Ltd and an advisory board member of Wings Corporate Travel and Wolf and Badger.
Steve qualified as a Chartered Accountant with Coopers and Lybrand in 1993 and holds a BA from St Catherines College Oxford.
SIMON SHERWOOD NonExecutive Chairman JEFF SINGLETON Chief Financial Officer SUNIL CHATRANI
Chief Executive Officer
STEVE BALDWIN Senior NonExecutive Director A R N 24 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS Luke joined the Elegant Hotels Group in 2017 and brings with him a wealth of leisure industry knowledge and a track record of helping companies achieve their growth plans.
Luke is the Chairman of private equity house Risk Capital Partners LLP.
He has an extensive range of other public and private company roles including the chairmanships of Patisserie Holdings PLC The Brighton Pier Group PLC and Neilson Active Holidays Ltd.
Previous chairmanships have included Channel 4 Television Corporation PizzaExpress Royal Society of Arts and Giraffe
Luke holds a BA from Magdalen College
David joined Elegant Hotels Group in 2015.
He has over 30 years experience in retail and consumerfacing businesses and was formerly the CFO and deputy CEO at House of Fraser plc and Executive Chairman at Jessops plc.
David currently holds nonexecutive roles in Conviviality plc Halfords plc Thinksmart plc and Fevertree Drinks plc.
David has an MA from Edinburgh University and is a Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Management Accountants.
LUKE JOHNSON NonExecutive Director DAVID ADAMS NonExecutive Director A R N
Member of the Audit Committee Member of the Remuneration Committee Member of the Nomination Committee Denotes Chairman of the Committee 25 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION The Board delegates some of its responsibilities to Board Committees which make recommendations to the Board as required.
The CEO is responsible for day today management of the Group.
He convenes regular meetings of the Executive Committee to oversee execution of the Board approved strategy.
The composition and responsibilities of the Executive Committee are discussed further below.
The CFO leads the Risk Committee comprised of the Executive Directors and senior members of operating and legal functions which identifies and manages risks using the operational risk assessment and management process set out in the Principal Risk and Uncertainties section on pages 18 to 21.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The Board recognises the importance of sound corporate governance.
It has adopted policies and procedures where appropriate which reflect the QCAs Corporate Governance Guidelines for Small and Midsized Quoted Companies as appropriate for the Group taking into account the size of the Group and the nature of its business.
THE BOARD The Board has responsibility for setting the Groups strategy and ensuring that its financial policies and procedures are appropriate taking into account the size of the Group and nature of its business.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT SIMON SHERWOOD
ATTENDANCE
Board
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Number of meetings Attendees Simon Sherwood 1415 44  22 Sunil Chatrani 1515 Jeff Singleton 1010 Steve Baldwin 1515 77 44 22 Luke Johnson 33 David Adams 1415 77 44 22 Richard Jones 44 GOVERNANCE FRAMEWORK ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC BOARD
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
AUDIT
COMMITTEE
CFO CEO
COMMITTEE
EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE
26 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 In addition to matters such as the approval of dividends accounts and policies the Board approves investments and capital expenditure projects over 500k in order to ensure their strategic fit with the business.
The Board meets formally at least six times a year.
For the period under review the Board has had 15 meetings.
The Board is supported by the Audit Committee the Nomination Committee and the Remuneration
Further information on the Audit and Remuneration Committees is set out in their reports on pages 28 to 34 and further information on the Nomination Committee is set out below.
BOARD COMPOSITION AND ROTATION OF DIRECTORS The Company currently has six Directors four of whom are Non
Directors biographies including the Committees on which they serve and chair are shown on pages 24 and 25.
Two of the Directors Steve Baldwin and David Adams are regarded as independent of the management of the Group.
It is the Groups policy to ensure that the number of Executive Directors does not exceed the number of Independent NonExecutive
The Board ensures that there is a NonExecutive Director appointed as the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
This position is currently held by Steve Baldwin.
All Directors are subject to election by shareholders at the first Annual General Meeting after their appointment and to reelection thereafter at intervals of no more than three years.
NonExecutive
Directors who have served longer than nine years should be subject to annual reelection.
Simon Sherwood Sunil Chatrani Steve Baldwin and David Adams are due for reelection at the 2019 Annual General Meeting.
Jeff Singleton and Luke Johnson are due for election at the 2018 Annual General Meeting.
The composition of the Board is regularly reviewed to ensure that it is of an appropriate size scale and balance as the Group considers its plans for the future.
The Board recognises that diversity in all its forms be it gender skillset cultural background or ethnicity is essential to the achievement of the Groups objectives and long term strategy.
On appointment Directors receive a full induction on the Company and its operations facilitated by the Chairman and have training available to them on an ongoing basis.
All Directors have access to the advice of the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director.
Directors are also able to take independent professional advice in relation to their duties as Directors of the Company at the Companys expense should they wish to do so.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE As well as the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees the Board is assisted by an Executive
This committee comprises the Executive Directors and representatives from Human Resources Operations Sales and Marketing and Legal.
It meets monthly and assists the Chief Executive Officer with the daytoday governance of the business and the execution of the Groups strategy.
NOMINATION COMMITTEE
The Nomination Committee identifies and nominates for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies as and when they arise.
The Nomination Committee is chaired by Steve Baldwin whilst David Adams and Simon Sherwood are the other members.
The Nomination Committee meets as required.
During the year the Nomination Committee with the assistance of an independent Londonbased search company conducted a thorough search for a Chief Financial Officer to replace Richard Jones.
Jeff Singleton was identified and nominated for approval by the Board.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The Board requires Directors to declare all appointments or other matters which could result in a possible conflict of interest and has adopted appropriate processes to manage and if appropriate approve any such conflict.
RELATIONSHIP WITH
The Groups Chief Financial Officer acts as the primary daytoday point of contact with the investment community and is responsible for maintaining the Groups ongoing relations with investors and shareholders.
The Chairman and Executive Directors maintain regular dialogue and interaction with major shareholders and potential investors and the Board is also regularly appraised of shareholder feedback.
The Companys website is regularly updated to keep shareholders fully informed of material developments in the Group and care is taken to ensure that any pricesensitive information is released to all shareholders at the same time.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Simon Sherwood
8 January 2018 27 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
The Audit Committee is an essential element of the Groups governance framework to which the Board has delegated oversight of the Groups financial reporting risk management and external audit.
It has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Group is properly measured and reported on and reviewing reports from the Groups auditors relating to the Groups accounting and internal controls in all cases having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
COMPOSITION AND MEETINGS The Audit Committee is comprised of Steve Baldwin Chairman and David Adams.
Simon Sherwood was a member until March 2017.
Other Directors are invited to attend meetings as required.
Meetings are also attended by invitation and as considered appropriate by the Committee by the Chief Executive Officer Sunil Chatrani the Chief Financial Officer Jeff Singleton and other members of the Groups senior management team.
The Audit Committee meets at least twice a year.
The Committee met on 7 occasions in the period from 1 October 2016 to the end of the financial year on 30 September 2017 including a meeting in June 2017 to review and approve the release of the interim results to 31 March 2017 and in July 2017 to discuss the budget preparation and planning for the year end.
The external auditors were present at two meetings.
Since the end of the financial year the Committee has met on two further occasions to consider this Annual Report with the external auditors being present on one occasion.
All members of the Committee were present at each of the meetings held.
The Board considers that the Chairman of the Audit Committee has appropriate recent and relevant financial experience.
FUNCTIONS RESPONSIBILITIES AND KEY ACTIVITIES The Committees main responsibilities as set out in its terms of reference are to review and advise the Board on the following principal matters FINANCIAL REPORTING the integrity of the financial statements of the Group significant financial reporting issues and judgements any unsatisfactory aspect of the proposed financial reporting by the Group and appropriateness of the going concern basis of preparation.
NARRATIVE REPORTING the content of the Annual Report and Financial Statements and whether the report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
INTERNAL CONTROLS AND RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups internal financial controls and internal control and risk management systems and the statements to be included in the Annual Report concerning internal controls and risk management.
COMPLIANCE WHISTLEBLOWING AND FRAUD the adequacy and security of the Groups arrangements for its employees and contractors to raise concerns in confidence about possible wrongdoing in financial reporting or other matters the Groups procedures for detecting fraud the Groups systems and controls for the prevention of bribery and to receive reports on noncompliance and the adequacy and effectiveness of the Groups compliance function.
STEVE BALDWIN Chairman Audit Committee 28 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 INTERNAL AUDIT the effectiveness of the Groups approach to internal audit in the context of the Companys overall risk management system.
EXTERNAL AUDIT recommendations to be put to shareholders for approval at the Annual General Meeting in relation to the appointment re appointment and removal of the Groups external auditor the auditors remit and any issues arising from the audit the annual audit plans consistency with the scope of the audit engagement having regard to the seniority expertise and experience of the audit team the findings of the audit including any major issues which arose during the audit key accounting and audit judgements levels of errors identified during the audit and the effectiveness of the audit process and policy on the supply of nonaudit services by the external auditor to avoid any threat to auditor objectivity and independence.
REPORTING RESPONSIBILITIES proceedings after each meeting on all matters within its duties and responsibilities and how it has discharged its responsibilities significant issues that it considered in relation to the financial statements and how these were addressed effectiveness of the external audit process and recommendation on the appointment or re appointment of the external auditor and any other issues on which the Board has requested the Committees opinion.
GOING CONCERN ASSESSMENT The Committee assessed the Groups ability to continue as a going concern by reviewing its operating and financing assumptions for a period 20 months from the date of assessment.
This assessment was prepared by management and included sensitivity analysis to account for potential changes in circumstances from the underlying assumptions.
This assessment was updated on 8 January 2018.
The Committee concluded that the Group is able to continue as a going concern.
SIGNIFICANT ISSUES The Audit Committee gives consideration to issues it considers important by virtue of their impact on the Groups results or the level of complexity judgement or estimation involved in their application.
In addition the Audit Committee periodically reviews papers presented by management on significant accounting policies and estimates as set out in notes 2 and 3 to the financial statements.
The main issues considered by the Audit Committee in relation to the 2017 financial statements were Acquisition accounting for Treasure Beach  reviewed papers prepared by management in accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations including the key assumptions and judgements such as the purchase price allocation.
The Committee concluded that the Groups allocation of the purchase price was reasonable Impairment testing  reviewed key management judgements including definitions of cash generating units longterm growth rates and discount rates applied.
INTERNAL CONTROLS
AND RISK MANAGEMENT
FRAMEWORK
The Board is responsible for the internal controls of the Group.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in its responsibility to ensure the operation of effective systems of internal control and risk management appropriate to the Groups business.
The Audit Committee has concluded that sound risk management and internal controls have been in operation throughout the annual accounting period.
The Groups internal control framework is intended to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material financial misstatement or loss.
The Groups internal control environment consists of Codes of conduct and policies Appropriate governance and organisational structures Risk management framework Review and testing of accounting and control systems Process to ensure compliance with rules and regulations Individual responsibilities and documented delegation of authorities An annual budget is prepared against which specific objectives and targets are set.
This budget is approved by the Board and reviewed on a regular basis.
Senior management monitors trading activity weekly and prepares and reviews internal management accounts monthly with comparisons against the latest plan and the prior year Monitoring of performance against budget and key KPIs Review and challenge at senior management and Board level Corrective action from top down and bottom up Annual Audit Committee review and External audit review.
The risk management framework is set out in more detail in the Risk Management section of this report on pages 18 to 21.
The Group will continue to review and develop operating documentation and controls as the business develops.
29 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND REPORTING The Committee is satisfied that the Annual Report and Financial Statements taken as a whole provides a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Groups performance position business model and strategy at 30 September 2017 and has advised the Board accordingly.
The Committee is also satisfied that the judgements made by management are reasonable and that appropriate disclosures in relation to key judgements and estimates have been included in the financial statements.
In reaching these conclusions the Committee has considered the information provided by management has constructively challenged assumptions and has considered detailed reporting from and discussions with the external auditors.
In addition the Committee has considered the procedures in place to ensure a fair balanced and understandable annual report and accounts which include review by financial and non financial management.
EXTERNAL AUDIT KPMG have been the external auditors of the Group since 2015 when the Groups shares were admitted to AIM.
A review of KPMGs independence and audit process effectiveness is performed each year before a recommendation is made to the Board to propose KPMG for reelection at the
In assessing KPMGs independence the Committee received confirmation that in KPMGs professional judgement KPMG is independent within the meaning of all UK regulatory and professional requirements and the objectivity of the audit partner and staff are not impaired.
In the 201718 financial year the Committee proposes to further safeguard the independence of the external auditor by removing tax compliance and consultancy work from the external auditors remit.
The Committee has reviewed and agreed the scope and methodology of the work undertaken by the Groups external auditors.
It has evaluated their independence and objectivity and has agreed the terms of their engagement and the fees to be paid to them.
The total fees paid to KPMG for the year ended 30 September 2017 were 0.3 million 2016 0.5 million of which 0.1 million 2016 0.2 million related to nonaudit work.
The non audit work related primarily to tax compliance and consultancy work as discussed above.
KPMG were considered independent in relation to this work as no accounting judgement was involved.
WHISTLEBLOWING
The Chairman of the Audit Committee is listed as the Designated Officer under the Groups Whistleblowing Policy.
During the year no whistleblowing instances were reported.
INTERNAL AUDIT FUNCTION Given the Groups size and development the Board did not consider it necessary to have an internal audit function during the year.
The Board will continue to monitor this requirement annually.
Steve Baldwin Chairman Audit Committee 8 January 2018 REPORT OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
30 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 REPORT OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE INTRODUCTION FROM THE CHAIRMAN On behalf of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present the Remuneration Report for the year ended 30 September 2017.
The Committee seeks to provide a framework that is aligned to the strategy and values of the business and to the interests of our shareholders.
It recognises the need to recruit retain and appropriately incentivise highcalibre managers to deliver the Groups strategy.
I hope you find the report clear and informative.
OVERVIEW
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for reviewing the performance of the senior executives the Executive Directors and the Groups Chairman as well as determining the scale and structure of their remuneration their terms and conditions of service and the grant of share awards having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The Committee is also responsible for reviewing the overall policy in respect of remuneration of all other employees of the Group and establishing the Groups policy and operation of share option schemes.
In determining the remuneration of senior executives the Committee seeks to enable the Group to attract and retain executives of the highest calibre.
The Committee also makes recommendations to the Board concerning the allocation of options to executives under the LTIP and for the administration of this scheme.
COMPOSITION AND MEETINGS The Remuneration Committee consists of two NonExecutive Directors being David Adams Chairman and Steve Baldwin.
Other Directors are invited to attend meetings as required.
The Remuneration Committee meets at least twice a year.
AIM REQUIREMENTS As an AIM company Elegant Hotels Group plc is not required to comply with Schedule 8 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008.
However certain disclosures have been made in line with Schedule 8 on a voluntary basis mindful of rule 19 of the AIM
The content of this report is unaudited unless stated.
KEY ACTIVITIES During the year the Committee Considered and approved the remuneration for the new Chief Financial Officer Reviewed proposals for and grant of longterm incentive plans for the Executive Directors Chairman and senior management team Reviewed allocation of issued share capital to longterm incentive and share option plans Reviewed salary and bonus arrangements for the Executive Directors and senior management team and Considered termination arrangements for Richard Jones.
DAVID ADAMS
Remuneration Committee 31 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION REMUNERATION POLICY AND ADVISORS The objectives of the remuneration policy are to ensure that the overall remuneration of senior executives is aligned with the performance of the Group and preserves an appropriate balance of annual profit delivery and longerterm shareholder value.
The Committee keeps the remuneration policy in particular the need for share ownership guidelines for Executive Directors regularly under review and will take action whenever deemed necessary to ensure that remuneration is aligned with the overall strategic objectives of the Group.
The Committee seeks the advice of appropriate independent advisors where required on remuneration related matters.
The Committee periodically reviews any relationships and remains satisfied that appropriate safeguards exist to ensure the independence of advisors.
LONGTERM INCENTIVE PLAN AND SHAREBASED PAYMENTS POLICY The Chairman Executive Directors and senior managers receive remuneration in the form of equity settled sharebased payments longterm incentive plans whereby they provide services in exchange for options over shares.
On IPO in May 2015 10% of the issued share capital of the Group was allocated for sharebased incentives 5% for employee plans and 5% for nonemployee plans.
It is the Boards intention to seek approval through a special resolution at the next Annual General Meeting to make available the 5% for nonemployee plans to employee plans.
In July 2017 share option awards were issued to the Chairman Executive Directors and senior management.
As with prior years targets were set with reference to Total Shareholder Return TSR 50% of awards and earnings per share EPS 50% of awards measures.
The Remuneration Committee considers that the targets are appropriate and are aligned with shareholder interests.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of options or shares is recognised as an expense on a straightline basis over the vesting period.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the options or shares determined at the grant date excluding the impact of any nonmarket based vesting conditions for example continuation of employment and performance targets.
The share options are valued using the Monte Carlo option pricing model.
Nonmarket based vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to become exercisable or the number of shares that the employee will ultimately receive.
This estimate is revised at each balance sheet date to allow for options that are not expected to vest and the difference is charged or credited to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income with a corresponding adjustment to reserves.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION SUMMARY The remuneration of the Chairman and each Director during the period is set out in the table below
Bonus
Benefits
Pension
Termination payments
Total
Simon Sherwood 134     134 158 Sunil Chatrani 300 45 35   380 342 Jeff Singleton  328 Steve Baldwin 67     67 77 Luke Johnson David Adams 60     60 64 Richard Jones 31  25 telTotal  1183 781 The Chairman and NonExecutive Directors have annual fees denominated in Sterling.
Currency fluctuations will affect their stated remuneration.
Benefits include health insurance travel and relocation allowance.
Luke Johnson elected to receive no fees for his role as a NonExecutive Director Richard Jones resigned as an Executive Director on 16 December 2016.
Both Sunil Chatrani and Jeff Singleton received a bonus equal to 15% of salary during the year for the achievement of certain Group targets.
Jeff Singleton received an additional oneoff bonus equal to 50% of his salary due to his joining arrangements on appointment to the Board.
This bonus is payable in two equal instalments in January 2018 and January 2019 and is forfeited should Jeff resign from the Group prior to its payment.
REPORT OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE
32 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AND CHAIRMAN Remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Chairman and the Chief Executive
The NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to annual bonuses or employee benefits and their fees are subject to annual review.
The Chairmans remuneration is determined by the Committee and until 30 September 2017 the Chairman was eligible to participate in a discretionary annual bonus scheme which would not exceed 30% of the annual fee payable to him for his services to the
In line with best practice on Chairman independence the Committee and the Chairman jointly agreed that the Chairman would not accept a bonus for the 201617 financial year despite being eligible.
From 1 October 2017 the Chairman will no longer participate in the annual bonus scheme.
The Chairman was also eligible to participate in the nonemployee LTIP until 30 September 2017.
The vesting of the awards was subject to the terms of the LTIP which provide that the Remuneration Committee determines whether and to what extent the performance conditions in respect of the award have been satisfied.
Details of awards under the LTIP are included in the Interests section opposite.
In line with best practice from 1 October 2017 the Chairman will no longer participate in the nonemployee LTIP.
Each of the Chairman and the Non Executive Directors have a letter of appointment stating their annual fee and termination terms.
The Chairman and NonExecutive Directors appointments are for a period of three years from the date of the letter of appointment or the date of Admission if later.
The appointments are terminable on three months written notice at any time by either the Company or the NonExecutive Director.
A summary of their remuneration and appointment dates is shown opposite.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The Executive Directors remuneration is determined by the Committee.
They are eligible to participate in a discretionary annual bonus scheme which shall not exceed the percentage of their annual fees or salary payable as set out below.
Payment of any bonus is subject to approval by the Remuneration Committee.
The Executive Directors are also eligible to participate in the employee and nonemployee LTIP as appropriate.
The vesting of the awards is subject to the terms of the LTIP which provide that the Remuneration Committee determines whether and to what extent the performance conditions in respect of the award have been satisfied.
Details of awards under the LTIP are included in the Directors interests section opposite.
SUNIL CHATRANI Sunil Chatrani is engaged as Chief Executive Officer of the Company under a consultancy arrangement dated 11 May 2015 with Sunil Chatranis Barbadian service company and under an appointment letter dated 11 May 2015.
Sunils appointment is terminable by either party on 12 months written notice.
JEFF SINGLETON Jeff Singleton is engaged as Chief Financial Officer of the Company under a service agreement dated 28 February 2017 and a letter of appointment letter dated 1 March 2017.
Jeffs appointment is terminable by either party on six months written notice.
RICHARD JONES Richard Jones was engaged as Group Chief Financial Officer of the Company under a service agreement and was separately appointed as a Director of the Company on the terms of a letter of appointment dated 18 July 2016 which took effect from 1 April 2016.
Richard Jones employment ended on the 15 December 2016 and he resigned from the Board on 16 December 2016.
33 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION APPOINTMENT DATES AND ANNUAL REMUNERATION Date of appointment as Committee
Independent Director Date of letter of appointment Annual fee Simon Sherwood NA 11 May 2015 100000 Steve Baldwin 26 October 2015 11 May 2015 50000 David Adams 26 October 2015 26 October 2015 45000 Luke Johnson NA 25 May 2017 0 Date of appointment as Executive Director Annual feesalary Maximum bonus potential Sunil Chatrani 11 May 2015 300000 30% Jeff Singleton 1 March 2017 220000 30%
The interests of the Directors who served during the period as at 30 September 2017 in the ordinary shares of the Company were as follows 2017 2016 Simon Sherwood 1872028 1872028 Sunil Chatrani 1849389 1849389 Jeff Singleton  NA Steve Baldwin Luke Johnson 11100000 NA David Adams 16000 16000 Three Directors 2016 three were awarded options over ordinary shares in the Group during the year ended 30 September 2017.
As at 30 September 2017 the following Directors who served during the period held the following options over ordinary shares Grant date At 1 October Issued during the year Exercised in the year Forfeited in the year At 30
Exercise price
Sunil Chatrani 8 May 2015 592105   592105  1p 8 May 2020 18 March 2016 194672    194672 1p 18 March 2021 24 July 2017  246448   246448 1p 24 July 2022 786777 246448  592105 441120 Jeff Singleton 24 July 2017  180728   180728 1p 24 July 2022 Simon Sherwood 8 May 2015 407895   407895  1p 8 May 2020 18 March 2016 93896    93896 1p 18 March 2021 24 July 2017  106572   106572 1p 24 July 2022 501791 106572  407895 200468 Richard Jones 18 July 2016 659110  659110  1p 18 July 2021 Total 1947678 533748  1659110 822316 David Adams Chairman Remuneration Committee 8 January 2018 REPORT OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE
34 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and parent Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent Company financial statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the parent Company financial statement on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant and reliable state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the EU assess the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that its financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
By order of the Board Simon Sherwood
8 January 2018 SIMON SHERWOOD
35 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES IN RESPECT OF THE ANNUAL REPORT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS TO THE MEMBERS OF ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC OUR OPINION IS UNMODIFIED We have audited the financial statements of Elegant Hotels Group plc the Company for the year ended 30 September 2017 which comprise the consolidated statement of comprehensive income the consolidated and company statement of financial position the consolidated statement of changes in equity the company statement of changes in equity the consolidated and company statement of cash flows and the related notes including the accounting policies in note 2.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent Companys affairs as at 30 September 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU the parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Overview
Materiality 525000 2016 700000 Group financial statements as a whole 4.8% 2016 5.9% of Group profit before tax Coverage 97% 2016 100% of the total profits and losses that made up Group profit before tax Risks of material misstatement vs 2016 Event driven Acquisition of Treasure Beach Recurring risks Recoverability of parent Companys investment in subsidiaries tu 36 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT 2.
KEY AUDIT MATTERS OUR ASSESSMENT OF RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows The risk Our response Acquisition of Treasure Beach Refer to page 29 Audit Committee Report page 45 accounting policy and pages 49 to 50 financial disclosures.
Accounting application A significant transaction during the year was the acquisition of Treasure Beach in May 2017 for The bargain purchase gain recognised was 1.3m.
Given the majority of the value acquired was property plant and equipment there is judgement required in determining whether or not the transaction is a business combination or an asset acquisition under the relevant accounting standard.
Subjective valuation The assets and liabilities acquired are required to be measured at their acquisitiondate fair values.
The valuation of land and buildings includes subjective assumptions which determine the valuation total.
Our procedures included Accounting analysis We challenged whether a business combination was the appropriate accounting treatment based on our review of the SPA and discussion with the Directors.
We considered the specific factors in the acquisition against the relevant accounting standards identification rules of business combination vs asset purchase.
Assessing valuers credentials Assessed the third party valuation report for the PPE acquired as part of the business combination through consideration of the competence and independence of the third party provider.
Benchmarking assumptions We challenged the highest and best use valuation basis based on our understanding and knowledge of the sector.
We challenged the key assumptions used such as occupancy rate discount rate and cost of refurbishment by comparing to industry norms and historic financial information.
Comparing valuations Compared the valuation to those of similar transactions in the marketplace.
Assessing transparency Assessed the adequacy of the disclosures around the business combination.
Recoverability of parent companys investment in subsidiaries 104.6m million 2016 125.1m Refer to page 45 accounting policy and page 64 financial disclosures.
Low risk high value The carrying amount of the parent Companys investments in subsidiaries represents 100% 2016 99% of the parent Companys total assets.
Their recoverability is not at a high risk of significant misstatement or subject to significant judgement.
However due to their materiality in the context of the parent Company financial statements this is considered to be the area that had the greatest effect on our overall parent Company audit.
Our procedures included Tests of detail Compared the carrying amount of 100% of investments with the relevant subsidiaries draft balance sheets to identify whether their net assets being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amount were in excess of their carrying amount and assessing whether those subsidiaries have historically been profit making.
Assessing subsidiary audits Assessed the work performed by the subsidiary audit teams on all of those subsidiaries and considering the results of that work on those subsidiaries profits and net assets.
37 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 3.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY AND AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Materiality for the Group financial statements as a whole was set at 525000 2016 700000 determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before tax of 10987000 2016 11789000 of which it represents 4.8% 2016 5.9%.
Materiality for the parent Company financial statements as a whole was set at 458000 2016 458000 determined with reference to a benchmark of parent company total assets of which it represents 0.4% 2016 0.4%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 26000 2016 35000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 23 2016 21 reporting components we subjected 10 2016 21 to full scope audits for Group purposes and 1 2016 0 to specified riskfocused audit procedures.
The latter component was not individually financially significant enough in 2017 to require a full scope audit for Group purposes but did present specific individual risks that needed to be addressed.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the percentages illustrated opposite.
For the residual components we performed analysis at an aggregated Group level to reexamine our assessment that there were no significant risks of material misstatement within these.
The Group team instructed the component auditor as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed above and the information to be reported back.
The Group team approved the component materialities of 395000 2016 458000 having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
The work on 9 of the 10 components 2016 21 of the 22 components was performed by the component auditor and the rest including the audit of the parent Company was performed by the Group team.
The Group team visited the only component location i.
Barbados 2016 Barbados for the components not audited by the Group audit team to assess the audit risk and strategy.
Telephone conference meetings were also held with this component auditor.
At this visit and meetings the findings reported to the Group team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group team was then performed by the component auditor.
The audit of the parent Company was performed by the Group team.
Prot before tax Group materiality 100% 2016 100% tel% 2016 100% Group Total Assets Full scope for Group audit purposes 2017 Specied riskfocused audit procedures 2017 Full scope for Group audit purposes 2016 Specied riskfocused audit procedures 2016 Residual Components 2016 Prot before tax 2016  11.8m Group revenue Group Prot before tax Group materiality 525000 2016 700000 Whole nancial statements materiality 2016 700000 Component materiality at 395000 2016 458000 Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 35000 99% 38 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
CONTINUED 4.
WE HAVE NOTHING TO REPORT ON GOING CONCERN We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
WE HAVE NOTHING TO REPORT ON THE OTHER INFORMATION IN THE ANNUAL REPORT The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the financial statements.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our financial statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the financial statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic report and Directors report Based solely on our work on the other information we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report and the Directors report in our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the financial statements and in our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
WE HAVE NOTHING TO REPORT ON THE OTHER MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
RESPECTIVE RESPONSIBILITIES Directors responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 35 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
THE PURPOSE OF OUR AUDIT WORK AND TO WHOM WE OWE OUR RESPONSIBILITIES This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Jonathan Russell Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square
E14 5GL 12 January 2018 39 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION Note Year ended 30 September Year ended 30 September restated Revenue 5 59872 56981 Cost of sales 24378 21863 Gross profit 35494 35118 Selling general and administrative expenses Before exceptional items and bargain purchase gain 22900 20074 Exceptional items 9 1054 2188 Bargain purchase gain 4 6 1259 22695 22262 Other operating income 986 1112 Operating profit 13785 13968 Finance income 10 12 22 Finance expenses 10 2810 2201 Finance expenses  net 2798 2179 Profit before taxation 6 10987 11789 Taxation 11 1799 2004 Profit for the year and total comprehensive income attributable to equity holders of the parent company 9188 9785 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share cents 12 10.3 11.0 Diluted earnings per share cents 12 10.3 11.0 Other comprehensive income Items that may be subsequently reclassified to profit or loss Currency translation differences 112 Total comprehensive income for the year 9076 9785 NonGAAP measures EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Operating profit 13785 13968 Loss on disposal of assets 49 Depreciation and amortisation 6 4135 3230 Impairment of shortterm investments 18 34 EBITDA 18003 17198 Exceptional items 9 1054 2188 Nonexceptional sharebased payment charges 287 180 Bargain purchase gain 4 6 1259 Adjusted EBITDA 18085 19566 Adjusted EBITDA margin 30.2% 34.4% All amounts relate to continuing activities.
The notes on pages 44 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
40 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME Note
Group restated
Company
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiary undertakings 30   104639 125127 Property plant and equipment 13 183714 172788 Intangible assets 14 114 Deferred tax assets 15 4938 5138 188766 177926 104639 125127 Current assets Inventories 16 3062 2950 Trade and other receivables 17 4668 3618 42 18 Shortterm investments 18 33 67 Cash and cash equivalents 19 996 3704  611 8759 10339 42 629 Total assets 197525 188265 104681 125756 Current liabilities Loans and borrowings 20 7095 4969 Bank overdraft 19 411 Trade and other payables 21 7081 7293 43 935 Provisions 22 615 261 Tax payable 892 1678 16094 14201 43 935 Noncurrent liabilities Loans and borrowings 20 66602 60531 Deferred tax liabilities 15 5047 4569 Total liabilities 87743 79301 43 935 Net assets 109782 108964 104638 124821 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent Share capital 24 1367 1367 1367 1367 Merger reserve 43497 43497 86208 86208 Sharebased payment reserve 55telRetained earnings at the beginning of the year 63191 60483 36337 43341 Profitloss for the year attributable to the owners 9188 9785 142 575 Other changes in retained earnings 8017 7077 19972 6429 Retained earnings 64362 63191 16507 36337 Total equity 109782 108964 104638 124821 The notes on pages 44 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
Approved on behalf of the Board of Directors on 8 January 2018 and signed on its behalf by Sunil Chatrani Jeff Singleton Director Director 41 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL POSITION Note
Merger reserve
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 October 2015 1367 43497 494 60483 105841 Profit for the year restated    9785 9785 Total comprehensive income for the year restated    9785 9785 Foreign exchange    57 57 Dividends    7134 7134 Sharebased payments 23   415  415 Total transactions with owners recognised directly in equity   415 7077 6662 Balance at 30 September 2016 restated 1367 43497 909 63191 108964 Profit for the year    9188 9188 Foreign exchange    112 112 Total comprehensive income for the year    9076 9076 Dividends    7905 7905 Sharebased payments 23   353  353 Total transactions with owners recognised directly in equity   353 7905 8258 Balance at 30 September 2017 1367 43497 556 64362 109782 The notes on pages 44 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
Note
Share capital
Sharebased payment reserve
Total equity Balance at 1 October 2015 1367 86208 494 43341 131410 Loss for the year    575 575 Total comprehensive loss for the year    575 575 Currency translation differences    705 705 Dividends    7134 7134 Sharebased payments 23   415  415 Total transactions with owners recognised directly in equity   415 6429 6014 Balance at 30 September 2016 1367 86208 909 36337 124821 Profit for the year    142 142 Currency translation differences    12067 12067 Total comprehensive loss for the year    11925 11925 Dividends    7905 7905 Sharebased payments 23   353  353 Total transactions with owners recognised directly in equity   353 7905 8258 Balance at 30 September 2017 1367 86208 556 16507 104638 The notes on pages 44 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
42 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY Group
Company
Company
Cash flows from operating activities Profitloss after taxation 9188 9785 142 575 Depreciation and amortisation 4135 3230 Impairment of shortterm investment 34 Income tax expense 1799 2004 Net finance expense 2810 2201 283 660 Bargain purchase gain 1259 Lossgain on disposal of fixed assets 49 78 Sharebased payments 353 415 353 415 Foreign exchange    86 Increase in provisions 354 261 Operating profit before working capital changes 16757 17818 72 414 Increase in inventories 112 156 Increase in trade and other receivables 1237 21 24 1 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 426 58 892 122 Increasedecrease in due to related parties   9438 1506 Increasedecrease in due from related parties   1017 11108 Taxation paid 2489 687 Net cash generated from operating activities 12493 17012 7577 10137 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 5440 9660 Purchase of intangible assets 137 Proceeds from disposal of equipment 212 669 Acquisition of subsidiary net of cash acquired 7766 3424 Net cash used in investing activities 13131 12415 Cash flows from financing activities Receipt of bank loans 13316 18500 Repayment of bank borrowings 4120 12226 Repayment of third party loans 1000 1414 Dividends paid 7905 9526 7905 9526 Interest paid 2489 1826 Loss on forward contract settlement 283  283 Net cash used in financing activities 2481 6492 8188 9526 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 3119 1895 611 611 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the year net of overdraft 3704 5599 611 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year net of overdraft 585 3704  611 Bank overdraft 411 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 996 3704  611 The notes on pages 44 to 64 form part of these financial statements.
The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.12.
43 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS 1.
GENERAL INFORMATION Elegant Hotels Group plc Elegant Hotels or the Company is a public limited company incorporated in the UK and listed on the Alternative Investment Market AIM of the London Stock Exchange.
The address of the registered office is 10 Norwich Street London EC4A 1BD.
The principal activity of the Company and its subsidiaries collectively the Group is the ownership and operation of hotels and restaurants in the Caribbean principally on the island of Barbados.
During the year the Group acquired Treasure Beach a Barbadosbased 35 room hotel.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of these Company and Consolidated Financial Statements are set out below.
They have been consistently applied in the financial years ending 30 September 2017 201617 financial year and 30 September 2016 201516 financial year unless otherwise stated.
BASIS OF PREPARATION The financial statements of Elegant Hotels Group plc and the consolidated financial statements for the Group have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the EU and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The Company has taken advantage of the exemption provided under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to publish its individual Income Statement and related notes.
The Company and Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared on the historical cost basis modified by the revaluation of certain assets and liabilities at amortised cost.
The functional currency of the Company is United States dollars .
The dominant currency of the trading entities is United States dollars.
The Company and Group presents the financial statements in United States dollars and all information is stated in United States dollars unless otherwise indicated.
All amounts have been rounded to the nearest thousand 000 unless otherwise indicated.
GOING CONCERN The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements with the assistance of its bank facilities which were renewed on 26 May 2015.
The Groups forecasts and projections take account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance and show that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current facilities meet future debt repayments and continue to comply with its banking covenants for at least the foreseeable future.
The Directors consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Group financial statements.
PRIOR YEAR ADJUSTMENT  CORRECTION OF DEFERRED TAX ON ACQUISITION RESTATEMENT OF PRIOR PERIOD FIGURES A prior year adjustment has arisen in respect of the year ended 30 September 2016.
In the preparation of these financial statements the Directors identified that a deferred tax liability that should have been recognised on the 3 March 2016 acquisition through business combination of Waves Hotel and Spa had been omitted from the acquisition accounting and the 2016 statement of financial position.
The deferred tax relates to buildings acquired through that business combination for which there is no recognition exemption.
As a result the Directors have made a prior period adjustment to correct this restating the prior year consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated statement of financial position consolidated statement of changes in equity consolidated statement of cash flows and related notes as at 30 September 2016 to eliminate the bargain purchase gain in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and record the deferred tax liability of 3995k in the consolidated statement of financial position as set out below.
In addition the Directors have made a restatement to gross up the prior year deferred tax balances by 574k a reclassification of liabilities out of deferred tax assets in order to correctly present their position.
The affected balances have been marked as restated.
As previously reported
Restated
Bargain purchase gain 3995 3995 Deferred tax liability  4569 4569 Deferred tax asset 4564 574 5138 The impact on profit before and after tax is a decrease of 3995k and the impact on net assets is a decrease of 3995k.
The impact on both basic and diluted EPS is a reduction from 15.5 to 11.0 cents per share.
44 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2.1.3.
CHANGES IN ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND DISCLOSURES No new standards interpretations or amendments effective for the first time to the year ended 30 September 2017 have had a material impact on the consolidated results or financial position of the Group or Company.
Management is assessing the following standards interpretations and amendments which are not yet effective or adopted for the impact on the Group IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective date for accounting periods from 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with Customers effective date for accounting periods from 1 January 2018.
Management has reviewed IFRS 15 and is considering the treatment of service charge in accordance with the revised standard.
Currently service charge collected as part of revenue and paid to employees is not recorded as revenue.
If service charge was recorded as revenue it would increase revenue by circa 10%.
There would be no impact on profit as a result of any change.
IFRS 16 Leases effective date for accounting periods from 1 January 2019.
This standard has not yet been endorsed by the EU.
Management has reviewed IFRS 16 and does not believe it will have a material impact on the Group.
The Group owns all of its properties and has very few arrangements that meet the definition of a lease per IFRS 16.
Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions  Amendments to IFRS 2.
This amendment has not yet been endorsed for use in the EU.
Annual improvements to IFRSs 20142016 Cycle  Minor amendments to various accounting standards effective for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 onwards.
This amendment has not yet been endorsed for use in the EU.
The other standards not yet in effect are not expected to have a material impact on the Group or Company.
New standards interpretations or amendments effective for the first time to the year ended 30 September 2017 have had a material impact on the consolidated results or financial position of the Group or Company.
BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION
Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
The Group controls an entity when it is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
The acquisition date is the date on which control is transferred to the acquirer.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
ACQUISITIONS
The Group applies the acquisition method to account for business combinations.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary is the fair values of the assets transferred the liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquiree and the equity interests issued by the Group.
The consideration transferred includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The Group recognises any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree on an acquisitionbyacquisition basis either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the recognised amounts of acquirees identifiable net assets.
Acquisition related costs are expensed as incurred.
INTRAGROUP
Intragroup balances and transactions and any unrealised income and expenses arising from intragroup transactions are eliminated.
Unrealised gains arising from transactions with equityaccounted investees are eliminated against the investment to the extent of the Groups interest in the investee.
Unrealised losses are eliminated in the same way as unrealised gains but only to the extent that there is no evidence of impairment.
In the Company financial statements all investments in subsidiaries are carried at cost less impairment.
45 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 2.3.
FOREIGN CURRENCY TRANSACTIONS AND BALANCES In preparing the financial statements of the individual companies transactions in currencies other than the entitys functional currency foreign currencies are recognised at the rates of exchange prevailing on the dates of the transactions.
At each reporting date monetary assets and liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing at that date.
Nonmonetary items carried at fair value that are denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the rates prevailing at the date when the fair value was determined.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
For the purpose of presenting consolidated financial statements the assets and liabilities of the Groups foreign operations are translated at exchange rates prevailing on the reporting date.
Income and expense items are translated at the average exchange rates for the period unless exchange rates fluctuate significantly during that period in which case the exchange rates at the date of transactions are used.
Exchange differences arising if any are recognised in other comprehensive income.
Exchange differences are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they arise except for exchange differences on monetary items receivable from or payable to a foreign operation for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur therefore forming part of the net investment in the foreign operation which are recognised initially in other comprehensive income and reclassified from equity to profit or loss on disposal or partial disposal of the net investment.
The Group enters into forward US dollarSterling forward exchange contracts to secure the amount of approved dividends.
No other forward contracts or similar contracts are conducted.
REVENUE RECOGNITION Revenue for the Group is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable net of discounts value added taxes and service charges.
The Group recognises revenue for services provided when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured and it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity.
Revenue arising from the provision of hotel accommodation restaurant and bar services and activities is recognised when the service is provided or the products are delivered to the customer.
All deposits for accommodation and similar income which are received in advance of the related performance are classified as deferred revenue and shown as a liability until delivery of the service.
FINANCE INCOME AND EXPENSE Finance income is recognised in profit and loss on an accruals basis.
Finance expense is recognised in profit or loss using the effective interest method.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Exceptional items are items that are in the judgment of management material due to their size or nature or non recurring items that are considered exceptional.
They are disclosed separately in the financial statements where it is necessary to do so to provide further understanding of the financial performance of the Group.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Shortterm employee benefits are expensed as the related service is provided.
A liability is recognised for the amount expected to be paid if the Elegant Hotels Group has a present legal or constructive obligation to pay this amount as a result of past service provided by the employee and the obligation can be estimated reliably.
Contributions to defined contribution pension schemes are charged to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income in the year to which the employees services relate.
SEGMENT REPORTING An operating segment is a component of the Elegant Hotels Group that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses whose operating results are regularly reviewed by the entitys Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM to make decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment and assess its performance and for which discrete financial information is available.
All revenue and operating profit is derived from the main activity of the Group.
Each hotel is considered to be a separate operating segment of the Group based on the information provided to the CODM considered to be the Board of Directors.
These segments are aggregated for the purposes of disclosure as the aggregation criteria of IFRS 8 Operating Segments are considered to be met.
The Directors believe the aggregation criteria is met due to the similar economic characteristics of the hotels which all operate on the island of Barbados.
46 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 2.9.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS Employees and Executive Directors receive remuneration in the form of equitysettled sharebased payments whereby employees render services in exchange for rights over shares share options.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of share options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the share options determined at the grant date excluding the impact of any nonmarket based vesting conditions for example continuation of employment and performance targets.
Nonmarket based vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of options that are expected to become exercisable or the number of shares that the employee will ultimately receive.
This estimate is revised at each reporting date to allow for forecasted employee attrition and the difference is charged or credited to the Statement of Comprehensive Income with a corresponding adjustment to reserves.
TAXATION
Income tax on the profit or loss for the period comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax is recognised in the statement of profit or loss except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or other comprehensive income where it is recognised in other comprehensive income or directly in equity respectively.
Current tax for the year is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using the best estimate of the weighted average annual income tax rate expected for the full financial year.
Deferred tax is recognised using the liability method in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets or liabilities using the tax rates enacted or substantially enacted at the reporting date.
Deferred income tax is not provided on the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination if at the time of the transaction there is no effect on either accounting or taxable profit or loss.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the unused tax losses and credits can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefits will be realised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset only when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income tax levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
INVENTORIES
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value on a first in first out basis.
The cost is determined using a weighted average basis.
Net realisable value for inventories held for sale is the estimated selling price in the normal course of business less the estimated costs necessary to make the sale.
Net realisable value for inventories held for consumption in the provision of services is equivalent to cost.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Items of property plant and equipment are initially recognised at cost including directly attributable costs and subsequently stated at historical cost less depreciation and impairment.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is calculated on other items of property plant and equipment on a straight line basis over the expected useful economic life of the asset as follows Buildings  30 to 50 years.
Furniture fixtures and fittings  2 to 15 years.
Motor vehicles  7 years.
Depreciation on assets under construction does not commence until they are complete and available for use.
These assets represent fitouts.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS The Group records intangible assets relating to its commercial website.
These assets are initially recorded at cost.
The website has been assessed as an asset with a finite life of three years.
The cost of the website is amortised on a straight line basis over this period.
The carrying value and the amortisation period is reviewed annually.
Costs associated with maintaining the website are recognised as an expense when incurred.
47 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 2.14.
IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Assets that have indefinite useful lives are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
All other noncurrent assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are separately identifiable cash flows cashgenerating units.
The Group determines any impairment by comparing the carrying values of each of the Groups assets or the cash generating unit to which it belongs to their recoverable amounts which is the higher of the assets fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
Fair value represents market value in an active market.
Value in use is determined by discounting future cash flows arising from the asset.
Future cash flows are determined with reference to the Groups own projections using pretax discount rates.
LEASED ASSETS Where substantially all of the risks and rewards incidental to ownership are not transferred to the Group an operating lease the total rentals payable under the lease are charged to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income on a straightline basis over the lease term.
The aggregate benefit of lease incentives is recognised as a reduction of the rental expense over the lease term.
FINANCIAL ASSETS The Group classifies its existing financial assets including cash and cash equivalents as loans and receivables.
The classification depends on the purpose for which the assets are held.
Management determines the classification of financial assets at initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at every reporting date.
LOANS AND RECEIVABLES These assets are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
They arise principally through the provision of services to customers e. incorporate other types of contractual monetary asset.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise cash and cash equivalents shortterm deposits and accounts and other receivables.
They are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs that are directly attributable to their acquisition or issue and are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method less provision for impairment.
Accounts receivable are presented in current assets in the Statement of Financial Position except for those with maturities greater than one year after the reporting date which are presented as noncurrent assets.
Impairment provisions are recognised when there is objective evidence such as significant financial difficulties on the part of the counterparty or default or significant delay in payment that the Group will be unable to collect all of the amounts due under the terms receivable the amount of such a provision being the difference between the net carrying amount and the present value of the future expected cash flows associated with the impaired receivable.
The Company advances loans to its subsidiary undertakings which are accounted for as part of its net investment in those operations.
These loans are repayable on demand and are stated at amortised cost less provision for impairment.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances and fixed deposits with original maturity dates of 90 days or less.
The carrying value of cash and cash equivalents in the Statement of Financial Position is considered to be fair value.
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES All financial liabilities are recognised initially at fair value net of transaction costs incurred and subsequently carried at amortised cost.
The Groups financial liabilities include bank and thirdparty loans the bank overdraft and trade and other payables.
Fees paid on the establishment of loan facilities are recognised as transaction costs of the loan and amortised to the profit and loss over the life of the loan.
All borrowing costs are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they are incurred.
48 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 2.18.
PROVISIONS
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation legal or constructive as a result of a past event it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the obligation and a reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
The Groups provisions are made up of legal amounts relating to specific legal claims employee benefits specifically annual leave and sales incentive schemes.
The timing of the utilisation of the provision is uncertain and is largely outside of the Groups control.
SHARE CAPITAL Financial instruments issued by the Group are treated as equity only to the extent that they do not meet the definition of a financial liability.
The Groups ordinary shares are classified as equity.
DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTION Final dividend distributions to the Companys shareholders are recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when paid.
Unpaid dividends that do not meet these criteria are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND JUDGEMENTS The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make judgements estimates and assumptions that affect the application of accounting policies and the reported amounts of assets liabilities income and expense.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Judgements made by the Directors in the application of these accounting policies that have significant effect on the financial statements and estimates with a significant risk of material adjustment in the next year are Property plant and equipment  The assessment of the useful economic lives requires judgement in order that depreciation can be charged over the life selected.
This also includes the assessment of residual values that will be attributed to the hotel properties.
Judgement is also required in determining whether the carrying values of the assets have any indication of impairment.
Acquisition accounting  The Group assessed the identifiable assets and liabilities of Treasure Beach Limited on acquisition.
The Group acquired an operation that was capable of being run as a business and therefore has been accounted for as a business combination.
The difference in the fair value and the carrying amount on the property acquired resulted in a bargain purchase gain see note 4.
Other Items specifically considered but not deemed relevant related to customer lists brand name and intellectual property.
The Group did not identify any intangible items that would meet the criteria for recognition on acquisition.
A one percent change in the discount rate used in the valuation would increasedecrease the valuation by 0.9m.
A one per cent change in the occupancy rate assumption used in the valuation would increasedecrease the valuation by 0.2m.
For the purposes of IFRS 3 this transaction has been recorded as a business combination.
100% of the share capital of Treasure Beach Limited which was the company holding the assets liabilities and trade of Treasure Beach Hotel was acquired.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS ACQUISITION OF TREASURE BEACH HOTEL On 5 May 2017 the Group purchased 100% of the share capital of Treasure Beach Limited for 7.9 million.
Treasure Beach Limited is a Barbados externally registered company which owns the business and property of Treasure Beach Hotel located in Paynes Bay St.
James Barbados.
The Group purchased Treasure Beach to further expand within Barbados.
It has refurbished the property as an adultsonly European plan offering.
Treasure Beach Limiteds property has been independently valued at 9.7 million by Terra Caribbean.
In addition a deferred tax liability of 0.6 million was recognised on the value of the buildings.
The difference of approximately 1.3 million between the total consideration and the fair value of the assets and liabilities is shown as a bargain purchase gain on acquisition in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The bargain purchase gain resulted from the property being for sale for a number of years.
The property was loss making prior to acquisition and the Directors believed the property was not operating to its full potential.
The Directors reviewed the purchased assets for unrecognised intangible assets but could not identify any.
The acquisition accounting policies are consistent with those of the Group.
In the period immediately following the date of acquisition up to July 2017 the operation of the hotel was under the existing brand and the net losses of 0.1 million have been recognised as exceptional expenses.
The property closed for renovations and reopened in December 2017 under the Elegant Hotels brand.
49 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 4.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS CONTINUED Acquisition related costs The Group incurred acquisition related costs of 0.4 million comprising legal professional and due diligence fees stamp duty and renovationrefurbishment project management fees.
These costs have been included as exceptional administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Acquired receivables The fair value of acquired receivables was 0.1 million.
The gross contractual amounts receivable is 0.1 million and at the acquisition date all of the contractual cash flows were expected to be received.
ACQUISITION OF WAVES HOTEL and SPA On 3 March 2016 the Group purchased Waves Hotel and Spa via the acquisition of 100% of the shares of Swiss International Ltd for 5.4 million.
This was satisfied in cash and a loan from the vendor of 2.0 million.
The loan is payable in four equal instalments which commenced on 3 September 2016 and will be settled within the next three years.
The acquisition is in line with the Groups stated strategy to expand both on Barbados and further into the Caribbean.
In the period immediately following the date of acquisition up to 18 April 2016 the operation of the hotel and spa was licensed back to the former owner to fulfil existing customer reservations.
The property closed for renovation and reopened in August 2016.
Waves therefore contributed a small operating loss for the 2016 financial year the period of acquisition.
EFFECT OF ACQUISITION The acquisitions described above had the following effect on the Groups assets and liabilities 2017 2016 Acquisition of Treasure Beach Hotel Acquisition of Waves Hotel and Spa
Fair value adjustments
Acquirees books values Fair value adjustments restated
Acquirees net assets at the acquisition date Property plant and equipment 7912 1841 9753 28524 6609 21915 Inventory 17  17 Trade and other receivables 61  61 63  63 Shortterm investments    27  27 Cash and cash equivalents 103  103 Trade and other payables 224  224 360  360 Interestbearing loans and borrowings    12226  12226 Deferred tax liabilities  582 582  3995 3995 Net identifiable assets and liabilities 7869 1259 9128 16028 10604 5424 Consideration paid Cash paid 7869 3424 Vendor loan  2000 Total consideration 7869 5424 Bargain purchase gain 1259 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
50 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 5.
REVENUE
The Groups revenue is earned in Barbados in US dollars or currencies pegged to US dollars.
Accommodation 45405 42843 Food and beverage 13594 13416 Other services 873 722 59872 56981 Virgin Holidays represented 13% of the Groups total revenue 2016 12%.
No other customer represented more than 10% of the Groups total revenue.
PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION Included in profit before taxation are the following amounts restated Depreciation and amortisation note 13 14 4135 3230 Repairs and maintenance 1742 2280 Operating lease expense note 25 78 65 Employee costs before sharebased payments note 7 14754 15924 Fees payable to the Companys auditor 296 459 Exceptional items note 9 Sharebased payments related to the IPO note 23 640 235 Acquisition and other oneoff costs 1694 1953 Bargain purchase gain 1259 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
AUDITORS REMUNERATION Audit of these financial statements 80 98 Amounts receivable by the Companys auditor and its associates for Audit of financial statements of subsidiaries of the Company 157 194 Taxation compliance services to subsidiaries of the Company 53 20 Other assurance services to the Company  12 Other assurance services to subsidiaries of the Company Other taxation advisory services 6 39 Transaction services  STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 7.
STAFF NUMBERS AND COSTS The average number of people employed by the Group including Directors during the year analysed by category was as follows
Number
Directors 2 2 Administration 31 26 Sales and marketing 15 13 Hotels and restaurant 993 962 1041 1003 The aggregate payroll costs of employees were as follows Wages and salaries 12610 13909 Social security costs 2033 1901 Contributions to defined contribution plans 111 114 Total before sharebased payments 14754 15924 Sharebased payment expenses see note 23 353 415 14401 16339 The Group operates a number of defined contribution pension plans.
The total expense relating to these plans in the current year was 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION The remuneration of the Directors comprises Salaries fees and other shortterm employee benefits 1031 815 Compensation payments for loss of office 152 Total salaries and other shortterm employment benefits 1183 815 Sharebased payments creditcharge 148 154 1035 969 The aggregate remuneration including amounts receivable under longterm incentive schemes of the highest paid Director during the year was 0.3 million 2016 0.4 million.
None of the Directors received a payment in lieu of pension contribution 2016 none.
Disclosures on Directors remuneration required by AIM rule 19 are included in the Remuneration Report on pages 31 to 34.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Sharebased payments charge relating to awards issued on IPO 640 235 Acquisition costs for Treasure Beach hotel 2016 Waves Hotel and Spa 419 915 Preopening costs for Treasure Beach hotel 2016 Waves Hotel and Spa 276 489 Restructuring costs 937 360 Other exceptional items 62 189 1054 2188 52 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 10.
FINANCE INCOME AND EXPENSE Finance income Interest receivable in relation to security deposits 12 22 Finance expense Interest on loans 2489 1788 Amortisation of capitalised finance costs 38 38 Foreign exchange loss on forward contract 283 375 2810 2201
Recognised in the Income Statement Current tax expense Current year 2101 1807 Adjustments for prior years 398 85 Total current tax expense 1703 1722 Deferred tax expense Origination and reversal of temporary differences 96 282 Total deferred tax expense note 15 96 282 Tax expense in the Income Statement 1799 2004 RECONCILIATION OF EFFECTIVE TAX RATE restated Profit for the year 10987 11789 Tax using the Barbados corporation tax rate of 25% 2016 25% 2747 2947 Effect of tax rates in foreign jurisdictions 48 122 Utilisation of capital allowances 533 407 Nondeductible expenses 642 18 Marketing development allowance 624 753 Tax on bargain purchase gain not recognised 314 Tax losses not recognised 231 198 Over provided in prior years 398 85 Total tax expense 1799 2004 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
53 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 12.
EARNINGS PER SHARE restated Profit used in calculating basic and diluted earnings per share 9188 9785 Bargain purchase gain 1259 Exceptional costs 1054 2188 Nonexceptional sharebased payment charges 287 180 Tax on oneoff items 267 488 Profit used in calculating adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share 9003 11665 Number of shares Weighted average number of shares for the purpose of basic earnings per share and adjusted basic earnings per share number 88815789 88815789 diluted earnings per share and adjusted diluted earnings per share number 89100871 89037710 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share cents per share 10.3 11.0 Diluted earnings per share cents per share 10.3 11.0 Adjusted earnings per share cents per share 10.1 13.1 Adjusted diluted earnings per share cents per share 10.1 13.1 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted earnings per share amounts are calculated by dividing profit for the year attributable to equity holders of the Company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year together with the dilutive number of ordinary shares.
The Company has 1717223 potentially issuable shares 2016 4037084 all of which relate to share options issued to Directors and key management personnel.
The dilutive number of issuable shares is 285082 2016 221921 for the purposes of calculating the dilutive earnings per share.
Adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share has been shown in order to compare underlying earnings per share year on year.
In order to calculate adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share the numerator has been adjusted to exclude the after tax effect on earnings of share based payments bargain purchase gains acquisition and pre opening costs relating to new hotels and other exceptional items.
54 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 13.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and buildings
Fixtures and fittings
Total
Cost
Balance at 1 October 2015 139798 27 37177 306 177308 Additions 4622  4598 170 9390 Additions from business combinations 21915    21915 Transfers 19  262 281 Disposals 28  808  836 Balance at 30 September 2016 166326 27 41229 195 207777 Additions 1425  1590 2532 5547 Additions from business combinations 9700 12 41  9753 Transfers 171  23 194 Disposals 347  470 2 819 Balance at 30 September 2017 177275 39 42413 2531 222258
Balance at 1 October 2015 5120 4 26880  32004 Depreciation charge for the year 565 4 2661  3230 Disposals 7  238  245 Balance at 30 September 2016 5678 8 29303  34989 Depreciation charge for the year 883 6 3223  4112 Disposals 170  387  557 Balance at 30 September 2017 6391 14 32139  38544 Net book value At 30 September 2016 160648 19 11926 195 172788 At 30 September 2017 170884 25 10274 2531 183714 No interest has been capitalised into property plant and equipment.
No items of property plant and equipment are held under finance leases.
The Groups properties are used as security for bank loans see note 20.
The fair value of the Groups property plant and equipment is considered to be of greater than the book value recorded in these financial statements.
All properties with the exception of Treasure Beach Hotel and Waves Hotels and Spa those properties disclosed as acquired in these financial statements were valued by CBRE in April 2015.
This valuation indicated a value of 235.5 million which is in excess of their carrying amount.
The majority of the Groups noncurrent assets are located in Barbados.
55 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 14.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS Amount at 1 October
Amortisation
Amount at 30 September Cost  137  137 Accumulated amortisation   23 23 Carrying amount  137 23 114 The fair value of the Groups intangible asset is considered to be greater than the book value recorded in these financial statements.
DEFERRED TAX ASSETS AND LIABILITIES RECOGNISED DEFERRED TAX ASSETS AND LIABILITIES Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following Assets Liabilities restated restated Property plant and equipment 1420 1803 5238 4866 Tax value of carried forward losses 1227 841 Qualifying capital expenditure 2482 2791 Tax assetsliabilities 5129 5435 5238 4866 Offsetting 191 297 191 297 Net deferred tax assetsliabilities 4938 5138 5047 4569 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
The recoverability of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of those arising from the reversal of deferred tax liabilities.
The deferred tax asset has been recognised to the extent that it is considered to be recoverable based on forecasts for future periods.
At 30 September 2017 the value of the unrecognised deferred tax asset is 0.2 million 2016 0.9 million.
0.2 million 2016 0.3 million restated of deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are presented net in the Statement of Financial Position as the Group has the legal right to settle current tax amounts on a net basis and the deferred tax amounts are levied by the same taxing authority on the same group of entities that intend to realise the asset and settle the liability at the same time.
MOVEMENT IN DEFERRED TAX DURING THE YEAR 1 October restated
Recognised on acquisition 30 September Property plant and equipment 3063 173 582 3818 Tax value of loss carryforwards utilised 841 386  1227 Qualifying capital expenditure 2791 309  2482 The comparative figures have been restated to adjust the deferred tax relating to the prior year acquisition.
See note 2.1.2.
INVENTORIES
Group
Group
Food and beverage 678 524 Base stock 2171 2201 Guest supplies and stationery 170 225 Goods in transit 43 3062 2950 There is no significant difference between the fair value of inventories and the values stated above.
56 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 17.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
Group
Company
Company
Trade receivables 2411 2396 Prepayments Electricity bonds 461 448 Other receivables 1050 140 4668 3618 42 18 There were no receivables that were past due or considered to be impaired.
There is no significant difference between the fair value of other receivables and the values stated above.
All amounts shown under trade and other receivables are due to be received within one year.
During the year electricity bonds were reclassified from shortterm investments to trade and other receivables.
CREDIT RISK CONCENTRATION BY GEOGRAPHY The concentration of credit risk for trade receivables for the Group at the reporting date by geographic region was Geographic region Barbados 80 242 UK 1629 1735 United States and Canada 559 311 Other 143 108 Trade receivables 2411 2396 CREDIT RISK CONCENTRATION BY COUNTERPARTY The concentration of credit risk for trade receivables for the Group at the reporting date by type of counterparty was Tour operators 2165 2118 Credit card companies 219 221 Other 27 57 Total trade receivables 2411 2396 CREDIT QUALITY OF TRADE RECEIVABLE AND VALUATION ALLOWANCES Industry standard repayment terms for credit sales are applied to all receivables.
The Group monitors each receivable balance on a regular basis with regard to credit sales granted and payments received.
In order to manage credit risk credit limits are set for customers based on volume of business and payment history.
New accounts are usually on a prepaid basis.
Credit limits are reviewed by the finance team on a regular basis based on the customers debt ageing and collection history.
The ageing of trade receivables for the Group at the reporting date was
Carrying amount
Carrying amount Not past due 2124 2124 2121 2121 Past due 030 days 21telPast due 31120 days More than 120 days 37 1 2447 2411 2396 2396 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing.
There are no indications at the reporting date that recognised debtors will not meet their payment obligations.
57 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 17.
TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES CONTINUED The movement in the allowance for impairment in respect of trade receivables for the Group during the year was as follows Balance at the start of the year  24 Allowance recognised 36 Allowance utilised Allowance reversed  24 Balance at end of the year 36 SHORTTERM INVESTMENTS The Group has an investment in the Barbados Golf Club which was originally undertaken for commercial reasons.
During the period the Group impaired its investment from 0.1 million in 2016 to 0.0 million.
The carrying amount reflects the fair value of this investment.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Group
Cash and cash equivalents 996 3704 Bank overdraft 411 585 3704 Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash cash at bank and bank deposits with a maturity of up to 90 days.
LOANS AND BORROWINGS
Group
Noncurrent liabilities Secured bank loans 66102 59531 Thirdparty loan 500 1000 66602 60531 Current liabilities Secured bank loans 6595 3969 Thirdparty loan 500 1000 7095 4969 73697 65500 The Groups loans and borrowings are measured at amortised cost.
The carrying amount of loans and borrowings is equivalent to their outstanding originated value.
For more information about the Group and Companys exposure to interest rate risk see note 29.
During the period the Group received 13.4 million from loans and borrowings 2016 18.5 million and repaid 4.2 million 2016 12.2 million.
The Group also repaid 1.0 million in relation to thirdparty borrowings 2016 1.4 million.
Secured bank loans In May 2015 the Group entered into a Credit Agreement with the Bank of Nova Scotia to provide a USdollar Term Loan Commitment of 50 million with a maturity of 2020 which was fully drawn.
This loan facility was increased and drawn for the acquisition of Waves in April 2016 by 13.5 million and Treasure Beach in May 2017 by 8.4 million for a total of 71.9 million 2016 63.5 million.
After accounting for repayments of 4.0 million during the year 2016 nil 67.9 million of this facility remains outstanding.
As part of the Credit Agreement with the Bank of Nova Scotia the Group also has a Revolving Loan Commitment of 5 million.
4.8 million of this facility was drawn at the end of the year 2016 0.0 million.
The Group also has an operating overdraft facility in Barbados dollars of 19.8 million US 10 million.
This facility was drawn down by 0.4 million 2016 not drawn.
58 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 20.
LOANS AND BORROWINGS CONTINUED The secured bank loans carry interest at US LIBOR plus 275 basis points.
The Groups management review the forecast US LIBOR rates on a regular basis and may lock in the future rate for a specific period depending on the assessment of trends and forecasts.
The overdraft carries interest at the Barbados Government Base rate less 200 basis points.
Therefore these balances are entirely variable.
The Company is party as a guarantor to crossguarantees in respect of the indebtedness of its subsidiary undertakings to the Bank of Nova Scotia.
At 30 September 2017 the total indebtedness of subsidiary undertakings under these crossguarantees amounted to 72.7 million 2016 63.5 million.
Thirdparty loan As part of the acquisition of Waves Hotel and Spa the Group agreed an US dollar interestfree loan with the vendor in the amount of 2.0 million.
This loan is repayable in four annual instalments of 0.5 million commencing from September 2016.
The final two instalments are due in September 2018 and September 2019.
Sensitivity analysis An increase of 100 basis points in interest rates would decrease profit or loss by 0.7 million on an annual basis.
This analysis assumes that all other variables in particular foreign currency rates remain constant.
The financial liabilities which have a contractual maturity greater than one year are the Groups loans and borrowings.
Including estimated interest payments and excluding the effect of netting agreements the payments due in relation to the Groups loans and borrowings are 8.6 million due within one year and 68.6 million due between one and five years 2016 7.0 million due within one year and 65.1 million due between one and five years.
TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES
Group
Company
Company
Current
Trade payables 2789 2176 Social security and other taxes 567 187 Accrued expenses 1576 2305 43 935 Deferred income 2149 2625 7081 7293 43 935 All trade and other payables are due for payment within 12 months.
There is no significant difference between the fair value of the trade and other payables and the values stated above.
Trade payable days for the Company at 30 September 2017 were 30 days 2016 42 days.
PROVISIONS
Provisions recognised at the end of the year were as follows 1 October
Unused provisions 30 September Annual leave  342 30 312 Sales incentive  105  105 The Group recognises provisions with respect to the following Legal claims  the Group is sometimes involved in litigation where the timing amount or likelihood of any outcome is uncertain Annual leave  the Group recognises an amount with respect to annual leave owing to employees and Sales incentives  the Group rewards certain travel agents with accommodation or cash rewards based on sales.
The timing amount or likelihood of any settlement of these rewards is uncertain.
59 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 23.
SHAREBASED PAYMENTS Awards are made under longterm incentive and other arrangements.
Certain employees of the Group have been eligible for options over ordinary shares in the Company awarded under the Share Option Scheme.
The award of options is subject to market and nonmarket conditions.
The market conditions are based on the total shareholder return over the performance period which is the three years prior to vesting.
The nonmarket conditions are based on the Groups earnings per share return over the same performance period.
Once these criteria have been met the options remain exercisable subject to the vesting provisions.
If performance conditions are not met then a portion or all of the awards will lapse.
All options granted under the Scheme have a fixed exercise price of 1 pence per option.
The contractual life of the options is five years.
Options cannot normally be exercised until the full vesting conditions including term of service have been met.
The options are classified as equitysettled.
The issued share options include marketbased performance conditions.
From 201617 new option grants have been valued using a Monte Carlo option pricing model.
Prior to 201617 options were valued using the Black Scholes method.
The assumptions used in the calculation of the fair value of sharebased payments are as follows The expected life of the share options is five years 2016 five years.
Expected dividends dividend yield is 7% 2016 7%.
All option exercises are expected to be equitysettled.
The expected volatility in all cases is 40% based upon historical share price volatility of listed comparable businesses over a period of time equal to expected option life ending on date of grant.
The risk free rate applied to the options is 5.5% and is based upon the yield on zerocoupon Barbados government bonds of a term consistent with the expected option life.
It has been assumed that the employee attrition rate will be 5% 2016 6.3% throughout the period.
The exercise price and weighted average exercise price of all options is 1 pence.
The weighted average share price during the year was 80 pence 2016 89 pence.
OPTIONS OVER ORDINARY SHARES OUTSTANDING AS AT 30 SEPTEMBER 2017 Grant date Share price Number of options outstanding Exercise price Fair value per option
Contractual maturity years Vesting date 18 March tel278 1 75 5% 3.5 30 September 2018 21 July 2017 78 947945 1 73 5% 4.8 30 September 2019 A credit of 0.4 million has been included in the Statement of Comprehensive Income 2016 charge of 0.4 million.
Of this amount a credit of 0.6 million related to the awards issued on IPO 2015 charge of 0.2 million.
No outstanding options at 30 September 2017 are exercisable.
SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES 2017 2016 Number of Ordinary Shares of the Company of 1p each
Number of shares
Number of shares As at 30 September 1367 88815789 1367 88815789 The holders of Ordinary Shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
DIVIDENDS
During the year the Company declared an interim dividend of 3.5 pence per ordinary share 2016 3.5 pence per ordinary share which was paid.
After the balance sheet date a final dividend of 1.75 pence per ordinary share 2016 3.5 pence was proposed by the Directors.
The final dividend has not been provided for.
60 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 24.
SHARE CAPITAL AND RESERVES CONTINUED MERGER RESERVE The merger reserve represents amounts attributable to equity in respect of merged subsidiary undertakings and includes an amount relating to the capitalisation of an intercompany loan within the subsidiaries which is shown within merger reserve on consolidation.
In May 2015 the Company became the new holding company for the Group.
This was put into effect through a shareforshare exchange of 56615788 ordinary shares of 0.01 in the Company for the whole of the issued capital of eight St Lucia domiciled companies.
These companies owned all of the share capital in ten trading subsidiaries.
The introduction of the new holding company was accounted for as a capital reorganisation using the merger accounting principles prescribed within IFRS 3 Business Combinations.
The use of merger accounting principles resulted in a balance in the Group and Company reserves which has been classified as a merger reserve and included in the Groups shareholders funds.
The Company recognised the value of its investment in the acquired St Lucian companies at a value based upon the initial share placing price on admission to AIM of 1 per share.
As permitted by Section 612 of the Companies Act 2006 the amount attributable to share premium has been transferred to the merger reserve.
OBLIGATIONS UNDER OPERATING LEASES The Group has total noncancellable operating lease rentals in respect of its US sales office of 0.2 million 2016 0.2 million.
Of these amounts 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million are payable in less than one year 0.1 million 2016 0.1 million are payable between one and two years and no amounts over two years 2016 0.0 million.
No other lease obligation is considered significant.
The Company has no operating lease commitments.
COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES There were outstanding capital commitments of 0.1 million at 30 September 2017 30 September 2016 nil.
The Company is party as a guarantor to crossguarantees in respect of the indebtedness of subsidiary undertakings.
At 30 September 2017 the total indebtedness of subsidiary undertakings under these crossguarantees amounted to 72.7 million.
There are no other material contingent liabilities attributable to the Group or Company.
POSTBALANCE SHEET EVENTS There are no disclosable postbalance sheet events.
RELATED PARTIES TRANSACTIONS WITH KEY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL The Group has a related party relationship with its Directors related companies other Group companies and affiliated parties controlled by its Directors senior officers executives and significant shareholders of the parent company.
Key management personnel includes certain senior officers of the Elegant Hotels Group.
Directors of the Company and their immediate relatives control 16.7% of the voting shares of the Company.
The remuneration of the Directors and their interests in ordinary shares of the Company are disclosed in the Remuneration Report on pages 31 to 34.
The compensation of key management personnel is as follows
Group
Company
Company
Key management remuneration including social security costs 2002 1482 Sharebased payments creditcharge 316 340 1686 1822 TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN THE COMPANY AND ITS SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS In consideration for the services that the Company provides in the management of the Group and in arranging the financing of the subsidiaries the Company has entered into management service agreements with those subsidiaries.
61 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 29.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS FAIR VALUES OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Groups financial instruments are classified into a fair value hierarchy based on the valuation technique used to determine fair value.
This hierarchy can be summarised as follows Level 1 quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. as prices or indirectly i.
Level 3 inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable input The Groups cash and cash equivalents of 1.0 million 2016 3.7 million are classified as Level 1 in the valuation hierarchy.
All other financial assets of 2.4 million 2016 2.5 million and financial liabilities of 81.9 million 2016 73.1 million are classified as Level 3 in the valuation hierarchy.
The carrying value of all of the Groups net financial liabilities of 78.4 million 2016 66.4 million is equivalent to their fair value.
The CBRE valuation dated April 2015 indicated a value of 235.5 million for properties with the exception of Treasure Beach Hotel and Waves Hotels and Spa those properties disclosed as acquired in these financial statements.
This is classified at level 3 under the fair value hierarchy and valued using the highest and best use method.
The fair value has been primarily derived using discounted cash flows supported by market transaction data.
The Company had trade and other payables with a carrying value of 0.0 million 2016 1.0 million which would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Board has overall responsibility for the determination of the Groups risk management objectives and policies.
The overall objective of the Board is to set policies that seek to reduce risk as far as possible without unduly affecting the Groups competitiveness and flexibility.
The Group has not issued or used any other financial instruments of a speculative nature.
In the 2017 financial year the Group used forward currency contracts to secure the value of approved dividends payable to its shareholders.
No other new forward currency contracts are undertaken.
To the extent financial instruments are not carried at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position book value approximates to fair value at 30 September 2017 and 30 September 2016.
Cash and cash equivalents are held in various currencies including US dollars Barbados dollars and Sterling.
Trade and other receivables are measured at amortised cost.
Book values and expected cash flows are reviewed by the Board and any impairment charged to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income in the relevant period.
Trade and other payables are measured at book value and amortised cost.
Credit risk Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations and arises principally from the Groups receivables from customers.
The Group is exposed to credit risk in respect of these balances such that if one or more of the customers encounter financial difficulties this could adversely affect the Groups financial results.
The Group attempts to mitigate credit risk by assessing the credit rating of new customers prior to entering into contracts and by entering into contracts with customers with agreed credit terms.
Provision is made against any receivable considered to be impaired.
The Group is only exposed to credit risk on cash and cash equivalents refer note 19 and trade receivables refer note The maximum exposure to credit risk at the balance sheet date by class of financial asset is limited to its carrying amount.
The credit risk associated with cash is remote.
The Groups principal credit risk arises from nonrecovery of trade receivables.
The credit risk relating to receivables is detailed in note 17.
The Company has no assets that are exposed to credit risk.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due.
Liquidity risk is mitigated by management of working capital capital expenditure and debt servicing requirements.
The Group and the Company seek to manage liquidity risk by ensuring sufficient funds are available to meet foreseeable needs and to invest cash safely and profitably.
The Group monitors its cash resources through short medium and longterm cash forecasting against available facilities.
Management monitors the liquidity risk by considering the maturity of both financial assets and projected cash flows from operations.
Shortterm flexibility is available through additional overdraft and capital expenditure facilities as set out in note 20.
All financial liabilities classified as current have a contractual maturity of less than one year.
The contractual maturities for the loans and borrowings can be found at note 20.
The Company has contractual cash maturities of nil 2016 nil in relation to trade and other payables of less than one year.
62 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 29.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS CONTINUED Market risk Market risk is the risk that changes in market prices such as foreign exchange rates interest rates and equity prices will affect the Groups income or the value of its holdings of financial instruments.
The majority of the Groups business is conducted in US dollars and Barbados dollars.
The exchange rate of the Barbados dollar is fixed to the US dollar at a rate of Bds1.98  US1.00.
Revenue is earned in US dollars from contracts with tour operators who effectively take the risk of any fluctuation against the currency paid by the end consumer.
The longerterm risk to the Group of a deterioration in the rate of exchange in origin countries is that the rates for hotel accommodation may be perceived as becoming more expensive.
The majority of the Groups expenditure including operating costs as well as capital expenditure occurs in US dollars or in Barbados dollars.
The Groups exposure to foreign currency risk is small and limited to the carrying amount for monetary financial instruments that are denominated in currencies other than US dollars and Barbados dollars and to transactions that are payable in Sterling including dividends to shareholders of the Company.
Interest rate risk Market interest rate risk arises from the Groups borrowings which are denominated in US dollars.
None of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are subject to fixed rates of interest.
The most significant element of the financial liabilities relates to the Groups longterm loan which is subject to interest at US LIBOR plus 275 basis points and is therefore entirely variable.
The Group is also exposed to market interest rate risk in respect of its cash balances held pending investment in the growth of the Groups operations.
The effect of interest rate changes on the Groups financial instruments is set out in note 20.
Capital management The Group manages its capital to ensure that the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to shareholders through optimising the debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the Company.
The Groups capital is made up of share capital share premium merger reserve translation reserve and retained earnings totalling 109.8 million 30 September 2016 109.0 million.
The Groups objectives when maintaining capital are to safeguard the entitys ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Groups capital is not restricted.
Management may seek additional external borrowings to fund the future investment and growth of the
All funding required to expand the Groups business including the acquisition and development of new hotels and for working capital purposes are financed from existing cash resources where possible.
Management will also consider future fundraising or bank finance where appropriate.
The Group has a progressive dividend policy which takes into account the results of the past year and the trading outlook.
63 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION 30.
INVESTMENTS IN SUBSIDIARY UNDERTAKINGS The Company has the following subsidiaries Company name Principal place of businesscountry of registered office address Class of shares % shareholding % shareholding Elegant Finance St Lucia Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Elegant Services St Lucia Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Colony SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% The House SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Crystal SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Tamcove SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Turtle SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Daphnes Restaurant St Lucia Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Waves SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% BW SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% 100% Treasure SL1 Limited St Lucia Ordinary 100% International Tourism Management Services Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% International Tourism Management Services LLC United States Ordinary 100% 100% Colony Club Barbados Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Windward Investments Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Crystal Cove Hotel Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Tamarind Cove Hotel Co.
Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Turtle Beach Resort Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Daphnes Restaurant Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Paynes Bay Investments Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Waves Hotel Limited Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Elegant Hotels Barbados Management Ltd Barbados Ordinary 100% 100% Wholly owned held indirectly through subsidiary undertakings.
The entities listed in the above have the following registered addresses according to their country
Lucia  Hewanorra Corporate Services Limited Hewanorra House Trou Garnier Financial Centre Point Seraphine Castries St.
Lucia
Barbados  Suite 250 Tamarind Cove Hotel Paynes Bay St.
James BB24023 Barbados United States  Incorp Services Inc.
17888 67th Court North Loxahatchee FL 33470 United States All investments in subsidiaries have been consolidated in these financial statements.
Included within investments are intercompany loans to the subsidiaries which are considered by management to be as permanent as equity and have been treated as such.
During the year investments held by the Company decreased by 20.5 million as a result of movements in intercompany loans classified as investments.
64 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED The Directors are pleased to present their report on Elegant Hotels Group plc the Company for the financial year ended 30 September 2017.
This Directors report forms part of the Strategic report and covers regulatory statutory and other information and incorporates the other section of the Strategic report and the Governance report which are set out earlier in this Annual Report by reference.
The registered company number is .
INSURANCE COVER Insurance cover is in force in respect of the personal liabilities that may be incurred by Directors of the Company in the course of their service for the Group as permitted by the Companies Act 2006.
SHARE OPTIONS In the financial years ending 30 September 2016 and 2017 the Company issued options over a portion of the share capital of the Company to members of the Board and to certain key employees which amounted to a total of 2535545 ordinary shares which if exercised would comprise 2.9% of the current issued share capital of the Company.
See also Directors interests on page 34 and note 23.
DIVIDENDS
An interim dividend of 3.5 pence per ordinary share was declared on 13 June 2017 and paid to Shareholders on 14 July 2017.
A further dividend of 1.75 pence per share is proposed by the Directors to be approved at the Annual General
It will be paid on 7 March 2018 to shareholders who are on the register on 26 January 2018.
This will bring the total dividend paid in respect of the Companys financial year ended 30 September 2017 to 5.25 pence per ordinary share.
SHARE DEALINGS The Board has adopted a code for share dealings which conforms to the requirements of the AIM Rules for Companies.
CONTROL ENVIRONMENT
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES The financial and other risks to which the Group is exposed together with the Boards risk management procedures objectives and policies and specifically the Boards policies in respect of price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow risk has been approved by the Board and are set out in the Strategic Report on pages 2 to 23 and in note 29 to the financial statements.
POLITICAL DONATIONS There were no political donations made during the financial year 2017 2016 nil.
EMPLOYEE CONSULTATION AND EMPLOYMENT OF DISABLED PERSONS The corporate social responsibility report on pages 24 and 25 sets out the Groups policies in relation to employee consultation and employment of disabled persons.
RESEARCH AND
The Group did not carry out any research and development during the financial years ended 30 September 2016 and 2017.
DIRECTORS
The Directors who served during the period are Name Board title Date of appointment Date of resignation Simon Sherwood NonExecutive Chairman 15 April 2015 Sunil Chatrani Chief Executive Officer 15 April 2015 Jeff Singleton Chief Financial Officer 1 March 2017 Steve Baldwin NonExecutive Director 15 April 2015 David Adams NonExecutive Director 26 October 2015 Luke Johnson NonExecutive Director 25 May 2017 Richard Jones Chief Financial Officer 1 April 2016 16 December 2016 65 STRATEGIC REPORT GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CORPORATE INFORMATION DIRECTORS REPORT At the date of this report in addition to the Directors interests set out on page 34 the shareholders in the table above hold 3% or more of the Companys share capital.
No further disclosures of major shareholdings have been made to the Company under Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rule 5 Vote holder and Issuer Notification Rules.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS Future developments are included in the Strategic Report on pages 2 to 23.
POSTBALANCE
SHEET EVENTS Since the end of the financial year there have been no disclosable post balance sheet events.
AUDITORS AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS Each Director in office at the date of approval of this report has confirmed that so far as he is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and he has taken all reasonable steps that he ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
In accordance with Section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution will be proposed at the AGM that KPMG LLP be reappointed as auditors.
By order of the Board Simon Sherwood
8 January 2018 SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS
Number of shares
Luke Johnson 11100000 12.50% Miton Asset Management 7700122 8.67% Legal and General Investment Management 6000000 6.76% Schroder Investment Management 5136586 5.78% Close Brothers Asset Management 5016305 5.65% Hargreave Hale 4816020 5.42% Tellworth Investments 3928000 4.42% Hargreaves Lansdown Asset Management 3353186 3.78% 66 ELEGANT HOTELS GROUP PLC ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED Directors Simon Sherwood NonExecutive Chairman Sunil Chatrani
Chief Executive Officer
Jeff Singleton Chief Financial Officer Steve Baldwin NonExecutive Director David Adams NonExecutive Director Luke Johnson NonExecutive Director Company secretary Shauna Kissoon Registered company number Registered office 10 Norwich Street London EC4A 1BD UK Head office Suite 250 Tamarind Hotel Paynes Bay St James BB24023 Barbados
KPMG LLP Chartered Accountants 15 Canada Square London E14 5GL UK Nominated Adviser and Joint Broker Zeus Capital Limited 10 Old Burlington Street London W1S 3AG UK Joint Broker Liberum Capital Ropemaker Place 25 Ropemaker Street London EC2Y 9LY UK Company Solicitors Macfarlanes LLP 20 Cursitor Street London EC4A 1LT UK
The Bank of Nova Scotia Corporate and Commercial Banking 3rd Floor CGI Tower Warrens
