Annual Report and Accounts 2017
GROWTH
FOR The Group Carrs Group plc is focused on the principal activities of Agriculture and Engineering Carrs Group plc is an international business operating across the Agriculture and Engineering sectors which supplies products and services to over 50 countries around the world.
The Agriculture division includes an international feed block supplement business with manufacturing locations in the USA UK and Europe.
In the UK the division also sells animal feed fertiliser animal health products fuel farm machinery and rural supplies from its 43 locations.
The Engineering division designs manufactures and supplies specialist precision parts equipment robotics and remote handling products from three sites in the UK two sites in Germany and two sites in the USA.
These highly specialised products and services are supplied predominately into the nuclear defence and oil and gas markets.
The Group is listed on the London Stock Exchange.
AGRICULTURE 2017 Continued growth and innovation Investment in manufacturing Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial Highlights
Continuing operations only
9.9% up from 2016 PreTax Profit 29.0% down from 2016
Per Share 28.0% down from 2016
Per Share 5.3% up from 2016
Strategic Report 01 Financial Highlights 02 The Group at a Glance
04 Chairmans Statement
06 Group Strategy 07 Business Strategies 08 Case Studies
10 Chief Executives Review
14 Risk Management
17 Viability Statement
18 Financial Review
20 Key Performance Indicators 21 The Board 22 Corporate Responsibility Corporate Governance 26 Corporate Governance Report 30 Audit Committee Report
33 Remuneration Committee Report
44 Nominations Committee Report 46 Directors Report Financial Statements 49 Independent Auditors Report to the members of Carrs Group plc 55 Consolidated Income Statement 56 Consolidated and Company Statements of Comprehensive Income 57 Consolidated and Company Balance Sheets 58 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 59 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 60 Consolidated and Company Statements of Cash Flows 61 Principal Accounting Policies 66 Notes to the Financial Statements 104 Five Year Statement 106 Directory of Operations 107 Registered Office and Advisers 346.2mtel 4.0ptel 7.7ptel 10.0mtel Restated for IAS19 Revised Restated for the effect of the 101 share split in January 2015 ENGINEERING 2017 International expansion Significant contract delivery View this report online site Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group at a Glance
OVERVIEW AND MARKETS
OVERVIEW AND MARKETS The Agriculture division develops and supplies a range of branded innovative animal nutrition products into the livestock industries as well as servicing the UK farming and rural communities through a network of retail stores and fuel businesses.
It also develops and manufactures branded molassesbased feed supplements in the form of high and low moisture feed blocks which enrich the diet of all types of ruminant farm animals.
Operational Locations The divisions products are manufactured in the USA Germany and the UK and are sold through a vast distribution network across the UK Europe New Zealand and North America.
That network is expected to include South America in 2018 following the conclusion of farm trials.
Customer Base Leading livestock farmers across the globe in the dairy beef sheep pig and equine sectors.
As at 2 September 2017.
Figures exclude Head Office.
The Engineering division designs and manufactures bespoke equipment and provides specialist technology and engineering solutions for the nuclear defence oil and gas and petrochemical industries.
Its diverse range of products and services includes manipulators robotics patented technologies radiation protection and decontamination specialist fabrication and precision machining.
Operational Locations The division is spread across a number of key sites in the UK Germany and in the USA.
Products and services are supplied worldwide across Europe North America South America Asia Africa and Australasia.
Customer Base Leading companies and government bodies worldwide across the nuclear research oil and gas and petrochemical industries.
Total Employees 627 Total Employees 35tel57 STRENGTH THROUGH DIVERSITY Carrs is an international group focused on developing innovative solutions for its diverse global customer base.
The Groups distribution network spans over 50 countries and that geographical diversity and breadth of divisional activity lies at the centre of its strategy.
The Group continues to concentrate upon growth both organically and through acquisition within its core markets of Agriculture and Engineering.
Its diverse geographic spread and depth of divisional coverage provides strength in an increasingly volatile global economic environment.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
SOUTH AFRICA
ARGENTINA
NEW ZEALAND
CANADA
BRAZIL
SOUTH KOREA
CYPRUS
JORDAN
KAZAKHSTAN
PAKISTAN
QATAR
EGYPT
FRANCE
SPAIN
UNITED ARAB
KUWAIT
ICELAND
RUSSIA
CHINA
TAIWAN
INDONESIA
GERMANY
USA
UK
FRANCE
BELGIUM
SWITZERLAND
ITALY
NETHERLANDS
CZECH
REPUBLIC
SWEDEN
NORWAY
AUSTRIA
UK
GERMANY
IRELAND
SPAIN
PORTUGAL
FRANCE SWITZERLAND
CZECH
REPUBLIC
SLOVAKIA
POLAND
ESTONIA
FINLAND
SWEDEN
NORWAY
BELGIUM
ITALY
DENMARK
AUSTRIA
UK
GERMANY
ROMANIA
SERBIA
HUNGARY
UKRAINE
LITHUANIA
BELARUS
LATVIA
GREECE
BULGARIA
CROATIA
INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTION Our Engineering and Agriculture divisions distribute to customers all over the world.
UK
LOCATIONS
AGRICULTURE
EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTION HEAD OFFICE
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTION Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CHRIS HOLMES
Chairmans Statement
REVIEW OF THE YEAR The financial year ended 2 September 2017 was a challenging year as the Groups financial performance was impacted by external factors affecting both divisions which were highlighted in our trading update on 20 July 2017.
Despite this the year was also one of investment and significant progress towards achieving the Groups medium term strategic objectives.
In our Agriculture division while the UK business benefited from a recovery in farmgate milk prices and consequently improved farmer confidence sales volumes in our USA feed block business were affected throughout the year by lower cattle prices.
This was partially mitigated by a gradual recovery in the second half which has continued into the new financial year.
In October 2017 we completed the acquisition of Pearson Farm Supplies Ltd in line with our strategy of strengthening our presence in current locations.
With the backdrop of this recovering USA trading environment the strategic investment made in our new low moisture feed block plant in Tennessee USA will provide us with access to new geographic markets in the Eastern and South Eastern states of the USA.
The plant is expected to be completed before the end of December 2017 and following this the Group will have comprehensive coverage of all the major cattle areas in the USA.
In our Engineering division we suffered a significant setback during the year as a result of a delay to the commencement of a major contract and the poor profitability of certain other contracts during the period.
As previously disclosed in our trading update on 20 July 2017 the delayed contract has now been signed and work has begun which will continue throughout the current and into the next financial year.
During the year we also invested in the acquisition of two engineering businesses.
In October 2016 we acquired a German familyowned engineering business STABER GmbH which designs and develops specialised technology and is highly complementary to Wlischmiller our German remote handling business.
Since its acquisition STABER has been integrated with Wlischmiller and we are investing in the extension of our premises in Markdorf Germany to consolidate both operations into one site and provide additional efficiency flexibility and capacity.
In August 2017 we announced the acquisition of NuVision Engineering Inc. and services to the nuclear industry.
The acquisition will provide the Group with a foothold into new major nuclear markets and the opportunity to market Wlischmiller products in the USA.
In addition we have continued to invest in extending our reach into new markets particularly China where significant opportunities lie in the supply chain as part of the countrys increased development and investment in the nuclear power market.
We have also increased the strength and depth of our management team in the Engineering division through the appointment of a Divisional Managing Director who will oversee and coordinate the businesses in the UK Germany and the USA.
In total the Group has invested up to 24.3 million in expanding its USA feed block operations and in growing the Engineering division through acquisitions which take the Group into new geographic markets provide additional capabilities and support our growth ambitions.
We therefore remain confident in the future prospects of both divisions.
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Revenue for the year increased by 9.9% to 346.2 million 2016 314.9 million.
Operating profit before amortisation of intangible assets and nonrecurring items was down 28.5% to 9.3 million 2016 13.0 million with Agriculture contributing 8.6 million 2016 10.4 million and Engineering 0.7 million 2016 2.6 million.
The contribution from associates and joint ventures was up 35.2% at 2.8 million 2016 2.1 million.
The Group incurred a number of non recurring items in the year totalling 1.3 million.
This included acquisition costs of 1.4 million primarily related to the acquisitions of NuVision and STABER and a net credit relating to Chirton Engineering of 0.4 million.
The net credit comprised an exceptional credit of 2.1 million for contingent consideration no longer payable and an impairment charge against the associated goodwill of 1.7 million.
There was also a loss of 0.2 million on the disposal of an old unutilised Agriculture site and restructuring costs of 0.1 million.
Reported operating profit after amortisation of intangible assets and nonrecurring items was down 38.3% at 7.9 million 2016 12.8 million.
Despite challenges in both of our divisions the year was one of investment and significant progress towards achieving the Groups medium term strategic objectives.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Profit before tax before amortisation of intangible assets and nonrecurring items was down 20.2% to 11.4 million 2016 14.3 million and reported profit before tax was down 29.0% at 10.0 million 2016 14.1 million.
Basic earnings per share were down by 28.0% to 7.7 pence 2016 continuing operations 10.7 pence with fully diluted earnings per share of 7.6 pence 2016 continuing operations 10.5 pence and adjusted earnings per share excluding amortisation of intangible assets and nonrecurring items of 8.9 pence 2016 continuing operations 10.9 pence.
Net debt at 2 September 2017 was 14.1 million 2016 net cash of 8.1 million.
The movement included 13.2 million generated from operations 14.3 million used for acquisitions and capital expenditure and 19.5 million paid in dividends.
DIVIDEND
The Board is proposing a final dividend of 2.1 pence per ordinary share which together with the two interim dividends of 0.95 pence per ordinary share paid on 12 May 2017 and 6 October 2017 make a total of 4.0 pence per share for the year 2016 3.8 pence per share excluding the special dividend of 17.54 pence per share paid in October 2016.
The final dividend if approved by the shareholders will be paid on 12 January 2018 to shareholders on the register on close of business 15 December 2017 and the shares will go exdividend on 14 December 2017.
BOARD COMPOSITION AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE In line with our commitment to continual improvements in corporate governance during the year we engaged Independent Audit Limited a leading specialist in corporate governance to conduct an external evaluation of the effectiveness of the Board and its Committees.
That review concluded that the Board and its Committees were functioning well and noted that improvements had been made since the previous external review which we carried out in 2013.
It also made a number of further recommendations which the Board has already begun to work towards implementing.
The Board remains firmly committed to good governance.
Some changes have been made this year to the composition of the Boards Committees and to the Groups Remuneration Policy in light of feedback received from shareholders and investor reporting bodies following our 2016 Annual Report.
We always welcome the views of all Carrs Group plc stakeholders particularly where it can lead to improvements in our governance framework.
Full details of our approach to Corporate Governance the independent review undertaken during 2017 and our policy on continued improvement are set out on pages 2629 of our Annual Report and Accounts.
OUTLOOK
The Group remains focused on delivering its stated strategic objectives of investing in both its people and its asset base whilst continuing to drive product innovation and deliver growth both organically and by acquisition across our two divisions.
The outlook for UK Agriculture remains positive with farm incomes continuing to improve in the near term.
Additionally we continue to see a gradual improvement in cattle prices in the USA resulting in improved feed block volumes which is expected to continue.
In Engineering the difficulties in our UK business largely caused by a significant contract delay have been addressed and with the beneficial effects of other contract wins and strengthened management we expect to see a significant improvement in the year ahead.
The recent acquisitions enhance the depth of our offering and provide further opportunities to drive growth.
We are also encouraged by the opportunities apparent within our Engineering division particularly in China and the USA.
Looking further ahead it remains unclear what the UKs terms of exit from the European Union will look like.
However the Board will continue to monitor the position closely and the Group will remain flexible to respond to any challenges that may arise.
Overall trading in the new financial year has started well and in line with the Boards expectations with a particularly good start to the year in our USA feed block business and strong order books across the Engineering division.
We believe that with the investments made in acquisitions and research during the year in both Agriculture and Engineering we have laid a solid foundation for sustained growth and are confident in the outlook for the Group.
CHRIS HOLMES DL
22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group Strategy Seen and recognised as leaders in innovation
Investment in assets to ensure long term competitive advantage Investing in people that will shape the business in ten years time
To be recognised as a truly international business at the forefront of technology and innovation in our chosen markets.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Build business value by focusing on markets with growth potential Grow and diversify our international footprint Differentiate ourselves through innovation and technology Lead in our chosen markets
INVESTMENT
PEOPLE
ACQUISITIONS
INNOVATION
SERVICE EXCELLENCE ADDED VALUE
ENGINEERING Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business Strategies Focused on growth markets We aim to succeed by being selective in what we do.
We constantly strive to build deep and long lasting relationships with customers across a range of carefully chosen markets.
OUR KEY STRENGTHS GLOBAL MARKETS Wide range of export markets across the globe supplied from key manufacturing plants in UK mainland Europe and across the USA.
CORE COMPETENCIES Deep industry knowhow delivering market leading solutions backed up with world leading engineering capability.
MARKET LEADING PRODUCTS Leading branded products such as Crystalyx and SmartLic in Agriculture and MSIP Powerfluidics Telbot and A1000 in Engineering.
DOING THE RIGHT THING Management style that encourages entrepreneurial drive and innovation backed up by key values  respect trust and integrity.
Agriculture
After three difficult years across the global agricultural sector prices in dairy and livestock markets have stabilised and begun to recover as 2017 has progressed.
In the UK this recovery has been supported further by the continued weakness seen in sterling as the Brexit process has unfolded over the past twelve months.
Brexit adds uncertainty in the UK especially for agriculture and in the longer term the industry may move through a period of some significant change and restructuring in response.
But long term prospects for agriculture remain strong  whatever the outcome of Brexit the need to increase productivity in the UK Europe and globally to feed the growing world population remains critical.
Moreover to offset challenges that may emerge in the UK industry as a result of the Brexit process means that the need for productivity enhancing technologies remains strong.
The strategic aim across the Agricultural division remains to strengthen the businesses geographical position and reach across core markets in the UK Europe and the USA taking advantage of rising incomes in the dairy and beef sectors while also starting to develop a leadership position in dairy nutrition.
Growing manufactured feed volumes in UK market.
Continued investment in UK retail store development.
Global investment including a new low moisture block plant in Shelbyville Tennessee a new Pick Block plant at Oldenburg Germany and continued development of feed block markets in New Zealand and South America.
Engineering
Growing opportunities across the global nuclear industry continue to offer a good platform on which to develop and strengthen our Engineering division.
The product development programme in remote handling is progressing well enabling the opening up of exciting new markets such as China.
Exploration into the adjacent markets of defence and nuclear newbuild amongst others also remains an important element of the divisional strategy as does building long term strategic relationships with key clients such as Sellafield.
The STABER GmbH integration process has progressed well and works are ongoing to extend premises at Markdorf Germany to fully consolidate the business.
The acquisition of NuVision Engineering Inc. market.
Further acquisition opportunities are also under review across the sector.
Medium term manufacturing pipeline looking good with benefit of 48m Sellafield Vessels and Tanks framework contract expected to begin during 2018.
Acquisition of NuVision a leading technology and applications engineering company based in the USA opens up market access and manufacturing capability across North America.
Increased strength and depth in management to bring full coordination and the benefit of synergies across the division globally.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The development of the Simarghu range by Workware a division of Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd aligns with the Groups longterm strategy of focusing on markets with growth potential and differentiating ourselves by investing in technology and innovation.
The range has proved very successful and has significantly elevated the profile of the Workware division.
Top The Simarghu harness in action.
Bottom The Gemini female harness.
Case Study Simarghu In 2017 the Groups Workware division launched its Simarghu range of arborist harnesses and products.
Developed over a number of years and backed by patent pending technology Simarghu represents the very best in safety and performance.
Named after the mythical dragon who protects the tree of life the Simarghu harnesses are the product of a collaboration with renowned industry and design experts.
Recognising the importance of comfort whilst working at height the design process heavily involved occupational therapists to ensure that the Simarghu range continues to perform throughout use.
The meticulous design process has resulted in range of harnesses that have been described as truly gamechanging with full ergonomic adjustability and practical features which are designed specifically with arborists in mind.
Perhaps the most notable development is the production of the very first femalespecific harness which better levels of comfort and support over traditional unisex harnesses.
The Simarghu range was first revealed at the Tree Care Conference in Augsburg Germany and officially launched at the ARB Show National Arboretum on 12 May 2017.
The industry response has been extraordinary with arborists providing ongoing positive feedback and endless reviews discussions on social media.
Since launch further products have also been added to the range which complement the harnesses and enhance performance.
Workware has already been able to appoint distributors across Europe and has plans to launch Simarghu into the USA Canada Australia and New Zealand.
During the year the Group made strategic investment in technologies which will provide a platform for further growth in key markets.
GENERATING
GROWTH
THROUGH
INNOVATION Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Top Steam generator pipeend decontamination applied at a US Nuclear Power Plant.
Bottom Largescale Powerfluidics technology Demonstrator Programme for the US Department of Energy.
Case Study NuVision Engineering Inc.
On 7 August 2017 Carrs Group plc announced its acquisition of USAbased engineering business NuVision Engineering Inc.
NuVision was founded in 1971 and is split between its headquarters in Pittsburgh Pennsylvania and operations in Charlotte North Carolina.
It is recognised internationally as a leading technology and engineering solutions business specialising in supplying products and services at nuclear and power plant facilities government waste remediation facilities and in waste cleanup programmes.
NuVision boasts an impressive customer base including the US Department of Energy major nuclear energy suppliers and public utilities worldwide and international governments.
Its specialist products and services include MSIP a patented technology for improving the safety and operational life of nuclear plant by reducing the stresses exerted onto welds and crack mitigation Powerfluidics maintenancefree systems for mixing sampling and retrieving radioactive liquids slurries and sludges Decontamination efficient and effective systems for decontaminating pipeends and other artefacts in nuclear power plants during standard maintenance procedures Robotics a suite of heavy duty manipulators for use in cleanup operations complementing the range currently offered by the Groups existing remote handling operations and RandD consultancy working with the US Department of Energy to develop innovative solutions for the nuclear industry.
As part of the deal the Group also acquired NuVisions 49% stake in Mid Columbia Engineering Inc. to the Hanford Site nuclear complex.
The acquisition provides a strong foothold into USA nuclear markets and will enable significant revenue synergies with the Groups existing engineering businesses including the opportunity to market Wlischmillers products in the USA.
It aligns with the Groups strategy of international growth particularly in markets with significant potential and to be at the forefront of innovation and technology.
MSIP
Mechanical Stress Improvement Process MSIP is a patented technology that was invented developed and first used in 1986 by NuVision for mitigating stress cracking in nuclear plant pipe welds.
The process works by hydraulically compressing a pipe either side of a weld joint by approximately 12%.
By compressing the weld the tensile stresses are redistributed and the safety and operational life of plant is improved.
Each application requires a highly engineered bespoke clamp to be manufactured and meticulous planning so that installation can be completed during nuclear plant outages.
MSIP is accepted by the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission as a stress mitigation process and has successfully been applied to over 6000 welds on nuclear power plants worldwide and on pipes from 234 inches in diameter.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Agriculture division has experienced a challenging year.
Lower farming profits in the USA resulting from lower cattle prices impacted sales volumes of our feed blocks.
However this was partially offset by a recovery in UK Agriculture as farmgate milk prices and farmer confidence improved.
FEED BLOCKS In the USA pressure from lower cattle prices impacted our feed block business with sales volumes including joint ventures down 4.1% year on year.
As anticipated the second half of the year saw the beginning of a recovery resulting in volumes being marginally ahead of previous expectations.
This gradual recovery is expected to continue in the current year.
Our new low moisture feed block plant in Tennessee is expected to be fully operational by the end of December 2017 providing access to new markets across the Eastern and South Eastern states of the USA and providing additional capacity as the market recovery continues.
UK feed blocks performed well demonstrating the strength of our brands despite milder spring weather conditions which caused a slowdown in the second half.
Overall feed block sales were down 2.1% on last year.
We continue to develop opportunities to expand geographically.
In South America our trials at FAI Farms a commercial research institute in Brazil and the Instituto de Zootecnia near Ribeirao Preto So Paulo State are progressing well.
Completion of the trials is expected in the current financial year and initial results are encouraging.
In New Zealand we have incorporated a subsidiary company and established a direct sales operation distributing to farmers through key merchants as we make progress towards establishing our feed block products in this important market.
Investment in research in all our territories continues as we demonstrate the continued value of our existing brands such as Crystalyx and SmartLic as well as the introduction of new products such as FlaxLic and
The continued investment in research which confirms the efficacy of our products is the foundation for the success of our feed block business globally and sets us apart from our competitors.
Despite difficult market conditions and a disappointing performance in our UK Manufacturing business we have continued to invest in our business which is consistent with our vision to be recognised as a truly international business at the forefront of innovation and technology across Agriculture and Engineering.
Before amortisation and nonrecurring items TIM DAVIES
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Chief Executives Review
OPERATING PROFIT BY SECTOR AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 17.2% DOWN from 2016 74.2% DOWN from 2016 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements UK AGRICUL TURE The recovery we witnessed in the first half in UK Agriculture continued into the second half with manufactured feed volumes which includes compound feed and blends increasing 10.9% year on year against a national market rise of 6.6% This is a strong performance which demonstrates the value we bring to our customers.
On 5 June 2017 we acquired the trade and assets of Mortimer Feeds a feed merchant business operating principally in Cheshire.
This acquisition adds incremental feed volumes converts some existing merchant business into direct sales and is in line with our strategy of strengthening our presence in current locations and leading in dairy nutrition.
The retail business has delivered another strong performance with the country store network across Northern England and Southern Scotland reporting an increase of 0.8% in likeforlike sales and a 2.2% increase in total sales following the opening of Penicuik East Midlothian in December 2016 and the acquisition of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd Ayr in March 2017.
On 31 October 2017 we acquired the entire issued share capital of Pearson Farm Supplies Ltd an agricultural retail business with locations across Yorkshire Lancashire and North West Wales.
This will significantly expand our customer base bring together key people and provide key synergies across the Group.
The acquisition takes our total retail footprint to 43 locations.
The strategy for the retail business remains the expansion of our geographic reach into adjacent territories redeveloping existing facilities and expanding our product offering to meet the needs of our customers particularly those located in rural communities.
As part of our strategy we continue to ensure that our retail stores have the best possible locations alongside livestock auction markets and in key agricultural locations.
In addition we had a strong performance in agricultural machinery where sales achieved a record level increasing 27.8% year on year.
New tractor sales were up 42% year on year against a market increase of 21% and our market share for key brands increased by 3% to 19%.
The oil distribution business saw sales volumes decline 3.5% which was a resilient performance given the mild weather conditions with ambient temperatures during winter and spring higher than the prior year.
Our continued good performance can be attributed to our product offer and excellent levels of customer service.
AGRICULTURE OUTLOOK Farmer confidence has returned during the year as a result of the increase in farmgate milk prices and improved revenues from beef and sheep leading to a recovery in farm incomes.
We expect farm incomes to continue to improve throughout the current financial year.
The uncertainty following the outcome from the EU referendum remains particularly relating to the future of the single farm payment and support for UK farmers.
However in the shortterm UK livestock and dairy prices have responded positively due to a number of factors including the devaluation of sterling.
The division is well placed both operationally and geographically to adapt to future market conditions whilst continuing to support the needs of our farming customers.
Department for Environment Food and Rural Affairs 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executives Review continued
The Engineering division had a disappointing year with a poor performance in UK Manufacturing due largely to a delayed contract.
Despite this the division made significant strategic progress with the highlights being the acquisition and integration of STABER into our remote handling business and the acquisition of NuVision.
This takes the business into new markets in the USA increases the focus on nuclear and its adjacent markets and brings new technology and capabilities to the Group.
UK MANUFACTURING Revenues declined in the year as a result of the contract delay in the first half of the year.
As announced on 30 March 2017 efforts to mitigate the effects of that delay were only partially successful.
The impact of the reduction in revenues together with poor margins on work completed during the year largely as a result of the continuing pressures in the oil and gas markets resulted in a loss in our UK Manufacturing business.
We have strengthened the management team in the UK Manufacturing business in the final quarter of the financial year.
Also we were pleased to report on 20 July 2017 that the delayed contract had been signed.
This will be delivered throughout the current financial year and into the next financial year.
Additionally work within the Sellafield Vessels and Tanks Category Management Framework is expected to commence during the current financial year.
This contract with a value of 48m at the time of the tender secures design and manufacturing services relating to Sellafields highest complexity vessels for a 10 year period.
This underpins the growth and development of our UK Manufacturing business over the medium and long term.
The Groups focus on the nuclear industry has continued although as previously reported the pivot by part of the manufacturing business away from oil and gas to nuclear and its adjacent markets including defence has been slower than initially anticipated due to the aforementioned contract delay.
The UK nuclear industry has benefited from the Governments commitment to both the ongoing decommissioning process and the future construction of new nuclear power facilities.
Consequently the division is seeing an increase in the level of activity and engagement with the new build sector and is establishing itself as a strategically relevant partner to the international effort behind the new build programme.
USA ENGINEERING On 7 August 2017 we announced the acquisition of USAbased engineering business NuVision Engineering Inc.
Pittsburgh Pennsylvania and Charlotte North Carolina.
The Group acquired the company for an initial consideration of 11.5m 8.8m before adjustments for working capital and a total consideration of up to 20m 15.4m dependent upon future financial performance.
NuVision is recognised internationally as a leading technology and engineering solutions business specialising in supplying products and services at nuclear and power plant facilities government waste remediation facilities and in waste cleanup programmes.
The acquisition provides a strong foothold into USA nuclear markets and will enable significant revenue synergies with the Groups existing engineering businesses including the opportunity to market Wlischmillers products in the USA.
NuVision is already a key supplier under a major nuclear contract being delivered by the UK Manufacturing business.
REMOTE HANDLING During the year the remote handling business performed ahead of the Boards expectations with high levels of activity particularly in relation to the manufacturing of products for the Chinese market.
Furthermore the order book is at its highest level for several years.
Engineering Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements In January 2017 we were notified that the Group had won the tender for the supply of a number of manipulators including three A1000s 36 A100s and four A200s into China.
Manufacturing commenced during the second half of the year and continues in the current financial year.
This is particularly encouraging given the significant increase in the planning and construction of new nuclear power plants and forms part of the Chinese Governments strategic plan to remove its current reliance on coal generated power.
As part of that plan power companies are mandated to include remote handling capability within the design of a new nuclear power station in order for it to be able to handle waste and potential future decommissioning requirements.
During the year it was confirmed by Statoil that funding would continue to be supplied for the Demo 2000 project which involves the development of a lightweight Telbot especially for use on oil and gas platforms and which is designed to reduce risk and downtime during tank inspections.
On 24 October 2016 we acquired STABER GmbH one of the primary suppliers to Wlischmiller our German remote handling business including all of its associated intellectual property for a total cash consideration of 7.9m STABER and Wlischmiller have been working together closely for over 50 years and its acquisition will help drive efficiencies and profitability within the division.
The first stage of integrating STABER into Wlischmiller has been successfully completed with key personnel being retained and working together effectively and the extension of the premises in Markdorf Germany is underway.
This will provide additional flexibility and capacity and consolidates both operations into one facility which will complete the integration process and be of significant benefit.
Following the acquisition of NuVision in August 2017 which has its own range of heavyduty manipulators the Group has one of the most technologically advanced ranges of remote handling equipment in the world.
MANAGEMENT
To maximise opportunities and synergies following the strategic progress made during the year we have strengthened the management in the Engineering division through the appointment of a Divisional Managing Director to oversee Engineering operations across the Group.
ENGINEERING OUTLOOK We continue to invest in the ongoing development of our products and services within the Engineering division to ensure that they remain at the forefront of innovation and technology.
When combined with our existing decommissioning portfolio and strong pipeline of current and potential contracts the Group is well positioned to benefit from future opportunities and developments particularly in the nuclear sector where our reputation as a premium supplier of high integrity equipment is already well established.
TIM DAVIES
Chief Executive Officer
22 November 2017 The acquisition of NuVision Engineering Inc. engineering businesses.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Risk Management
The Group adopts a risk profile aligned to our vision to be recognised as a truly international business at the forefront of technology and innovation.
Our available capital and resources are applied to underpin our four strategic pillars acquisitions people investment and innovation.
The Board believes that in managing the Groups business it is critical to strike the right balance between an appropriate and comprehensive control environment and encouraging entrepreneurial behaviours required to seek out and develop the business.
However well this is struck the business will always be subject to a number of risks and uncertainties.
Our approach to risk management is designed to provide reasonable assurance that our assets are safeguarded.
The risks facing the business are assessed and where possible mitigated and all relevant information is disclosed and reported to the Board.
ORGANISATION AND PROCESS The Board assumes overall responsibility for the management of risk and for reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
The Board has established a clear organisational structure with welldefined accountabilities for the principal risks the Group faces in the short medium and long term across all divisions.
This is overseen by the Executive Directors who have an active responsibility for focusing on the principal areas of risk to the Group.
The Board reviews these risk areas including consideration of environmental social and governance matters.
This review is undertaken quarterly.
For each of our principal risks we have a risk management framework detailing our assessment of the risk the controls we have in place who is responsible for managing the risk as well as any further mitigating actions required.
BOARDS ASSESSMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK The Board review the principal risks quarterly.
This is supported by an annual review of the risk management system undertaken by the Audit Committee.
Details of the activities of the Audit Committee in relation to this can be found in the Audit Committee Report on pages 3032.
Decisions that could have a material impact on the Group are reviewed as and when required at Board meetings.
PRINCIPAL RISK FACTORS Our business is subject to a variety of risks and uncertainties.
On the following pages we have identified the risks we regard as most significant to our Group and performance at this time.
These may change as the Group develops over the year.
We have commented on mitigating actions that we believe help us manage these risks.
However we may not be successful in deploying some or all of these mitigating actions.
If the circumstances in these risks occur or are not successfully mitigated our cash flow operating results financial position business and reputation could be materially adversely affected.
Our risk appetite and approach to risk management Our success as a Group depends on the ability to identify and maximise the opportunities generated by our businesses and the markets in which we operate.
In doing so we continue to develop an embedded approach to risk management which puts risk and opportunity assessment at the heart of our strategy.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KEY RISKS DESCRIPTION OF THE RISK WHAT WE ARE DOING TO MANAGE THE RISK IT AND CYBERSECURITY The Group relies on information technology and key systems to support the business.
In common with other organisations the Group undertakes development of its IT systems and is susceptible to cyberattacks with the risk of a financial loss and threat to the overall confidentiality and availability of data in systems.
The Group has a comprehensive suite of IT security solutions in place which are reviewed and tested by specialist third parties.
From a system development perspective major projects are subject to appropriate project governance arrangements.
BREXIT
The UKs impending exit from the European Union EU highlights a number of risks for the Group particularly in the Agriculture division.
Part of our customer base is inherently reliant on agricultural subsidies from the EU and therefore future government policy and support for the agricultural sector will potentially impact on our customers with a knock on effect to our agricultural business.
Similarly for some areas of the business the Group imports raw materials from within the EU.
The imposition of tariffs or other related cost increases could impact the cost base of the Group.
The Group benefits from its operational and geographic diversity and is not substantially dependent on the EU for either raw materials or revenues.
We will continue to monitor developments in the Brexit process and incorporate steps into our future business planning where these may be required in order to mitigate any potentially adverse consequences including the imposition of any tariffs.
ACQUISITIONS
The Group is acquisitive and is therefore exposed to the possibility of acquiring a company based on inaccurate information unrealistic synergies and financial benefits or an inappropriate deal structure.
Failure to effectively integrate acquired businesses could also undermine any expected synergies.
A thorough and careful due diligence process is undertaken utilising relevant skilled internal personnel as well as external expertise when required.
Individual
Consideration is given to the composition and skills of the management team of the acquired company and support and relevant training is provided by Group personnel as part of a detailed plan to ensure a successful integration.
The deal structure and proposed financing arrangements are determined on a case by case basis.
Postacquisition reviews are also undertaken to identify any areas for improvement in future transactions.
MANAGING COSTS Margins may be affected by fluctuations in raw material prices due to factors such as harvest and weather conditions crop disease crop yields alternative crops and byproduct values.
In some cases due to the basis for pricing in sales contracts or due to competitive markets we may not be able to pass on to customers the full amount of raw material price increases or higher energy freight or other operating costs.
The Group has a number of strategies in place to manage this risk.
These include strategic long term relationships with suppliers multiplesource suppliers for key ingredients raw material and forward energy purchasing policies to provide security of supply and cost and close monitoring of contract execution to ensure supply is within agreed terms.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Continued overleaf Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Risk Management continued
DESCRIPTION OF THE RISK WHAT WE ARE DOING TO MANAGE THE RISK RELIANCE ON KEY CUSTOMERS Some businesses within the Group have a significant proportion of their revenue generated from a small number of key customers.
A loss of one or more of these customers could adversely affect the performance of a division and in turn the Group.
The businesses have established good long term relationships with key customers to ensure that demands and expectations are met.
The Group is constantly investing in its businesses to ensure that they are able to satisfy customer needs and are market leaders.
The Group is continually working on identifying new markets products and opportunities to expand the customer base of all its businesses.
PEOPLE
Performance knowledge and skills of employees are central to the success of the Group.
We must attract integrate and retain the talent required to fulfil our strategic growth ambitions.
Inability to retain key knowledge and adequately plan for succession could have a negative impact on the Groups performance.
The Group has remuneration policies designed to attract retain and reward employees with the ability and experience to execute the Groups strategy.
Management development programmes are in place alongside detailed succession planning across the Group.
Succession plans for senior roles are reviewed by the Nominations Committee annually.
STRATEGIC PARTNERS The Group has a number of strategic partners particularly in the Agriculture division who are involved either as joint venture partners or significant minority shareholders.
A successful working relationship with these partners is paramount to those businesses success.
Close working relationships are maintained with all the Groups strategic partners.
This includes regular meetings both formally and informally and close involvement in the setting and monitoring of strategy for those businesses.
In addition arrangements are appropriately documented in contracts and legal agreements.
CUSTOMER DEMAND Changes in customer demand be that retail commercial or government customers caused by economic factors or delays in planning contracts could result in a fall in demand for the Groups product offering resulting in a significant loss in revenue.
The Group operates in diverse worldwide markets which provide some resilience for the Group against difficulties faced by any one market or economy.
The businesses are managed flexibly to react to changing demands in their own sector.
TREASURY
We are exposed to a variety of financial risks in relation to treasury.
The Group must ensure that it has an adequate level of facilities to provide sufficient funding to operate its businesses and to develop growth opportunities.
Changes to the value of currencies can fluctuate widely and could have a significant impact on a divisions results due to the translation of overseas results into our functional currency and because some sales receipts and purchase payments are denominated in foreign currencies.
Furthermore because the Group has international businesses it is subject to exchange risks in the translation of the underlying net assets and earnings of its foreign subsidiaries.
The level of facilities are regularly reviewed by the Group Finance Director and these are also regularly reported to and discussed by the Board.
The Group operates a treasury policy of hedging all significant transactional currency exposures.
Additionally translational hedging instruments are sometimes used to limit the potential impact of fluctuating currencies on reported earnings from foreign subsidiaries.
For interest rate risk on floating rate debt we maintain a mix of fixed rate debt primarily finance lease and floating rate debt.
These levels are monitored and assessed against forecast changes in interest rates and forward guidance from interest rate setting authorities.
BUSINESS CONTINUITY The operation of manufacturing plants involves many risks that could cause a temporary or permanent stoppage in production and could have a material adverse effect on the Group.
The Group has Business Continuity arrangements in place to enable continuity of supply as quickly as practicable of product to customers in the event of a natural disaster or major equipment or plant failure.
A programme of insurance is also in place to protect against the cost of major business interruptions.
KEY RISKS Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Viability Statement The Groups focus is particularly on developing its supplements business because of the opportunities for international expansion and product development and its nuclear engineering business because of the global expansion opportunities in the nuclear sector and adjacent markets.
The Groups prospects are assessed primarily through its strategic planning process.
This process is led by the Chief Executive across all aspects of the Group.
The Board participates fully in the annual process through an annual strategy day detailed strategic presentations on all areas of the business by business leaders throughout the year and an annual half year strategic update.
Part of the Boards role is to consider whether the plan continues to take appropriate account of the changing external environment.
The output of the strategic planning process is a set of Group strategic objectives and a number of strategic priorities for the forthcoming financial year.
The latest updates to the strategic plan were finalised in May 2017 following this years review.
This considered the Groups current position and the development of the business as a whole over the next three years.
Given the nature of the business cycles in both Agriculture and Engineering it was decided that a period of three years to 31 August 2020 was the most appropriate for the purpose of a viability assessment.
The Group has prepared detailed financial forecasts for the 3 year period to 31 August 2020 so that 2 years 10 months remains at the time of approval of this years Annual Report and Accounts.
The first year of the financial forecasts form the Groups operating budget and is subject to a reforecast process at the halfyear.
Forecasts for the second and third years are prepared in a similar level of detail.
The Groups principal risks are set out on pages 1416.
The purpose of the principal risks table is primarily to summarise those matters that could prevent the Group from delivering on its strategy.
A number of other aspects of the principal risks  because of their nature or potential impact  could also threaten the Groups ability to continue in business in its current form if they were to occur.
Of the principal risks identified the following are the most important to the assessment of the viability of the Group
Managing costs Reliance on key customers Strategic partners Customer demand and
It was determined that none of these individual risks would in isolation compromise the Groups viability.
Although the strategic plan reflects the Directors best estimate of the future prospects of the business they have also tested the potential impact on the Group of a number of scenarios over and above those included in the plan by quantifying their financial impact and overlaying this on the detailed financial forecasts in the plan.
These scenarios represent severe but plausible circumstances that the Group could experience.
The scenarios tested included Significant reductions in profitability and associated cashflows associated with the risks highlighted above with consumer demand affecting all business units and additional impacts on Agriculture business units from commodity costs and from strategic partners and Interest costs increasing by a factor of two.
The results of this stress testing showed that due to the stability of the core business the Group would be able to withstand the impact of these scenarios occurring over the period of the financial forecasts by making adjustments to its operating plans within the normal course of business.
The Group also considered a number of scenarios that would represent serious threats to its liquidity.
None of these was considered to be plausible.
Based on their assessment of prospects and viability above the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the three year period ending 31 August 2020.
The Directors also considered it appropriate to prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis as explained in the Basis of Accounting paragraph in the principal accounting policies.
The Groups business model and strategy are central to an understanding of its prospects and details can be found on pages The Group is very diverse both operationally and geographically.
The Group set down a strategic plan three years ago which is subject to ongoing monitoring and development as described below.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial Review
NEIL AUSTIN GROUP FINANCE DIRECTOR Current and Future
REVENUE
Reported revenues from continuing operations were 346.2m 9.9 per cent ahead of last year 2016 314.9m.
Revenues have increased primarily as a result of higher sales volumes in the UK Agriculture business.
OPERATING PROFIT Group operating profit before amortisation and nonrecurring items of 9.3m is down 28.5 per cent on last year 2016 13.0m.
As a percentage of revenues Group operating margin before amortisation and nonrecurring items is 2.7 per cent compared to 4.1 per cent in 2016.
These reductions are due to the trading issues experienced in the last year in UK Manufacturing and in USA Feed Blocks.
Operating profits before amortisation and nonrecurring items and from continuing operations per division and as a percentage of divisional revenues are as follows AMORTISATION AND NONRECURRING ITEMS The Group incurred a number of non recurring items in the year totalling This included acquisition costs of 1.4m primarily related to the acquisitions of NuVision and STABER and a net credit relating to Chirton Engineering of 0.4m.
The net credit comprised an exceptional credit of 2.1m for contingent consideration no longer payable and an impairment charge against the associated goodwill of 1.7m.
There was also a loss of 0.2m on the disposal of an old unutilised Agriculture site and restructuring costs of 0.1m.
SHARE OF ASSOCIATES AND JVS The Groups share of the posttax result in its associates and joint ventures was 2.8m compared to 2.1m in 2016.
The result reflected both an increase in its associates profitability and an increase in joint venture profitability primarily driven by a recovery in the European dairy market which assisted feed block performance and a better performance in the USA AminoMax business.
FINANCE COSTS Net finance costs of 0.7m were lower than the previous year 2016 0.8m reflecting lower borrowings throughout the year.
Interest cover was 15.5 times based on reported profit 18.1 times on an underlying profit basis compared to 19.2 times in 2016.
Operating Profit Before amortisation and nonrecurring items % %
Engineering
Total 9.3 13.0 The key features of the year have been the disappointing performances in parts of the UK Engineering and USA Agriculture businesses.
However despite this there has been significant strategic progress.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PROFIT BEFORE TAX Profit before tax from continuing operations before amortisation and nonrecurring items at 11.4m was 20.2 per cent lower than in the previous year 2016 14.3m.
Reported profit before taxation was 10.0m 2016 14.1m.
TAXATION
The Groups effective tax charge on profit from activities after net finance costs and excluding profits from associates and joint ventures was 23.7 per cent 2016 24.2 per cent.
A reconciliation of the actual total tax charge to the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.58 per cent is given in note 7 to the financial statements.
EARNINGS PER SHARE The profit attributable to the equity holders of the Company amounted to 7.0m 2016 12.5m and basic earnings per share from continuing operations was 7.7p 2016 10.7p a decrease of 28.0 per cent.
Adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations of 8.9p 2016 10.9p is calculated by dividing the profit attributable to equity holders for the year before amortisation and nonrecurring items by the weighted average number of shares in issue during the year.
ACQUISITIONS
The Group has made a number of acquisitions in the year in both divisions.
The entire issued share capital of STABER GmbH was acquired by Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH on 24 October 2016 for cash consideration of 7.85m including 2m of deferred consideration.
The deferred consideration is payable upon successful transfer of intellectual property and is due by 30 June 2018.
The Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd a retailer of animal health products for the pet equine and smallholding market on 17 March 2017 for a cash consideration of 139000.
On 5 June 2017 the Group also acquired the business and certain assets of Mortimer Feeds Ltd for cash consideration of 579000 including 125000 of contingent consideration.
Both acquisitions have been subsequently hived up and incorporated into Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Limited.
NuVision Engineering Inc. a total consideration of up to 20m.
The initial consideration payable was 11.5m with contingent consideration of up to 8.5m payable over a three year period dependent on future financial performance.
Further details on all acquisitions are given in note 29 to the financial statements.
CASH FLOW AND NET DEBT A free cash flow of 11.3m was generated in the year representing an increase of 73.2 per cent on 6.5m in the previous year.
This increase was substantially due to improvements in working capital.
After payment of 19.5m of dividends including a 16.0m special dividend and 13.2m on acquisitions the cash flow for the year was 22.3m resulting in closing net debt of 14.1m.
Headroom against existing facilities was 30.2m at the year end.
Other than the Groups overdraft which is renewable annually the Groups existing facilities are due for renewal in June 2019.
PENSIONS
The Group operates its current pension arrangements on a defined benefit and defined contribution basis.
The defined benefit scheme is closed to new members and closed to future accrual.
The scheme currently has 106 deferred members and 227 current pensioners.
The valuation on an IAS 19 accounting basis showed a surplus before the related deferred tax liability in the scheme at 2 September 2017 of 5.2m 2016 0.3m.
This is after an actuarial gain of 5.0m 2016 loss of 2.7m which has been recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
NEIL AUSTIN Group Finance Director 22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Cash flow and net debtcash 2017 Operating profit from continuing operations Depreciation and loss on disposal Amortisation and impairment of goodwill EBITDA excluding associates and joint ventures Increase in inventories Increase in receivables Increase in payables
Net operating cash flow Net interest
Cash flow from continuing operations Maintenance capex Free cash flow Expansionary capex
Dividends received Dividends paid Loans and Finance leases receivedpaid Change in borrowings
Cash flows Opening net cash Closing net debt 14139 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key Performance Indicators We monitor our performance against the strategy by means of key performance indicators KPIs 5.5% 13.1% 4.1% 6.5m 13.0%
Revenues are monitored by the Board.
Our volume driven businesses are all subject to significant raw material price variations the majority of which are passed through to selling prices.
Hence increasing raw material prices are expected to lead to higher revenues.
Comments
Gross margin is a reflection on how successfully we have managed raw material price volatility in our markets together with how successful we have been in pricing in other areas of our business in competitive markets.
Our gross margin from continuing operations fell to 11.2% in the current year which reflects the market conditions in USA Agriculture and the poor performance of UK Manufacturing partly as a result of major contract delay.
Comments
The underlying Group operating margin reflects the gross margin achieved which is described above but also indicates the efficiency of our operations from both an administrative and distribution perspective.
The fall in underlying operating margin from continuing operations to 2.7% reflects the financial performance in USA Agriculture and UK Manufacturing.
Comments
This KPI indicates how much cash is available for the Group to utilise for expansionary capital investment paying dividends or financingrepaying borrowings.
The increase in FY17 is predominantly due to working capital changes across the business.
Comments
Return on net assets fell to 10.8% this year.
This reduction also reflects the financial performance in USA Agriculture and UK Engineering.
The 2016 calculation excludes profit before tax of discontinued operations of 3.5m.
Definition
Gross profit as a percentage of sales revenue.
Definition
Year on year increase decrease in sales revenue excluding the impact of acquisitions and disposals.
Definition
Operating profit before nonrecurring items and amortisation as a percentage of revenue.
Definition
Cash generated from operating activities including all cashflows from discontinued operations less maintenance capital expenditure.
Definition
Profit before tax nonrecurring items and amortisation as a percentage of net assets.
Underlying sales growthdecline 9.6% Gross margin 11.2% Adjusted Group operating margin 2.7% Free cash flow Return on net assets 10.8%
Financial Review
Pages 1819
Financial Review
Pages 1819
Financial Review
Pages 1819
Financial Review
Pages 1819
Financial Review
Pages 18telteltel 2017 2017 9.6% 11.2% 2.7% 11.3m 10.8% Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ALISTAIR WANNOP NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR Alistair was appointed a NonExecutive Director in 2005.
Alistair has been the Chairman of both the County NFU and the MAFF northern regional advisory panel.
He has served as a Director of The English Farming and Food Partnership Rural Regeneration Cumbria and Cumbria Vision.
Alistair is a fellow of the Royal Agricultural Society of England and currently holds office as High Sheriff of Cumbria.
The Board TIM DAVIES
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
Tim joined Carrs in March 2013 as Chief
Tim was formerly the Group Managing Director at Openfield.
Prior to this he progressed from Sales Director to Managing Director of Grainfarmers plc in 2005.
He subsequently led the successful merger of Grainfarmers plc and Centaur Grain Ltd in 2008 forming Openfield the largest farmerowned grain marketing business in the UK.
Tim continued in his role as Group Managing Director until 2013.
He was a Director of the Agricultural Industries Confederation between 20032016.
NEIL AUSTIN GROUP FINANCE DIRECTOR Neil joined Carrs in January 2013 and became Group Finance Director in April 2013.
Neil was formerly a Director at PwC having joined as a graduate in their Newcastle office in 1997.
He was appointed as a Director of the Newcastle office in 2007 with lead responsibility for part of the Assurance practice and has experience with FTSE 350 companies and multinationals.
CHRIS HOLMES NONEXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN Chris joined Carrs in 1991 as the Managing Director of the Agriculture business having previously worked for J Bibby and Sons.
Chris was appointed Chief Executive in 1994 and remained in that role until he was appointed Chairman in 2013.
He commenced as Chairman of Carlisle Youth Zone in 2013 and is currently Chairman of the Cumbria Local Enterprise Partnership Scrutiny Panel.
JOHN WORBY SENIOR INDEPENDENT
AUDIT COMMITTEE
John was appointed a NonExecutive Director in April 2015.
John is currently a NonExecutive Director of Fidessa Group plc Senior Independent Director of Hilton Food Group plc and Chairman of the audit committee of both companies.
John was previously the Finance Director of Genus and a NonExecutive Director of Cranswick plc.
John is a chartered accountant and a member of the Financial Reporting Review Panel.
IAN WOOD NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN Ian was appointed to the Board on 1 October 2015.
He retired as the Commercial Director International Business Development for Centrica previously British Gas in January 2016 having held a number of positions with the Company covering various aspects of the business including engineering customer services industrial and commercial marketing and energy trading within the UK Continental Europe and North America.
Ian is a Director of Talkin Energy Ltd.
MATTHEW RATCLIFFE COMPANY SECRETARY Matthew joined Carrs in November 2016 as Company Secretary and Legal Counsel.
Matthew is a solicitor with a breadth of experience working alongside both international and local businesses in corporate commercial and contentious matters.
He began his career with Pinsent Masons before joining a Cumbrian law firm in 2009 and being appointed a Director in 2014.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Responsibility Carrs Group places great emphasis on social responsibility and in maintaining high ethical standards.
The Group takes pride in the safety and wellbeing of its people in the steps taken to reduce its environmental impact and in ensuring that it plays its part in the community.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
People are fundamental to every business and our employees are critical to the successful delivery of our strategic objectives.
One of our four key pillars is investing in people who are vital to the long term success of the business .
Our values of trust respect and integrity run throughout all our businesses.
Our high levels of teamwork and cooperation are a major contributing factor to our success.
We strive to ensure that employees across the Group are kept informed about business performance through the issue of regular briefing notes by the Executive Directors or Senior Management.
These are circulated as a matter of routine at regular intervals and also whenever there are significant developments across the Group or which affect a particular division or business unit.
Management within the Group are also kept informed on issues that may affect employees which enables effective transparent communication and consultation where appropriate.
Continuing to identify talent and develop our people will remain key priorities for us going forward.
We remain committed to providing a working environment that is consistent and fair is free from discrimination aids development and skills and supports employee engagement.
Equal opportunities The Group is committed to an active equal opportunities policy promoting an environment free from discrimination harassment and victimisation where everyone will receive equal treatment regardless of gender colour ethnic or national origin disability age marital status sexual orientation or religion.
All decisions relating to employment practices will be objective free from bias and based solely upon work criteria and individual merit.
The Group is responsive to the needs of its employees customers and the community at large.
We are an organisation which uses everyones talents and abilities and where diversity is valued.
Employees with disabilities It is our policy that people with disabilities should have full and fair consideration for all vacancies and opportunities.
We remain committed to maintaining the current open fair and nondiscriminatory recruitment process operated throughout the Group and seek to have full engagement with any employee who becomes disabled during their employment.
Sharesave
The Group operates a Sharesave scheme in which all UKbased employees are entitled to participate.
The Group recognises that the scheme is a well established method of employee engagement facilitating ownership in the Group.
Development overview of year This has been another good year in developing our people at all levels.
The Group Wide Senior Leadership Development Programme concluded in February 2017 with the presentation of Strategic Business Projects to the CEO and Managing Directors.
Detailed feedback was obtained which clearly demonstrated achievement of the initial programme objectives.
We intend to continue our successful working relationship with the Brathay Trust on future development programmes.
The Carrs Billington Branch Supervisors Development Programme concluded in January 2017 and detailed feedback from throughout the programme was collated which resulted in a further session chaired by the Managing Director to work with the supervisors regarding areas such as credit control product knowledge systems customer service and pricing structures.
One outcome from this was an increase in product knowledge training across the business.
A further outcome was a half day programme in customer service which has been delivered to over 280 Carrs Billington employees earlier in the year.
The feedback from the programme has led to Regional Branch Managers requesting follow up training to expand on the learnings from the first session and to ensure implementation of the key learning points.
We believe that an employees first impressions of an organisation have a significant impact on their integration within the team and their level of job satisfaction.
As a result of this we have introduced a Carrs Group induction programme as an opportunity to welcome all new recruits regardless of position to help them settle in and ensure they have the knowledge and support needed to thrive at work.
It is important to us that induction is not just treated as a tick box exercise but is seen as a great opportunity to introduce new employees to the culture and ways of working of the business.
We all need to invest time in inducting new employees to help them settle in become productive more quickly and to take our business forward.
The programme covers the following areas Company History Company Structure Vision Strategy and Values The Way We Work Health and Safety and Customer Service.
As part of our ongoing commitment to supporting professional development we have run three Management Development Programmes throughout 2017 for Line Managers to enhance their management skills.
The programme includes essential modules that help managers increase their level of knowledge and implement effective workplace principles and practices.
Module 1 Roles and Responsibilities in Leadership and Management Module 2 Problem Solving and Decision Making Module 3 Communication and Crucial
Module 4 Conflict and Conducting Disciplinary Meetings Module 5 Performance Management and PDRs Module 6 Communication and Effective Behaviours in Meetings Senior Managers and Executives male and female 12 Men 3 Women 20% 80% The Group employs 1014 people.
The split is as follows 757 Men 257 Women 25% 75% As at 2 September 2017.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Responsibility continued HEAL TH AND SAFETY The Group remains fully committed to the maintenance of high standards of health and safety for all of its employees visitors customers and any others who may be affected by the activities of its businesses.
Health and safety is continually monitored and the Group strives to make progressive improvements.
The CEO Group FD and Group Risk Manager meet monthly in advance of each Board meeting to review health and safety which is a permanent high agenda item.
Every Board meeting involves a detailed review of statistics auditing activity and other initiatives as well as ensuring the Board are alerted to key risk management and legislative changes.
The Board also endorses an ongoing programme of improvements.
Since his appointment as a Non Executive Director in 2015 Ian Wood has closely overseen health and safety across the Group at Board level providing support to the Executive Directors and Group Risk Manager.
This has helped the Group deliver its programme of improvements and ensure that policies and practices are in line with the recommendations of the Institute of Directors and HSE.
The Group Risk Manager continuously monitors safety performance to ensure there is a high standard of health and safety management across all Group businesses.
This includes a rolling programme of site audits.
The overall number of accidents for the Group as a whole including the overseas businesses was 44 a reduction of 1 on the 45 recorded the previous year excluding Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
The number of RIDDOR reportable injuries and overseas equivalents has however increased to 4 from 2 the previous year.
The number of days lost in the year arising from these was consequently 57 an increase from 25 the previous year.
During 20162017 there have been several Health and Safety training initiatives in both the UK and overseas which will help lay the foundations for future improvement and a reduction in accidents.
The Board is committed to improving standards of health and safety and remains confident the overall trend of reduction in accident numbers seen in recent years will continue.
Division CO2 Tonnes 201617 CO2 Tonnes 201516 UK Agriculture Overseas Agriculture UK Engineering Overseas Engineering Head Office Sub Total
Total
Includes additional plant at Silver Springs USA Data for 201516 included transport within Carrs Flour Mills Ltd Carrs Group  Carbon CO2 Generation 201617 v 201516
As a Group we are committed to improving our environmental impact and continue to make progress towards our target of achieving a 25% reduction in our carbon footprint by 2020 against our 2012 baseline.
The Groups Environmental Committee meets four times each year with active representation from UK subsidiaries across the Group.
Through continued investment in state of the art equipment energy efficient lighting and in improving processes the Group continues to reduce its carbon generation.
The Group wide Environmental Reporting System is fully operational for both UK and overseas subsidiaries.
Each subsidiary and business location reports the following monthly data and performance against preset benchmarks Energy and Carbon Generation Water Utilisation Waste Generation and Recycling Transport Fuels and Environmental LegislationCompliance.
During 2015 the Group undertook a full Energy Audit in accordance with the mandatory Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme ESOS and the findings and energy saving opportunities identified from the audit were presented to the CEO and duly signed off as required by law.
We have already adopted many of the recommendations highlighted in that report and will continue with our programme of implementation which has resulted in progressive improvements to the Groups environmental impact.
A second ESOS Energy Audit will be undertaken by the Group before December 2019.
During 2017 and in light of the results from our ESOS Energy Audit we carried out a comprehensive review of how energy data is collected across the Group in order to ensure that the data we collect is accurate readily comparable and consistently recorded.
That review has helped improve the manner in which data is collected and can be reported.
All Engineering and Manufacturing sites across the UK within the Group now purchase their energy from Haven Power Limited which during the 12 months ended 31 March 2017 sourced 77.8% of its electricity from renewable sources.
Haven Power Limited Annual Disclosure Statement 2017 Carbon Generation Report The Group did not generate any additional greenhouse gases other than Carbon Dioxide CO2 from the utilisation of grid supplied electricity and natural gas during the year ended 2 September 2017.
The energy intensive UK feed block business continued to be in receipt of Climate Change Discount Agreements in exchange for target carbon reductions.
Those targets were met by the business during the year.
The table below details the CO2 generation of each of the Groups divisions and compares volumes against the previous year.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual UK Group Electricity Consumption for 201617 Group Overseas Electricity Consumption for 201617 Annual UK Group Gas Consumption for 201617 Group Overseas Gas Consumption for 201617 Total Other Fossil Fuel Consumption for 201617 3872459 kWh 4698190 kWh 6542422 kWh 49525318 kWh 10672913 kWh Energy Utilisation The table below details overall electricity and gas consumption across the Group in the year ended 2 September 2017.
Total UK Energy by Trading Division Transport Fuels During the year ended 2 September 2017 the Group utilised 1067984 litres of diesel and petrol fuel for fleet vehicles and company cars throughout its UK operations.
The amount of CO2 generated from this fuel consumption was 2858 tonnes down from 4405 tonnes in the previous year.
Total CO2 Generated by the Group The total amount of CO2 generated across the Group during the year ended 2 September 2017 was 16692 tonnes down from 16795 tonnes in the previous year.
2016 figures included Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
2017 figures include additional feed block plant at Silver Springs USA Intensity Metric Due to the diverse nature of operations across the Group we have determined that measuring tonnes of CO2 generated against total number of employees represents the best Key Performance Indicator for measuring improvements in Groupwide carbon footprint.
For the year ended 2 September 2017 the intensity metric stood at 16.5 tonnes of CO2 per employee being 16692 tonnes1014 employees which is down 31.3% from 24.3 tonnes of CO2 per employee in 2016.
The CO2 emissions data is reported in metric tonnes.
The CO2 emissions data has been calculated on the basis of measured energy and fuel use and multiplied by relevant CO2 conversion factors as approved by the Department of Energy.
Fuel and energy use are based on direct measurement verified through purchase invoices for the vast majority of our sites and collected centrally for the entire Group.
Environmental Protection We remain committed to protecting the environment and reducing the impact of our business through best practice.
Large manufacturing sites across the Group continue to operate within the emission levels set by the UK Environment Agency and their current permit conditions.
All sites operate within the framework of a full Environmental Management System.
All employees across the Group are actively encouraged to reduce waste and improve energy efficiencies and we carefully monitor waste and recycling across the businesses.
We have a strict Group Environmental Policy which is managed by the Groups Environmental
Waste and energy consumption targets are set for each business across the Group annually.
During the year ended 2 September 2017 the amount of waste disposed to landfill across the Group reduced by 9.1% and the amount of waste recycled increased by 39.6%.
We were able to reduce overall water consumption across the Group by 10.9%.
The Group will continue to monitor these statistics and set targets for improvement as part of its commitment to reducing its environmental impact.
COMMUNITY
We take an active role in supporting the communities in which we operate.
During 2017 that support has taken a variety of forms including charitable monetary donations fundraising and voluntary work.
Carrs Billington continues to be part of Zeus Packaging Groups global initiative to support childrens charities in Ireland the UK Spain Portugal New Zealand and Australia.
This has seen Carrs Billington be provided with the exclusive distribution rights of Zeus Purple Silage wrap and Purple Netwrap in the UK to support WellChild the national charity for sick children.
In addition to the proceeds raised by Carrs Billington we launched another competition in 2017 to support WellChild which required farmers to create eye catching displays from their purple hay bales customised with accessories.
Farmers taking part submitted photos of their creations which were then displayed on social media.
The Group maintains its relationship with Carlisle Youth Zone which continues to serve the social recreational and emotional needs of young people in the Carlisle area.
In 2017 we participated in the Dream Placement Programme developed by the Centre for Leadership Performance designed to give young people industry experience and an insight into the work of senior management and leaders of leading Cumbrian businesses.
CBAS
Caltech Crystalyx Scotmin Nutrition Bendalls Engineering Chirton Engineering Carrs MSM Hinds Bendalls Head Office T otal 3872459 kWh 2.2% 7.2% 24% 13.6% 5.6% 19.3% 27.3% 0.8% Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate Governance Report CHRIS HOLMES
CHAIRMANS OVERVIEW The Groups governance framework is designed to safeguard its longterm success for the benefit of shareholders and other stakeholders.
It continues to evolve as the Group develops and promotes transparency respect and accountability.
It ensures that the Board can operate in a culture of openness which coupled with its wealth of expertise and the collaborative attitude which permeates the Group optimises its effectiveness.
The Board is pleased to describe its approach to governance in the following report which describes how the Group has integrated the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code.
During the year the Board reviewed its membership of the Audit and Remuneration Committees in the light of comments received from certain shareholders.
As a result I stood down from both Committees which are now comprised exclusively of NonExecutive Directors that are considered by the Board to be independent.
I am pleased to report that as a result the Board now considers that it is in full compliance with the Code.
CHRIS HOLMES DL
22 November 2017 STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE WITH UK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE The UK Corporate Governance Code dated April 2016 and issued by the Financial Reporting Council sets out standards of good practice in relation to issues such as Board composition and effectiveness the role of Board committees
risk management
We are required to state how we have applied the principles contained in the Code and explain any areas where compliance has not been possible during the year.
The Board considers that the Company has during the year ended 2 September 2017 complied with the requirements of the Code save paragraphs C.3.1 and D.2.1 as is more particularly described below which had not been fully complied with whilst Chris Holmes remained a member of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
THE BOARD The Directors have a collective duty to promote the long term success of the Company for its shareholders.
In determining longterm strategy and objectives of the Group the Board is mindful of its duties and responsibilities to shareholders as well as employees and other stakeholders.
The Board reviews management and financial performance and monitors strategic delivery and achievement of business objectives.
The Boards time can be grouped into six key areas as outlined below.
A portion of the Boards time is also spent on administrative matters.
Good governance is central to the integrity reputation and performance of Carrs.
The Board remains committed to maintaining high standards.
Strategy
Setting strategic targets.
Reviewing new business developments and opportunities including potential acquisitions.
Research and technology.
Finance
Budget approval.
Monitoring financial performance.
Oversight of the preparation and management of the financial statements.
Dividend policy.
Pensions strategy.
Risk
Groups risk and internal control framework.
Stakeholder engagement AGM and other shareholder feedback.
Investor calls meetings and roadshows.
Governance
Legal updates and new disclosure requirements.
Internal Board review.
Succession planning.
Safety
Health and Safety monthly updates and management review.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The powers of the Directors are set out in the Companys Articles of Association.
The Directors are aware of their legal obligations and responsibilities that must be considered when exercising those powers including those arising under the Companies Act 2006.
During the year ended 2 September 2017 the Board comprised of two Executive Directors a NonExecutive Chairman and three NonExecutive
There is a Company Secretary to the Board.
The biographies of the Board can be found on page 21.
The Board met 12 times throughout the year.
In addition to regular scheduled meetings unscheduled supplementary meetings may also take place as and when necessary.
During this financial year there was one unscheduled meeting in relation to the acquisition of NuVision Engineering Inc.
Directors who are unable to attend a particular meeting receive relevant briefing papers and are given the opportunity to discuss any issues with the Chairman the Chief Executive or the Group Finance Director.
To enable the Directors of the Board to carry out their responsibilities all Directors have full and timely access to all relevant information.
The Board maintains a schedule of matters reserved for the Board which is reviewed against best practice.
A summary of those matters is set out below and a full schedule is available on the Companys website.
The Board is responsible for the Groups strategy acquisitions and divestment policy corporate governance risk and environment policy and management approval of budgets general treasury policy major capital expenditure projects dividend policy and monitoring the Groups profit and cash flow performance.
The Board has delegated its authority to the Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees to carry out certain tasks as defined in their written terms of reference approved by the Board these are also available on the Companys website.
The Code stipulates that there should be a clear division of responsibility between Board governance and executive management.
The Chairman is responsible for setting the Board agenda the leadership of the Board and ensuring its effectiveness on all aspects of its role providing strategic insight from his long business experience in the industry and with the Company and providing a sounding board for the Chief Executive on key business decisions and challenging proposals where appropriate.
The Chief Executive is responsible for the daytoday management of the Groups business leading the business and the rest of the management team in accordance with the strategy agreed by the Board leading the development of the Groups strategy with input from the rest of the Board leading the management team in the implementation of the Groups strategy and bringing matters of particular significance to the Chairman for discussion and consideration by the Board if appropriate.
Elections
The Companys Articles of Association provide that one third of the Directors retire by rotation each year at the Annual General Meeting however the Company considers it best practice to require all the Directors to retire and stand for reelection annually.
Attendance and Agenda In advance of all Board meetings the Directors are supplied with detailed and comprehensive papers covering the Groups strategy performance and operations.
Members of the executive management teams of businesses within the Group attend from time to time and make presentations.
The Company Secretary is responsible to the Board for the timeliness and quality of information.
Details of the number of meetings of and members attendance at the Board Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees during the period are set out in the table at the foot of this page.
Support
Directors can obtain independent professional advice at the Companys expense in performance of their duties as Directors.
None of the Directors obtained independent professional advice in the period under review.
All Directors have access to the advice and the services of the Company
In addition to these formal roles the NonExecutive Directors have access to senior management across the Group either by telephone or via involvement at informal meetings.
DIRECTORS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The Companies Act 2006 and the Companys Articles of Association require the Board to consider any potential conflicts of interest.
The Board has a policy and procedures for managing and where appropriate authorising actual or potential conflicts of interest.
Under those procedures Directors are required to declare all directorships or other appointments to organisations that are not part of the Group and which could result in actual or potential conflicts of interest as well as other situations which could result in a potential conflict of interest.
MEETING ATTENDANCE Board Audit
Remuneration
Committee
Nominations
Committee
No. of meetings Chris Holmes Tim Davies Neil Austin Alistair Wannop John Worby Ian Wood
Part of the meeting by invitation Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Board is required to review Directors actual or potential conflicts of interest at least annually.
Directors are required to disclose proposed new appointments to the Chairman before taking them on to ensure that any potential conflicts of interest can be identified and addressed appropriately.
Any potential conflicts of interest in relation to proposed directorships are considered by the Board prior to their appointment.
In this financial year there have been no declared conflicts of interest.
BOARD EVALUATION During 2017 the Board conducted an independent review facilitated by Independent Audit Limited which built upon the internal review conducted during 2016 and the previous external review in 2013.
The review covered the whole Board together with its Audit Nominations and Remuneration Committees which were each considered separately.
Particular focus was given to the effectiveness and appropriateness of the composition of the Board and of the Committees.
Scrutiny was also applied to the question of the independence of NonExecutive Directors.
The review commenced with discussions between Independent Audit and the Chairman and Company Secretary.
Those discussions led to the design of detailed and bespoke questionnaires which were subsequently disseminated to the Board certain other senior executives and in the case of the evaluation of the Audit Committee the Companys auditors PwC.
The questionnaires were completed entirely in confidence and a draft report was produced by Independent Audit analysing the feedback provided.
Following further discussions between Independent Audit and the Chairman and Company Secretary a full report was produced and presented to the Board by Independent Audit.
The report drew positive conclusions including that the Board and its Committees were performing effectively and are appropriately constituted.
It went on to make recommendations for further continued improvements including the planning of agendas to include further businessspecific reviews and increasing the focus on succession planning and people issues more generally.
The Board noted that improvements continue to be made to the Groups governance framework and that matters highlighted in the 2013 and 2016 reviews had been addressed.
The Board will continue to make improvements where necessary and appropriate to ensure that governance arrangements remain effective as the Group continues to develop.
An internal review will take place during the current financial year.
The report also confirmed the Boards views in relation to NonExecutive Director independence.
This was given greater focus due to the tenure of Alistair Wannop being in excess of nine years.
The report did not highlight any issues or concerns in relation to the independence of any Directors and confirmed the Boards view that independence cannot be determined solely by reference to the tenure of any Director particularly in the absence of any other circumstances or matters including those detailed at paragraph B.1.1. questioned.
The Board noted that Alistair Wannop had no material business relationships with the Company does not hold a significant shareholding or represent any shareholder does not have any family connections with the Company and has not served the Company in any capacity other than as a NonExecutive Director.
The Board was entirely satisfied that Alistair Wannop continued to exercise the level of objectivity and challenge that would be expected of an independent NonExecutive Director and that his knowledge of the Group and the markets in which it operates was of enormous benefit to the Board.
The Board is accordingly satisfied that Alistair Wannop Ian Wood and John Worby remain independent.
The question of NonExecutive Director independence is a matter which is kept under review and assessed annually by the Board.
The Chairman evaluated the performance of the Directors through informal discussions and observations.
The Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and the other NonExecutive Directors have met without the Chairman present to appraise his performance.
Overall the Board considered the performance of each Director to be effective and concluded that the Board and its Committees provide effective leadership and that appropriate governance and controls are in place.
The Board will continue to review its procedures effectiveness and development in the future.
BOARD COMMITTEES As is detailed below changes were made during 2017 to the composition of the Audit and Remuneration Committees to ensure compliance with the Code.
Audit Committee The Audit Committees key function is to review the effectiveness of the Companys financial reporting and performance of the external auditor.
The Audit Committee comprises three NonExecutive Directors John Worby Chairman Ian Wood and Alistair
During the year the Committee also included Chris Holmes who ceased to be a member owing to the requirement under the Code that the Committee is comprised solely of independent NonExecutive Directors.
The Board considers that the Committee meets the requirements of the Code and is appropriate for a company its size.
In particular the three members bring financial agricultural and engineering experience to the Committee together with a good understanding of the businesses within the Group and the risks that they face.
The work responsibilities and governance of the Audit Committee are set out on pages 3032.
The Chairman of the Audit Committee will be available at the AGM to answer any shareholder questions on the Committee and its activities.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises three NonExecutive Directors Ian Wood Chairman John Worby and Alistair Wannop.
During the year the Committee also included Chris Holmes who ceased to be a member owing to the requirement under the Code that the Committee is comprised solely of independent NonExecutive
Alistair Wannop held the position of Chairman until September 2017 when Ian Wood took over having served on the Committee for in excess of one year.
The work responsibilities and governance of the Remuneration Committee are set out on pages 3343.
The Chairman of the Remuneration Committee will be available at the AGM to answer any shareholder questions on the Committee and its activities.
Nominations Committee During the year the Nominations Committee comprised of Chris Holmes Chairman Alistair Wannop John Worby and Ian Wood.
The work responsibilities and governance of the Nominations Committee are set out on pages 4445.
Corporate Governance Report continued Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Chair of the Nominations Committee will be available at the AGM to answer any shareholder questions on the Committee and its activities.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS The Board recognises and values the importance of good communications with all shareholders.
The Group maintains dialogue with substantial and institutional shareholders and analysts and hosts presentations on the preliminary and interim results.
Shareholders have access to the Companys website at site and its investor website at investors.
We engage with our shareholders through regular communications.
Significant matters relating to trading or development of the business are disseminated to the market by way of Stock Exchange announcements.
We announce our financial results on a six monthly basis with all shareholders provided with our half year statement and we produce trading updates during the year.
All reports and updates are made available on the Companys investor website.
The Annual General Meeting AGM provides all shareholders with the opportunity to develop further their understanding of the Company.
It is the principal forum for all the Directors to engage in dialogue with private investors.
All shareholders are given the opportunity to raise questions on any matter at the meeting.
The Group aims to send notices to shareholders at least 20 working days before the meeting as required by the Code and it is the Companys practice to indicate the proxy voting results on all resolutions at the meetings.
Following the AGM the voting results for each resolution are published and are available on the Companys website.
FAIR BALANCED AND
The Directors have also reviewed the financial statements and taken as a whole consider them to be fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
INTERNAL CONTROL The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management which safeguard the shareholders investment and the Groups assets.
Such systems can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss being designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives.
The Board of Directors is not aware of any significant losses caused by breaches of internal control in the year.
The Group operates within a clearly defined organisational structure with established responsibilities authorities and reporting lines to the Board.
The organisational structure has been designed in order to plan execute monitor and control the Groups objectives effectively and to ensure that internal control becomes embedded in the operations.
The Board confirms that the key ongoing processes and features of the Groups internal risk based control system which accord with the Turnbull guidance have been fully operative throughout the year and up to the date of the Annual Report being approved.
These include a process to identify and evaluate business risk a strong control environment an information and communication process a monitoring system and a regular Board review for effectiveness.
The Group Finance Director is responsible for overseeing the Groups internal controls.
The Groups internal controls systems cover controls over the financial reporting process including monthly reporting from subsidiaries its associates and joint ventures.
This reporting is subject to detailed review by the Chief Executive and the Group Finance Director and detailed validation by the Group finance team and forms the basis for information presented to and reviewed by the Board.
All monthly reporting is prepared in line with Group accounting policies which are reviewed annually and are also subject to review by the external auditors.
The management of the Groups businesses identified the key business risks within their operations considered the financial implications and assessed the effectiveness of the control processes in place to mitigate these risks.
The Board reviewed a summary of the findings and this along with direct involvement in the strategies of the businesses investment appraisal and budgeting process enabled the Board to report on the effectiveness of internal control.
A summary of the risk management framework and key risks to the business are set out on pages 1416.
COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE The Board considers that it complied with the Code throughout the year with the exception of the following requires the Boards Audit Committee to be comprised of at least two NonExecutive Directors who are considered to be independent and provides that the Chairman may be a member if independent upon appointment.
Until September 2017 Chris Holmes was a member of the Audit Committee despite not meeting the independence criteria upon his appointment as Chairman.
Such membership was previously considered appropriate given that two NonExecutive Directors were appointed during 2015.
Chris Holmes is no longer a member of the Audit Committee which is now comprised solely of NonExecutive Directors considered by the Board to be independent.
Remuneration Committee to be comprised of at least two Non Executive Directors who are considered to be independent and provides that the Chairman may be a member if independent upon appointment.
Until September 2017 Chris Holmes was a member of the Remuneration Committee despite not meeting the independence criteria upon his appointment as Chairman.
Such membership was previously considered appropriate given that two NonExecutive Directors were appointed during 2015.
Chris Holmes is no longer a member of the Remuneration Committee which is now comprised solely of Non Executive Directors considered by the Board to be independent.
By order of the Board MATTHEW RATCLIFFE Company Secretary
CA3 9BA 22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Audit Committee Report JOHN WORBY CHAIRMAN OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE
On behalf of the Audit Committee I am pleased to present this report to shareholders.
The purpose of the report is to highlight the areas that the Committee has reviewed and how we have discharged our responsibilities effectively during the year.
RESPONSIBILITIES
The key responsibility of the Committee is to provide effective governance over the appropriateness of the Companys financial reporting.
Under its terms of reference the Committee is required amongst other things to monitor the integrity of the financial statements of the Company including the appropriateness of the accounting policies adopted and whether the Annual Report was fair balanced and understandable review understand and evaluate the Companys internal financial risk and other internal controls and risk management systems appraise the Board on how the Companys prospects are assessed oversee the relationship with the external auditors making recommendations to the Board in relation to their appointment remuneration and terms of engagement monitor and review the effectiveness of the external audit including the external auditors independence objectivity and effectiveness and to approve the policy on the engagement of the external auditors to supply nonaudit services and keep under review the requirement for and extent of internal audit activities in the Company.
The terms of reference can be found on the Companys website site
The Audit Committee met three times during the year see page 27 and has an agenda linked to the Group financial calendar.
It invites the Chairman the Chief Executive the Group Finance Director the Group Financial Controller and the external auditors to attend its meetings.
The Committee met with the external auditors at the conclusion of the audit without the Executive Directors being present.
The Committee has met once since the end of the financial year to consider the results and the Annual Report for the year ended 2 September 2017.
In addition to its Chairman the Audit Committee comprises Ian Wood and Alistair Wannop.
Chris Holmes stood down as a member of the Audit Committee in 2017 as explained on page 28.
MAIN ACTIVITIES DURING THE YEAR Set out below is a summary of the key areas considered by the Committee during the year and up to the date of this report.
FINANCIAL REPORTING During the year the Audit Committee reviewed reports and information provided by both the Group Finance Director and the external auditors in respect of the half year and annual financial report.
An important responsibility of the Audit Committee is to review and agree significant estimates and judgements made by management.
To satisfy this responsibility the Committee reviewed a written formal update from the Group Finance Director on such issues at the two meetings that reviewed the half year and year end results as well as reports from the external auditors.
The Committee carefully considered the content of these reports in evaluating the significant issues and areas of judgement across the Group.
We have placed significant focus on Engineering and on accounting for the recent acquisitions.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The key areas of judgement in the year were as follows The assumptions adopted for the accounting valuation of our defined benefit pension scheme.
The Committee concluded that the assumptions used were appropriate Potential impairment of assets including goodwill particularly in relation to the UK Engineering businesses of Bendalls and Chirton given the performances of these businesses in the year.
The performance of Bendalls had been impacted by a significant contract delay and losses on certain other contracts however in the light of the delayed contract coming back on stream other contracts won in the year and improvements made to controls in the business the Committee determined that no impairment was required.
In relation to Chirton the committee concurred with the need to impair the goodwill of 4.2m by 1.7m.
In reaching this conclusion the Committee was satisfied that the recovery in performance required to support the remaining goodwill was reasonably achievable Provisioning policies in relation to accounts receivable particularly in the Agriculture division.
The Committee determined that the judgements made were appropriate to justify the provisions held at 2 September 2017 Provisioning policies in relation to contractual disputes.
The Committee determined that the judgements made were appropriate to justify the provisions held at 2 September 2017 Accounting for long term contracts.
The Committee reviewed performance on certain contracts in the UK Engineering business that were only part complete at the year end and agreed with managements judgements and The valuation of certain intangible assets and goodwill of STABER and NuVision following their acquisition in October 2016 and August 2017 respectively.
The Committee concluded the valuations were appropriate.
The Committee further to the Boards request has reviewed the annual report and financial statements with the intention of providing advice to the Board on whether as required by the Code the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys performance business model and strategy.
To make this assessment the Committee reviewed a report prepared by the Group Finance Director outlining the relevant key matters worthy of consideration.
The Committee also considered and was satisfied that all the key events and issues which have been reported to the Board in the CEOs monthly reports during the year both good and bad have been adequately referenced or reflected within the annual report.
The Committee has also reviewed the Groups going concern and viability statement disclosures.
It received a written report prepared by the Group Finance Director which enabled it to review the base assumptions and various sensitised scenarios throughout the forecast period.
The Committee was comfortable with the disclosures made.
INTERNAL CONTROL
AND RISK MANAGEMENT
During the year the Committee reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems.
Given the changing nature of the Groups engineering activities it commissioned a specific internal controls report on the UK Engineering business during the year.
The report recommended some improvements in controls to support the greater level of complexity in the business which are in the process of being implemented.
The Committee reported to the Board that it had reviewed and subject to implementation of the improved controls in the UK Engineering business referred to in the previous paragraph was satisfied with the effectiveness of the Companys internal control and risk management systems.
The Committee noted the significant progress made in implementing a more integrated risk and assurance framework and in the light of this has established a plan for further improvements in the oversight of the assurance activities in the year ahead.
EXTERNAL AUDIT The Audit Committee is responsible for recommendations for the appointment reappointment or removal of external auditors and for approval of their remuneration.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC and its predecessor firms have been the Auditor for Carrs Group plc since 1909.
The Audit Committee assesses annually the qualification expertise and independence of the auditors and the effectiveness of the audit process.
PwCs current engagement partner is Bill MacLeod and he has been in place since September 2013.
Following approval by shareholders to reappoint PwC at last years AGM the Audit Committee reviewed and approved the terms of engagement and remuneration of the external auditors.
The Committee is planning to carry out a tendering process during the year ahead with a view to appointing a new auditor for the 2019 year end following the conclusion of the five year term of the current audit partner.
This will comply with EUFRC rotation requirements.
AUDIT EFFECTIVENESS The effectiveness of the external audit process is dependent on appropriate audit risk identification at the start of the audit cycle.
PwC present their detailed audit plan to us each year identifying their assessment of these key risks.
Our assessment of the effectiveness and quality of the audit process and addressing these key risks is formed by amongst other things the reporting from the auditors and also seeking feedback from management on the audit process.
The Committee remain satisfied with PwCs performance and is of the view that there is nothing of concern that would impact the effectiveness of the external audit process.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Audit Committee Report continued AUDITOR INDEPENDENCE The Group meets its obligations for maintaining an appropriate relationship with the external auditors through the Audit Committee whose terms of reference include an obligation to consider and keep under review the degree of work undertaken by the external auditor other than the statutory audit to ensure such objectivity and independence is safeguarded.
In accordance with the Auditing Practices Board Ethical Standards PwC has to implement rules and requirements which include that none of their employees working on our audit can hold any shares in Carrs Group plc.
PwC is also required to tell us about any significant facts and matters that may reasonably be thought to bear on their independence or on the objectivity of the lead partner and the audit team.
The lead partner in the audit team must change every five years.
The Audit Committee reviewed and approved the nonaudit services policy the objective of which is to ensure that the provision of such services does not impair or is not perceived to impair the external auditors independence or objectivity.
The policy imposes guidance on the areas of work that the external auditors may be asked to undertake and those assignments where the external auditors should not be involved.
There is a further category of services for which a casebycase decision is necessary.
In order to ensure that the policy is effective and the level of nonaudit fees is kept under review major work to be awarded to the audit firm must be agreed in advance by the Audit Committee Chairman.
For the 2017 financial year end the nonaudit to audit services ratio was 0.05  1.
Note 3 on page 68 provides further detail on nonaudit service fees.
Historically PwC undertook tax compliance activities for the Group.
In compliance with regulatory changes which took effect in 2016 PwC did not undertake any such activities during the financial year ended 2 September 2017 as a result of which the Group appointed an alternative adviser.
Taking into account our findings in relation to the effectiveness of the audit process and in relation to the independence of PwC the Committee is satisfied that PwC continues to be independent and free from any conflicting interest with the Group.
As a result the Committee has recommended to the Board that PwC be proposed for reappointment at the forthcoming AGM in January 2018.
INTERNAL AUDIT Consideration was given during the year to whether there should be an internal audit function within the Group.
Following the acquisitions of NuVision and STABER it was determined by the Committee to be appropriate given the increased diversity and geographic spread of the Groups Engineering division for an internal audit function to be established.
This function will be established and begin to operate during the 201718 financial year.
OTHER ACTIVITIES The Committee also reviewed its terms of reference its effectiveness the Groups policies on whistleblowing business ethics and on the prevention of bribery and modern slavery.
As Chairman of the Committee I will be available at the Annual General Meeting to respond to any shareholder questions that might be raised on the Committees activities.
JOHN WORBY Audit Committee Chairman 22 November 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee Report
IAN WOOD CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE ANNUAL STATEMENT FROM THE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE On behalf of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present my first report to shareholders following my appointment as the Remuneration Committee Chairman.
The Committees report is presented in the following sections This Annual Statement which summarises the key decisions made by the Committee during the year and forms part of the Annual Report on Remuneration.
The Directors Remuneration Policy which sets out the Policy for the Executive Directors Chairman and NonExecutive Directors.
The Directors Remuneration Policy will be put to a binding shareholder vote at the forthcoming AGM.
Annual Report on Remuneration
Policy has been applied in 201617 the remuneration received by Directors for the year and how the policy will be applied in 201718.
The Annual Report on Remuneration will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the AGM.
Proposed policy changes The current Directors Remuneration Policy was approved by shareholders at the January 2017 AGM however a number of shareholders voted against the policy or abstained.
The Committee has been conscious of the level of support received at the last AGM and also feedback that has been received from shareholders in relation to the policy.
Over the last year the Committee has therefore spent time reviewing the policy against that feedback in conjunction with best practice and considering how this best fits with the Group.
As result of this review the Committee has decided to make certain changes to the policy and put a revised Directors Remuneration Policy to a binding vote at the next AGM.
The Committee is proposing to introduce the following key changes Introduction of bonus deferral  the Committee recognises the importance of bonus deferral in strengthening the alignment of Executive Directors with shareholder interests.
Therefore the Committee has introduced a requirement for Executive Directors to defer 25% of any bonus earned into shares for 2 years.
2year postvesting holding requirement  for LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP awards made in 2018 and in subsequent years a 2year postvesting holding period will apply to Executive Directors.
Introduction of malus and clawback provisions  the policy now includes malus and clawback provisions which will apply to both the annual bonuses and LTIP awards.
LTIP performance measures  the current remuneration policy only allows for earnings per share EPS as the sole measure for assessing performance.
The new policy allows for one or more additional measures to be introduced in the future the Committee recognises a second measure would provide a useful balance but wishes to spend time considering what is right for the Group.
The Committee will consult with shareholders prior to the introduction of any new performance measure.
Awards granted in 2018 will continue to be subject to stretching EPS targets.
Performance and remuneration in 201617 As described in the Strategic report the Groups financial performance in the year under review was disappointing.
Whilst overall revenue increased to 346.2m 2016 314.9m reported profit before tax was down to 10.0m 2016 14.1m and adjusted Earnings Per Share was down to 8.9p 2016 10.9p.
Notwithstanding this financial performance good progress was made towards achieving the Groups strategic targets and in positioning the business well for future growth.
Performance outcomes are reflected in the remuneration received by Executive Directors and despite the strategic progress made by the Group no annual bonus awards were made to Executive Directors in relation to the financial year ended 2 September 2017.
The performance period of the 2014 LTIP awards ended during the year but because average adjusted EPS growth was below the threshold set by the Committee upon granting the awards no longterm awards vested to Executive Directors.
How the new policy will be implemented in 201718 The Remuneration Committee continually reviews the Directors Remuneration Policy to ensure it promotes the attraction retention and incentivisation of high calibre executives to deliver the Groups strategy.
For 201718 the maximum annual bonus for the Executive Directors will remain 100% of salary.
25% of any bonus will be deferred for two years.
The Committee also intends to grant LTIP awards of 100% of salary which will be based upon stretching EPS targets.
Salary increases were awarded to the Executive Directors effective 1 September 2017 of 2.5%.
This is consistent with the rest of the workforce.
I hope that you are able to support the proposed changes to the policy at the forthcoming AGM.
IAN WOOD Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REMUNERATION POLICY This part of the report sets out the Remuneration Policy for the Group and has been prepared in accordance with The Large and Medium sized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013 as amended.
The policy report will be put to shareholders for approval at the AGM of the Company to be held on 9 January 2018 and subject to approval will take effect from that date.
The role of the Committee The primary role of the Remuneration Committee is to make recommendations to the Board on the Companys policy for executive remuneration.
The Committee also has delegated responsibility for determining the remuneration and benefits of the Chairman the Executive Directors and the Secretary.
Key responsibilities include determining the framework for the remuneration of the Executive Directors and Chairman determining the total remuneration packages authorise terms and conditions and issue contracts for the Board approving the design and determine the targets for performance related pay schemes of the Executive Directors reviewing the ongoing appropriateness and relevance of the Remuneration Policy to ensure that is it aligned with the strategy of the Group ensuring that the Group rewards fairly and responsibly with clear links to both corporate and individual performance and reviewing the design of any share incentive plans for approval by the Board and shareholders.
Overview of policy When setting the policy for Directors remuneration the Committee takes into account the overall business strategy considering the longterm interests of the Group with the aim of delivering rewards to shareholders.
The Directors Remuneration Policy is ultimately designed to appropriately incentivise Executive Directors with a view to maximising shareholder value.
The Groups policy is that the overall remuneration packages offered should be sufficiently competitive to attract retain and motivate high quality executives and to align the rewards of the Executive Directors with the progress of the Group whilst giving consideration to salary levels in similar size quoted companies in similar industry sectors and views of shareholders.
The remuneration package is split into two parts a nonperformance related element represented by basic salary benefit and pension and a performance related element in the form of an annual bonus and a Long Term Incentive Plan.
KEY CHANGES TO THE POLICY As outlined in the Committee Chairmans statement and subject to approval at the AGM the following changes will apply Introduction of bonus deferral.
2year postvesting holding requirement for LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP awards made in 2018 and in subsequent years.
Introduction of malus and clawback provisions.
Consideration of the future introduction of one or more additional LTIP performance measures following prior consultation with leading shareholders.
CONSIDERATIONS OF CONDITIONS ELSEWHERE IN THE GROUP In determining the remuneration of the Groups Directors the Committee takes into account the pay arrangements and terms and conditions across the Group as a whole.
The Committee seeks to ensure that the underlying principles which form the basis for decisions on Directors pay are consistent with those on which pay decisions for the rest of the workforce are taken.
For example the Committee takes into account the general salary increase for the broader employee population when conducting the salary review for the Executive Directors.
However there are some differences in the Executive Directors Remuneration Policy compared to that for the wider workforce which the Committee believes are necessary to reflect the differing levels of seniority and responsibility.
A greater weight is placed on performancebased pay through the quantum and participation levels in incentive schemes to ensure the remuneration of the Executive Directors is aligned with the performance of the Group and the interests of shareholders.
CONSIDERATION OF SHAREHOLDER VIEWS In formulating this policy the Committee has taken into account guidance issued by shareholders and proxy agencies.
The Committee noted comments made by proxy agencies prior to last years AGM and that a number of shareholders voted against the Remuneration Policy or abstained.
During the last year further discussions were held to understand these views.
These views have been taken into account in the policy below.
The Committee continues to welcome feedback from shareholders received at each AGM and any feedback received throughout the year.
Remuneration Committee Report continued Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REMUNERATION POLICY TABLE
Purpose and link to strategy Policy and approach Opportunity Base salary To attract and retain the best talent.
Reflects an individuals experience performance and responsibilities within the
Salary levels and subsequent salary increases are set taking into consideration a number of factors including level of skill experience and scope of responsibilities of individual business performance economic climate and market conditions increases elsewhere in the Group and external comparator groups used for reference purposes only.
Salaries are normally reviewed annually with any increase effective 1 September each year.
There is no formal maximum however increases will normally align with the general increase for the broader employee population of the Group.
More significant increases may be awarded from time to time to recognise for example development in role and change in position or responsibility.
Current salary levels are disclosed in the Annual Report on
Pension Provides a competitive and appropriate pension package.
Executive Directors are entitled to participate in a defined contribution pension arrangement or to receive a cash alternative to those contributions.
Company contributions are up to 15% of base salary.
To the extent that pension contributions exceed annual taxfree allowances Executive Directors will be entitled to receive payment through ordinary payroll in lieu of pension contributions.
Up to 15% of base salary.
Benefits To aid retention and remain competitive in the market place.
Benefits provided include permanent health insurance private medical insurance and life assurance.
Relocation benefits may also be provided in the case of recruitment of a new Executive Director.
The benefits provided may be subject to minor amendment from time to time by the Committee within this policy.
The Company may reimburse any reasonable business related expenses incurred in connection with their role including tax thereon if these are determined to be taxable benefits.
Market rate determines value.
There is no prescribed maximum level but the Remuneration appropriate.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee Report continued
Element
Purpose and link to strategy Policy and approach Opportunity Annual bonus Designed to reward delivery of key strategic priorities during the year.
Bonus levels and appropriateness of performance measures and weighting are reviewed annually to ensure they continue to support our strategy.
Bonuses are capped at 100% of base salary.
25% of any bonus earned will be deferred into awards over shares with awards normally vesting after a twoyear period.
Performance is measured against stretching targets.
These may include financial and nonfinancial measures.
Financial measures will account for the majority and will typically include a profit related target.
Performance targets will be disclosed retrospectively.
The threshold level of bonus under each measure is 0%.
The cash element of the bonus is usually paid in November each year for performance in the previous financial year.
Dividends will accrue on deferral awards over the vesting period and be paid out either as cash or as shares on vesting and in respect of the number of shares that have vested.
A malus and clawback mechanism applies in specific circumstances including in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups accounts and also for other defined reasons.
These provisions apply to both the cash and deferred elements of the bonus.
Maximum of 100% of base salary.
Save As You Earn SAYE To encourage employee involvement and encourage greater shareholder alignment.
An HMRC approved SAYE scheme is available to eligible staff including Executive Directors.
The schemes are subject to the limits set by HMRC from time to time.
Long Term
Plan LTIP To motivate and incentivise delivery of sustained performance over the longer term and to support and encourage greater shareholder alignment.
Annual awards of performance shares which normally vest after three years subject to performance conditions.
Award levels and performance conditions required for vesting are reviewed annually to ensure they continue to support the Groups strategy.
Awards are capped at the equivalent of 100% of base salary at the date of award.
Awards up to and including the 2017 award are based solely upon an EPS measure.
Awards from 2018 onwards will be based on an EPS measure and may also include one or more additional measures of performance.
The Committee will consult with leading shareholders before introducing any new measures.
25% vests at threshold performance.
There is straight line vesting between threshold and maximum.
Two year postvesting holding period applies to the net of tax shares for awards granted in 2018 and beyond.
A malus and clawback mechanism applies in specific circumstances including in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups accounts and also for other reasons determined by the Committee.
Maximum of 100% of base salary.
Shareholding guidelines To provide alignment with shareholder interests.
Executive Directors are required to build up a shareholding equivalent to 200% of base salary over a five year period.
NA Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
COMMITTEE DISCRETIONS The Committee will operate the annual bonus plan and LTIP according to their respective rules.
To ensure the efficient operation and administration of these plans the Committee retains discretion in relation to a number of areas.
This is consistent with market practice and these include but are not limited to the following the participants the timing of grant andor payment the size of grants andor payments within the limits set out in the Policy table the determination of vesting based on the assessment of performance the determination of a good leaver and where relevant the extent of vesting in the case of the share based plans treatment in exceptional circumstances such as a change of control making the appropriate adjustments required in certain circumstances e. plans from year to year.
The Committee also retains the ability to adjust existing performance conditions for exceptional events so that they can still fulfil their original purpose.
Any varied performance condition would not be materially less difficult to satisfy in the circumstances.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES AND TARGETS Our Group strategy and business objectives are the primary consideration when we are selecting performance measures for incentive plans.
The annual bonus is based on performance against a stretching combination of financial and nonfinancial measures.
Profit before tax reflects the Groups strategic objective to increase profit.
In addition Executive Directors are assessed on strategic objectives as agreed by the Committee at the beginning of the year.
The LTIP is currently assessed against growth in adjusted Earnings Per Share as it rewards improvement in the Groups underlying financial performance and is a measure of the Groups overall financial success and is visible to shareholders.
Targets within incentive plans that are related to internal financial measures such as profit are typically determined based on our budgets.
The threshold and maximum levels of performance are set to reflect minimum acceptable levels at threshold and very stretching but achievable levels at maximum.
At the end of each performance period we review performance against the targets using judgement to account for items such as changes in accounting treatment foreign exchange rate movements and significant oneoff transactions.
The application of judgement is important to ensure that final assessments of performance are fair and appropriate.
In addition the Remuneration Committee reviews the bonus and incentive plan results before any payments are made to Executive Directors or any shares vest and has full discretion to adjust the final payment or vesting downwards if they believe the circumstances warrant it.
CHAIRMAN AND NONEXECUTIVE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION
Purpose and link to strategy Policy and approach Opportunity
Executive
Director fees To attract and retain a highcalibre Chairman and
Directors by offering market competitive fee levels.
Remuneration reflects the time commitment and responsibility of their roles market rate and that they do not participate in any bonus pension or share based scheme.
Our policy is for the Executive Directors to review the remuneration of NonExecutive Directors annually following consultation with the Chairman.
The Chairmans remuneration is reviewed annually by the Remuneration Committee.
The Chairman and the NonExecutive Directors are entitled to reimbursement of reasonable expenses.
The NonExecutive Directors will not participate in the Groups share bonus or pension schemes.
NonExecutive Directors are engaged for terms of one year subject to appointment and reappointment at the Companys AGM.
NonExecutive
Directors receive a single fee for all services to the Company.
Levels of fee are reviewed annually with any increases normally aligning with general increases for the broader employee population of the Group.
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee Report continued
APPROACH TO RECRUITMENT
The remuneration package for a new Executive Director would be set in accordance with the terms of the Companys approved Remuneration Policy in force at the time of appointment.
Buyout awards In addition the Committee may offer additional cash andor sharebased elements on a onetime basis or ongoing when it considers these to be in the best interests of the Group and therefore shareholders.
Any such payments would be limited to a reasonable estimate of value of remuneration lost when leaving the former employer and would reflect the delivery mechanism i. to that remuneration.
Maximum level of variable pay The maximum initial level of longterm incentives which may be awarded to a new Executive Director will be limited to the maximum Long Term Incentive Plan limit of 100% of base salary.
Therefore the maximum initial level of overall variable pay that may be offered will be 200% of base salary i.
100% annual bonus plus 100% Long Term Incentive
These limits are in addition to the value of any buyout arrangements which are governed by the policy above.
In the case of an internal appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role would be allowed to pay out according to its terms adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
In addition any other previously awarded entitlements would continue and be disclosed in the next annual report on remuneration.
Base salary and relocation expenses The Committee has the flexibility to set the salary of a new appointment at a discount to the market level initially with a series of planned increases implemented over the following few years to bring the salary to the appropriate market position subject to individual performance in the role.
For external and internal appointments the Committee may agree that the Group will meet certain relocation expenses as appropriate.
Appointment of NonExecutive Directors For the appointment of a new Chairman or NonExecutive Director the fee arrangement would be set in accordance with the approved remuneration policy in force at that time.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT AND LOSS OF OFFICE The Groups current policy is not to enter into employment contracts with any element of notice period in excess of one year.
All NonExecutives are appointed for terms of 12 months and will stand for reelection annually at the Companys AGM.
Copies of Executive Directors service contracts and NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment are available for inspection at the Companys registered office during normal hours of business and will be available at the Companys AGM.
Dates of service contracts and first appointment to the Board for all Directors are given in the table below.
An Executive Directors service contract may be terminated summarily without notice and without any further payment or compensation except for sums accrued up to the date of termination if they are deemed to be guilty of gross misconduct or for any other material breach of the obligations under their employment contract.
The Group has the right to terminate contracts by making a payment in lieu of notice.
Any such payment will typically reflect the individuals salary benefits and pension entitlements.
The Group has the ability to mitigate costs and phase payments if alternative employment is obtained.
There will be no automatic entitlement to a bonus if an Executive Director has ceased employment or is under notice.
However the Committee may at its discretion pay a prorated bonus in respect of the proportion of the financial year worked.
Such payment could be payable in cash and not subject to deferral.
Any sharebased entitlements granted to an Executive Director under the Groups share plans will be treated in accordance with the relevant plan rules.
Usually any outstanding awards lapse on cessation of employment.
However in certain prescribed circumstances such as death illhealth injury disability redundancy retirement with the consent of the Committee or any other circumstances at the discretion of the Committee good leaver status may be applied.
For good leavers under the LTIP outstanding awards will vest at the original vesting date to the extent that the performance condition has been satisfied and be reduced on a prorata basis to reflect the period of time which has elapsed between the grant date and the date on which the participant ceases to be employed by the Group.
For good leavers under the deferred bonus plan unvested awards will usually vest in full upon cessation.
In determining whether a departing Executive Director should be treated as a good leaver the Committee will take into account the performance of the individual and Group over the whole period of employment and the reasons for the individuals departure.
In the event of a change of control resulting in termination of office the Executive Directors are entitled to 12 months base salary.
The NonExecutive Directors are not entitled to any compensation for loss of office.
Date of service contract letter of appointment Date first appointed to the Board Executive Directors Tim Davies Neil Austin 18 October 2012 1 January 2013 1 March 2013 1 May 2013 NonExecutive Directors Chris Holmes Alistair Wannop John Worby Ian Wood 31 August 2017 31 August 2017 31 August 2017 31 August 2017 7 January 1992 1 September 2005 1 April 2015 1 October 2015 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION This part of the Directors Remuneration Report sets out a summary of how the Directors Remuneration Policy was applied during 201617.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee comprises Ian Wood Chairman John Worby and Alistair Wannop.
Chris Holmes stood down as a member of the Remuneration Committee in 2017 to ensure that it is comprised solely of NonExecutive Directors considered by the Board to be independent in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016.
As is further explained on page 28 Ian Wood took over from Alistair Wannop as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee in 2017.
The Committee met on 3 occasions during the year with all members in attendance see page 27.
The Executive Directors and the Chairman may attend meetings of the Remuneration Committee by invitation and in an advisory capacity only.
No person attends any part of a meeting at which his or her own remuneration is discussed.
The Chairman and the Executive Directors determine the remuneration of the other Non Executive Directors.
The Chair of the Committee will be available at the AGM to answer any shareholder questions on the Committee and its activities.
During the year the Committee considered levels of basic pay for Executive Directors the Chairman and senior management the outcome of bonus arrangements for Executive Directors and senior management the award of long term incentives for Executive Directors and senior management overall remuneration of Executive Directors and shareholder feedback in relation to prior bonus arrangements long term incentives and remuneration policy.
2017 Remuneration In this section we summarise the pay packages awarded to our Executive Directors for performance in the 2017 financial year versus 2016.
The table at the top of the next page shows all remuneration that was earned by each individual during the year and includes a single total remuneration figure for the year.
2017 ANNUAL BONUS PAYOUT The annual bonus uses a combination of financial and strategic performance targets which are set with regard to Group budget historic performance market outlook and future strategy.
50% of the bonus was based on Group adjusted profit before tax PBT.
The remainder of the financial targets were based upon the adjusted PBT generated by the two Group divisions excluding joint ventures and associates.
Adjusted PBT is calculated as reported PBT after adding back or deducting amortisation and nonrecurring items outside of normal trading that were not anticipated at the time targets were set such as acquisition related costs.
The Group is committed to disclosing its performance targets retrospectively save where this is prevented due to commercial sensitivities.
For the year ended 2017 PBT targets were set in accordance with the table below.
Threshold target
Agriculture
Engineering
Group
The tables below provide estimates of the potential future remuneration of each Executive Director based on the remuneration opportunity granted in the 2018 financial year.
Potential outcomes based on different scenarios are provided for each Executive Director.
The assumptions underlying each scenario are described below.
Fixed Consists of base salary pension and other benefits.
Base salaries are as at 1 September 2017.
Benefits are valued using the figures in the total remuneration for the 2017 financial year table adjusted for any benefits that will not be provided during 2018.
Pensions are valued by applying the appropriate percentage to the base salary.
Base
Benefits
Pension
Total
Tim Davies Neil Austin On target Based on what a Director would receive if performance was in line with plan and the threshold level was achieved under the LTIP.
Maximum Assumes that the full stretch target for the LTIP are achieved and maximum performance is obtained under the annual bonus scheme.
ESTIMATES OF TOTAL FUTURE POTENTIAL REMUNERATION FROM 2018 PAY PACKAGES
Annual bonus Salary and benefits Neil Austin Group Finance Director Fixed On target Maximum 80tel0
Total
Total
Tim Davies Chief Executive Officer
Fixed On target Maximum
Total
Total
Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee Report continued
If the Group overall generated adjusted PBT of 14.9m then regardless of individual divisional performance then the maximum bonus would be payable.
Upon the minimum bonus thresholds being met annual bonus payments are calculated in accordance with the table below.
Payments are adjusted on a straight line basis between the threshold and maximum PBT targets.
Threshold bonus
Agriculture
Engineering
Group
Strategic targets 6% 6% 12% 0% 15% 15% 50% 20% For the year ended 2 September 2017 adjusted PBT for the Group was as follows.
Adjusted PBT
Engineering
Group
Under the terms of the bonus arrangements none of the threshold targets were achieved and therefore no bonus was payable in connection with the Groups financial targets.
SalaryFees Benefits Bonus LTIP Pension Total Executive Directors Tim Davies Neil Austin 26tel 2tel392 NonExecutive Directors Chris Holmes Alistair Wannop John Worby Ian Wood Robert Heygate Benefits consist of private medical insurance The performance period for the 2014 LTIP awards ending during 2017 with no shares vesting owing to the performance threshold not being met Ian Wood joined the board in 2016 and therefore 2016 represents an 11 month period  prorated would be 37000 Robert Heygate stepped down from the board in 2016 and therefore 2016 represents an 8 month period  prorated would be 37000 Target description Performance outcome
Delivering strategic acquisitions and business integration.
Establishing presences and new business models in select new territories.
Delivering on capital investment projects.
Successful completion of various acquisitions during the year which align with the Boards growth strategy including NuVision in the USA and STABER in Germany.
Research trials in new territories at advanced stages and new business structures operating or established locally.
Various capital investment projects delivered or underway during the year in line with the Boards strategy.
Improving
Delivery of restructure within the Engineering division.
Strengthening of divisional leadership.
Restructure of Engineering division underway and integration ongoing in line with strategy following key acquisitions.
Strengthening of Engineering management team leading to appointment of Divisional Managing Director.
Health and
Improving health and safety reporting and culture across the Group.
Better reporting established throughout the Group and improved awareness and policies implemented.
DIRECTOR REMUNERATION 20162017 AUDITED INFORMATION Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic targets which account for 20% of the bonus were set at the start of the year.
Details of the targets and their performance against them is summarised in the table on the previous page.
In addition to those strategic performance indicators the Committee has a discretion to consider matters such as good corporate governance which can include environmental social and governance considerations.
At the end of the financial year the Committee noted that significant progress had been made against the strategic targets.
However despite that progress and following discussions with the Executive Directors a decision was made not to pay any bonus in relation to this element of the scheme owing to the disappointing financial performance of the Group.
LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN The awards made to Executive Directors in 2014 were subject to Average EPS growth targets over a three year period ended on 2 September 2017.
Threshold vesting was set at 3% average annual growth.
The Average EPS growth over the three year period was less than 3% and accordingly no shares under the longterm awards made to Executive Directors in 2014 vested.
Number of shares Basis on which the award was made Face Value of the award
End of performance period Tim Davies Neil Austin 100% of salary 100% of salary 25% 25% LONG TERM INCENTIVE PLAN AWARDS DURING THE YEAR AUDITED Longterm awards for 2017 were made to the Executive Directors in line with the remuneration policy.
TEN YEAR HISTORICAL TSR PERFORMANCE TOTAL PENSION ENTITLEMENTS AUDITED The table below provides details of the Executive Directors pension benefits Each Executive Director has the right to participate in Carrs defined contribution pension plan or to elect to be paid some or all of their contribution in cash.
Pension contributions andor cash allowances are capped at 15% of salary.
The performance conditions which govern the vesting of those shares are based on annual average growth in adjusted EPS over a three year period.
Average annual growth % % vesting Nothing is payable below 3% and a sliding scale operates between this and the maximum available.
Normal retirement age Total contributions to DCtype pension plan Cash in lieu of contributions to DCtype pension plan Tim Davies Neil Austin 50tel30tel100 Carrs Group plc FTSE AllShare Price Index Source Thomson Datastream Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee Report continued
ALL EMPLOYEE SHARE PLANS The Executive Directors are also eligible to participate in the UK allemployee plans.
The Carrs Group Sharesave Scheme 2016 is a HM Revenue and Customs HMRC approved scheme open to all staff permanently employed in a UK Group company as of the eligibility date.
Options under the plan are granted at a 20% discount to market value.
Executive Directors participation is included in the option table later in this report.
PAYMENTS TO PAST DIRECTORS
No payments to past Directors have been made to Directors during the year.
PAYMENTS FOR LOSS OF OFFICE
No payments for loss of office have been made to Directors during the year.
PERFORMANCE SHARES
The maximum number of outstanding shares that have been awarded to Directors under the LTIP are currently as follows award award award Tim Davies Neil Austin CHANGE IN CHIEF EXECUTIVES REMUNERATION In the table below we show the percentage change in the Chief Executives remuneration between 2016 and 2017 financial years compared to the other employees.
Tim
Davies
Other UK employees Base pay
Annual bonus 2.5% 0% 100% 2.5% 0% 0.4% The Remuneration Committee considers pay across the entire Group when setting Executive Director remuneration.
Annual consultations take place across the Group between the Executive Directors senior management and the Group Head of HR in relation to employee pay.
The outcome of that exercise and any changes to employee pay levels are considered when determining the appropriateness to changes in Executive Director pay.
DIRECTORS INTERESTS IN THE SHARES OF THE COMPANY AUDITED A summary of interests in shares and scheme interests of the Directors who served during the year is given below.
ASSESSING PAY AND PERFORMANCE In the table opposite we summarise the Chief Executives single remuneration figure over the past 5 years as well as how variable pay plans have paid out in relation to the maximum opportunity.
Total number of interests in shares
LTIP
Unvested
LTIP
SAYE unvested without performance conditions % of shareholding guideline achieved Executive Directors Tim Davies Neil Austin 40.2% 42.0% NonExecutive Directors Chris Holmes Alistair Wannop John Worby Ian Wood na na na na
Davies
Tim
Davies
Tim
Davies
Tim
Davies
Tim
Davies
Single figure of total remuneration 283 tel308 Annual variable element actual award versus maximum opportunity 100% 100% 100% 55% 0% Longterm incentive vesting versus maximum opportunity NA NA 100% 37.45% 0% Represents a 6 month period  pro rata would be 566000 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RELATIVE SPEND ON PAY The table shows the relative importance of spend on pay compared to distributions to shareholders.
Employee costs Dividends paid to shareholders Excludes the special dividend of 17.54 pence per share paid to shareholders in October 2016.
EXTERNAL APPOINTMENTS The Executive Directors did not receive any remuneration in respect of any external appointments in 201617.
IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE POLICY IN 201718 For 201718 the maximum annual bonus for the Executive Directors will remain 100% of salary.
25% of any bonus will be deferred for two years in the form of shares.
Performance will be assessed against stretching targets which will be 80% financial and 20% strategic.
Financial targets will be based upon adjusted PBT for the Group only and will not have any divisional splits.
All annual bonus targets will vest at thresholds of 0%.
Targets will be disclosed respectively in next years report.
The Committee intends to grant LTIP awards of 100% of salary with future vesting conditional upon stretching targets based upon an adjusted EPS growth measure the base for adjusted EPS will be fixed at a level which reflects changes within the Group including acquisitions.
Awards will vest at a threshold of 25% for average growth of 3% per annum and will rise on a straight line basis to the maximum 100% for average growth of 10% per annum during the performance period.
The Committee is currently considering the introduction of an additional measure for awards to be made during 2019 however it wishes to spend time carefully assessing which measure would be most appropriate for the business.
The Committee will seek to consult with leading shareholders prior to the introduction of any additional performance measure.
Salary increases were awarded to the Executive Directors effective 1 September 2017 of 2.5%.
This is consistent with the rest of the workforce.
EXTERNAL ADVISORS Following the review of our remuneration structures by the Committee an external advisor was appointed to provide an external perspective.
New Bridge Street part of Aon plc was appointed to advise the Committee however due to the timing of their appointment no fees were incurred in FY 201617.
New Bridge Street is a signatory to the Remuneration Consultants Code of Conduct which requires that its advice be objective and impartial.
New Bridge Street has no other connection with the Group and provides no other services to the Group.
2017 AGM The 2016 remuneration report received a 68.5% vote in favour 19600000 votes with 18.3% against 5240335 votes and 13.2% withheld 3763395 votes.
The 2016 remuneration policy received a 64.5% vote in favour 18455190 votes with 21.7% against 6201259 votes and 13.8% withheld 3946281 votes.
In light of the shareholder response to the 2016 remuneration report contact was made with certain of the Companys major shareholders and shareholder reporting bodies with a view to discuss any concerns.
The Remuneration Committee considered the feedback received at length during 2017.
As can be seen from the new Policy a number of changes have been made to Remuneration Policy which are designed to address the comments offered by shareholders and proxy agencies in response to the 2016 Report.
The Board welcomes shareholder feedback and believes that the changes proposed to the Policy and additional disclosures now made in the Annual Remuneration report address those comments.
By order of the Board IAN WOOD Chairman of the Remuneration
22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nominations Committee Report CHRIS HOLMES CHAIR OF THE NOMINATIONS COMMITTEE DEAR SHAREHOLDER This year the Committee has been active in developing strategies for the succession of both Board members and senior management across the Group.
COMPOSITION
AND CONSTITUTION The Nominations Committee comprises the Chairman of the Company and all of the NonExecutive Directors.
ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE The Committee meets at least once a year.
It reviews the structure size and composition of the Board and considers the optimal level of independence diversity of skills knowledge and experience required for the Board to operate effectively.
It oversees Board succession planning and is responsible for considering and making recommendations on the appointment of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee also evaluates succession planning and recruitment strategy for senior management throughout the Group taking into account the challenges and opportunities facing the Group and the skills experience and leadership required across its diverse range of businesses.
In performing its responsibilities the Committee gives full consideration to the benefits of diversity whether cultural ethnic gender or otherwise both within the Board and across the Groups leadership teams.
Working closely with the Board the Committee is focused upon ensuring that the Board and the management teams are able to deliver Group strategy.
ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE The Committee met once during the year to consider the following matters the Committees Terms of Reference to ensure they reflect the Committees remit the succession plans in place for the Board and senior management across the Group and the structure size composition and diversity of the Board its Committees and senior management across the Group.
CHANGES TO THE BOARD AND ITS COMMITTEES There have been no changes in the membership of the Board during the year which remains comprised of two Executive Directors and four NonExecutive Directors.
In November 2016 Matthew Ratcliffe was appointed to the position of Company Secretary following the departure of Katie Wood.
As is explained in more detail in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 2629 during the year the Company received feedback from certain shareholders which resulted in changes being made to the composition of the Boards Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Those changes which were announced in September 2017 were as follows Ian Wood took over as Chairman of the Remuneration Committee having served as a member since October 2015.
I ceased to be a member of the Audit and Remuneration Committees which would thereafter be comprised solely of NonExecutive Directors considered by the Board to be independent.
EXTERNAL REVIEW During the year the size composition and effectiveness of the Board and its Committees were the subject of an external review facilitated by corporate governance specialists Independent Audit Limited.
That review which generated positive feedback confirmed that the Board and its Committees were appropriately constituted and provided effective management of the Group as a whole.
The review also involved a consideration of the continued independence of the NonExecutive Directors and the commitment required from each in order to properly fulfil their duties.
Following the review and in consideration of all circumstances it was determined by the Board that all Directors committed sufficient time to properly fulfil their responsibilities and that John Worby Ian Wood and Alistair Wannop were considered to be independent.
As such there are no current plans to change the makeup of the Board.
For more information concerning the external review please see page 28.
Effective leadership and succession planning is critical to the continued success of the Group.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SUCCESSION PLANNING The Groups succession strategy was developed in 2014.
Efforts have since focused upon ensuring that appropriate and sufficient employees are recruited or developed internally to meet the future management needs of the Group taking into account continued growth and overall Group strategy.
In 2017 we appointed a Divisional Managing Director for Engineering who will oversee the Engineering Division globally and provide specialist industry and strategic support to the Board.
Across the Group we have established career pathway and employee development initiatives which are designed to attract retain and develop the best talent.
Further details of those initiatives are described on page 23.
DIVERSITY
The Group has a strict equal opportunities policy and ensures that appropriate consideration is given to diversity in determining the requirements of the business and in making recruitment decisions.
The Groups principal concern when making appointments is ensuring that candidates possess the skills knowledge and experience or the potential to develop the required skills knowledge and experience to meet the requirements of the Group.
All appointments are made on the basis of merit regardless of race colour nationality religion gender marital status family status sexual orientation disability or age.
REELECTION
At the Annual General Meeting on 9 January 2018 all the Directors will stand for reelection in accordance with best practice under the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016.
The Board will set out in the Notice of Annual General Meeting its reasons for supporting the reelection of the Directors at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Their biographical details on page 21 demonstrate the range of experience and skills which each brings to the benefit of the Group.
The Chair of the Nominations Committee will attend the Annual General Meeting to respond to any shareholder questions that might be raised on the Committees activities.
On behalf of the Board CHRIS HOLMES DL Chair of the Nominations Committee 22 November 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report RESUL TS AND DIVIDENDS A review of the results can be found on pages 1819.
2017 2016 First Interim dividend per share paid on 12 May 2017 Second Interim dividend per share paid on 6 October 2017 Final dividend per share proposed Subject to approval at the Annual General Meeting the final dividend will be paid on 12 January 2018 to members on the register at the close of business on 15 December 2017.
Shares will be exdividend on 14 December 2017.
The Group profit from continuing activities before taxation was 10.0 million 2016 14.1 million.
After taxation charge of 1.7 million 2016 2.9 million the profit for the year is 8.3 million 2016 11.2 million.
PENSIONS
Estimates of the amount and timing of future funding obligations for the Groups pension plans are based on various assumptions including among other things the actual and projected market performance of the pension plan assets future longterm corporate bond yields longevity of members and statutory requirements.
The Group continually reviews this risk and takes action to mitigate where possible.
In addition while the Group is consulted by the trustees on the investment strategies of its pension plans the Group has no direct control over these matters as the trustees are directly responsible for the strategy.
Details of the Groups pension plans are in note 26 in the Notes to the Financial Statements.
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES AND EMPLOYEES The Company is committed to its employees and further details on the Companys policies and commitment can be found in the Corporate Responsibility Report on page 23.
ENVIRONMENT
The Companys report on sustainability including carbon footprint and energy usage is on pages 2425.
POLITICAL AND CHARITABLE DONATIONS During the period ended 2 September 2017 the Group contributed 26300 2016 32175 in the UK for charitable purposes.
Further details have been included with the Corporate Responsibility statement on page 25.
There were no political donations during the year 2016 Nil.
SHARE CAPITAL The Company has a single class of share capital which is divided into Ordinary Shares of 0.025 each.
The movement in the share capital during the year is detailed in note 27 to the financial statements.
At the last Annual General Meeting the Directors received authority from the shareholders to Allot Shares  this gives Directors the authority to allot shares and maintains the flexibility in respect of the Companys financing arrangements.
The nominal value of ordinary shares which the Directors may allot in the period up to the next Annual General Meeting to be held on 9 January 2018 is limited to 752393.93 which is equal to 33 percent of the nominal value of the issued share capital on 14 November 2016.
The Directors submit their report and the audited accounts of the Company for the year ended 2 September 2017 The Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales whose shares are listed and traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The address of its registered office is Old Croft Stanwix Carlisle CA3 9BA.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Directors do not have any present intention of exercising this authority other than in connection with the issue of ordinary shares in respect of the Companys share option plans.
This authority will expire at the end of the Annual General Meeting to be held on 9 January 2018.
Disapplication of rights of preemption this disapplies rights of preemption on the allotment of shares by the Company and the sale by the Company of treasury shares.
The authority will allow the Directors to allot equity securities for cash pursuant to the authority to allot shares mentioned above and to sell treasury shares for cash without a preemptive offer to existing shareholders up to an aggregate nominal amount of 114221.60 representing 5 percent of the Companys issued share capital as at 14 November 2016.
This authority will expire at the end of the Annual General Meeting to be held on 9 January 2018.
To buy own shares  this authority allows the Company to buy its own shares in the market as permitted under the Articles of Association of the Company up to a limit of 9137729 Ordinary Shares being 10 per cent of the Companys issued share capital at 14 November 2016.
The price to be paid for any share must not be less than 0.25p being the nominal value of a share and must not exceed 105 percent of the average middle market quotations for the Ordinary Shares of the Company as derived from the London Stock Exchange Daily Official List for the 5 business days immediately preceding the day on which the Ordinary Shares are purchased.
The Directors have no immediate plans to exercise the powers of the Company to purchase its own shares and undertaken that the authority would only be exercised if the Directors were satisfied that a purchase would result in an increase in expected earnings per share and was in the best interests of the Company at the time.
This authority will expire at the end of the Annual General Meeting to be held on 9 January 2018.
The Directors would consider holding any of its own shares that it purchases pursuant to this authority as treasury shares.
The interests of the Directors as defined by the Companies Act 2006 in the Ordinary Shares of the Company other than in respect of options to acquire Ordinary Shares which are detailed in the analysis of options included in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 3343 are as follows All the above interests are beneficial.
There have been no other changes to the above interests in the period from 2 September 2017 to 13 November 2017.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS ATTACHING TO SHARES In a general meeting of the Company subject to the provisions of the Articles of Association and to any special rights or restrictions as to voting attached to any class of shares in the Company of which they are none the holders of the Ordinary Shares are entitled to one vote in a poll for every Ordinary Share held.
No member shall be entitled to vote at any general meeting or class meeting in respect of any shares held if any call or other sum then payable in respect of that share remains unpaid.
Currently all issued shares are fully paid.
Full details of the deadlines for exercising voting rights in respect of the resolutions to be considered at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 9 January 2018 are set out in the Notice of Annual General Meeting.
Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 the Company may by ordinary resolution declare a dividend to be paid to the members but no dividend shall exceed the amount recommended by the Board.
The Board may pay interim dividends and also any fixed rate dividend whenever the financial position of the Company in the opinion of the Board justifies its payment.
All dividends shall be apportioned and paid pro rata according to the amounts paid up on the shares.
CHANGE OF CONTROL There are no agreements that the Company considers significant and to which the Company is party that would take effect alter or terminate upon change of control of the Company following a takeover bid other than a number of banking agreements which upon a change of control of the Company are terminable by the bank immediately.
MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS The Company has been informed of the following interests at 13 November 2017 in the 91402641 Ordinary Shares of the Company as required by the Companies Act 2006 At 2 September 2017 Ordinary Shares At 3 September 2016 Ordinary Shares T J Davies N Austin C N C Holmes A G M Wannop J G Worby I Wood Number of shares % of issued share capital Heygate and Sons Limited 12652870 13.84 BBHISL Nominees Limited 4241863 4.64 Rathbone Nominees Limited 3019316 3.30 HSBC Global Custody Nominee UK Limited 2968940 3.25 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Report continued DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Directors Remuneration Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PREPARING FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial period.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare the Group and parent Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing those financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and of the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and
Directors Remuneration Report comply
Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Company website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess a companys performance business model and strategy.
DIRECTORS STATEMENT AS TO DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS The Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving the Directors Report are listed on page 21.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors each of the Directors at the date of this report confirms that he is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and he has taken all the steps that he ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed on page 21 confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group
the Chief Executives Review includes
By order of the Board MATTHEW RATCLIFFE Company Secretary 22 November 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the members of Carrs Group plc
In our opinion Carrs Group plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 2 September 2017 and of the Groups profit and the Groups and the Companys cash flows for the 52 week period the period then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the Companys financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the Consolidated and Company balance sheets as at 2 September 2017 the Consolidated income statement and Consolidated and Company statements of comprehensive income the Consolidated and Company statement of cash flows and the Consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity for the 52 week period then ended the accounting policies and the notes to the financial statements.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Company.
Other than those disclosed in note 3 to the financial statements we have provided no nonaudit services to the Group or the Company in the period from 4 September 2016 to 2 September 2017.
Report on the audit of the financial statements OUR AUDIT APPROACH
Overall Group materiality 565000 2016 845000 based on 5% of profit before tax before amortisation and nonrecurring items.
Overall Company materiality 400000 2016 435000 based on 0.5% of total assets.
We identified five reporting units within the Agriculture and Engineering divisions alongside the Company which in our view required an audit of their complete financial information.
Three of these reporting units were deemed financially significant and the other three were selected for particular risk characteristics which included coverage of the risks relating to pension assumptions fraud in revenue and of the profit from the associate.
Specific audit procedures on certain balances and transactions were performed on a further reporting unit in the UK in order to gain coverage of individual material financial statement line items.
Goodwill impairment in Chirton Engineering.
Defined benefit pension scheme surplus.
Acquisition accounting.
Receivables provisioning.
Assumptions made within contract accounting.
Fraud risk in revenue recognition.
Materiality
Audit scope Key audit matters Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the Directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the Directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
KEY AUDIT MATTER HOW OUR AUDIT ADDRESSED THE KEY AUDIT MATTER GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT IN CHIRTON ENGINEERING The Group has a material goodwill balance in respect of the acquisition in 2014 of Chirton Engineering.
The downturn in the oil and gas market has adversely affected the expected performance of this business giving rise to an increase risk of impairment.
The Directors assessment of the value in use of the Cash Generating Unit involved judgements about the future results of the business and the discount rates applied to future cash flow forecasts.
We reviewed the composition of future cash flows to ensure that all relevant elements were included or excluded as appropriate.
We compared current year actual results with the FY17 figures included in the prior year forecast to assess the accuracy of managements historic forecasts.
We challenged managements assumptions within the forecasts for short and midterm growth by comparing to the previous performance of the business and understanding and validating the measures implemented by management to achieve this growth.
We considered the suitability of the discount rate by assessing the cost of capital for the Company and comparable businesses.
We assessed the sensitivity analysis performed by management and determined that the calculations were most sensitive to the assumptions regarding profits in the terminal period.
We reviewed the adequacy of the disclosures given in note 11 in respect of the impairment assessment performed by management.
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION SCHEME SURPLUS The Group has a defined pension scheme with post retirement assets of 75.1m and postretirement liabilities of 69.9m.
The valuation of the Group surplus is sensitive to changes in key assumptions such as the discount rate inflation and mortality estimates.
The setting of these assumptions is complex and an area of judgement.
Changes in any of these assumptions could lead to a material movement in the net surplus.
We tested the membership census data used in the valuation of the scheme to payroll information.
We benchmarked and performed sensitivity analysis on key variables in the valuation model including salary increases mortality rates inflation and discount rates.
We obtained third party confirmation over ownership and valuation of pension scheme assets.
We ensured that the Company is entitled to recognise any surplus by examining the Trust Deed and Rules documentation.
ACQUISITION ACCOUNTING The Group has made two significant acquisitions during the financial year.
On purchase of STABER and NuVision the assets of the companies purchased were recognised at their fair values.
The fair values recognised involve judgement from management over the existence of any intangible assets and the inputs into the models that support these valuations including future projections of the businesses performance and the discount rates used.
We reviewed the valuations papers produced by management for each acquisition in conjunction with our valuation specialists.
We considered the suitability of the models used by management to adjust the assets purchased to their fair values and have corroborated the inputs to these models.
As part of this work we also considered the suitability of the discount rate by assessing the cost of capital for the Company and comparable businesses.
We challenged managements assumptions within the forecasts for short and midterm growth by comparing to the previous performance of the business and understanding and validating the measures implemented by management to achieve this growth.
We challenged the completeness of the assessment of any intangible assets acquired as part of the business combination.
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements KEY AUDIT MATTER HOW OUR AUDIT ADDRESSED THE KEY AUDIT MATTER RECEIVABLES PROVISIONING Within the Agriculture division there are material amounts of trade receivables that are past due and there has historically been a slower collection pattern within this division.
Managements provisions in respect of these amounts are an area of subjectivity with respect to the recoverability of balances.
We understood managements receivables provisioning policy and tested the accuracy of the aging of balances in order to recalculate managements provision.
We analysed the provision to identify significant balances for which the methodology had not been applied and understood and validated any such exceptions.
We performed testing over the operating effectiveness of controls with respect to approval of credit limits and monthly reviews of the receivables ledger.
For individually significant aged receivables balances we understood the rationale for managements provision by considering historic payment patterns and other supporting information.
We tested the levels of cash received after the year end on overdue receivables balances to assess the adequacy of the provision made.
ASSUMPTIONS MADE WITHIN CONTRACT
Within Carrs Engineering Limited there have been a number of contracts in the year on which performance has been worse than expected.
This increases the risk that the assumptions made by management in respect of costs forecast to complete contracts are not accurate.
We focused on the judgements required to account for long term contracts.
This involved a detailed review of contracts in place at the year end in order to understand the nature of the services provided.
As part of this review we conducted an assessment of the costs to completion on the contract and an evaluation of the stage of completion of the contract based on the evidence available.
We discussed each contract with members of management outside of the finance function to understand how forecasts of cost to come have been built up and the accuracy of these forecasts.
We also evaluated managements assessment of the stage of completion through performing a look back test to assess managements previous estimations as well as on a sample basis agreeing the inputs into the calculation of the revenue to supporting documentation and reperforming the calculation.
From the work we performed no material exceptions were noted.
FRAUD RISK IN REVENUE RECOGNITION ISAs UK presume there is a risk of fraud in revenue recognition.
We have determined this to apply specifically to the occurrence of revenue in all divisions because of the pressure management may feel to achieve the planned results.
Within the Agriculture division this is specifically in relation to whether a sale has occurred and within the Engineering division this is in relation to the judgements involved in long term contract accounting.
For the Agriculture division this involved testing the operating effectiveness of controls around dispatches and invoicing in certain components as well as substantively testing that revenue agrees to accounts receivable and cash received.
Where revenue did not directly agree to accounts receivable or cash further work was performed to understand and substantively test those transactions.
In addition to the work described above specifically in relation to long term contracts we performed additional procedures in the Engineering division to substantively test that revenue agreed to accounts receivable and cash received.
Where revenue did not directly agree to accounts receivable or cash further work was performed to understand and substantively test those transactions.
We determined that there were no key audit matters applicable to the Company with the exception of the defined benefit pension scheme surplus as described above to communicate in our report.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group is split into two principal divisions Agriculture and Engineering.
Within these divisions there are a number of UK subsidiary companies.
There are also a number of overseas subsidiary companies in the US and Germany which report separately to these divisions.
Group management are based in the UK along with the Group finance function.
Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Limited and Carrs Agriculture Limited which form part of the UK Agriculture division have been selected as full scope audit components as a result of their contribution to Group profits.
Wlischmiller a German subsidiary which operates within the engineering market has also been selected as a full scope component for this reason.
Carrs Group plc has been selected as a full scope component due to its significant net assets balance and the fact that the Group pension scheme is recognised within its accounts which is a key audit matter as noted above.
Carrs Engineering Limited has also been selected as a full scope component due to the greater judgement involved in determining its contribution to Group revenue which is a significant risk for our audit.
Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Limited an associate which the Group owns 49% of has been selected for full scope reporting.
Mitchell Charlesworth a component auditor undertake the audit of this component.
Carrs Properties Limited has been selected for limited scope reporting over fixed assets as a result of its contribution to this financial statement line item.
We have held planning calls with the component auditors for both Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Limited and Wlischmiller to understand their planned audit approach and ensure that it provides the comfort we require as part of our Group audit.
We have been involved in the clearance meeting between management and the component auditors for both components and have carried out a review of the working papers which support the reporting provided.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 200000 and 800000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 28250 Group audit 2016 42250 and 20000 Company audit 2016 22000 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements
565000 2016 845000.
400000 2016 435000.
How we determined it 5% of profit before tax before amortisation and nonrecurring items.
0.5% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on the benchmarks used in the annual report profit before tax before amortisation and nonrecurring items is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the Group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
The Company is a holding company and as such we believe total assets is the primary measure used to assess the performance of the entity and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the Directors statement in the financial statements about whether the Directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the Directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the Directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements REPORTING ON OTHER INFORMATION The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The Directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the period ended 2 September 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The Directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The Directors confirmation on pages 1416 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The Directors explanation on page 17 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the Directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the Directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the Directors on page 29 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and Company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on page 3032 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The Directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND THE AUDIT Responsibilities of the Directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Directors Responsibilities Statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The Directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
OTHER REQUIRED REPORTING Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we have been appointed as auditors since at least 1909 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 March 1909 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 109 years covering the years ended 31 March 1909 to 2 September 2017.
BILL MACLEOD Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors Newcastle upon Tyne 22 November 2017
Independent Auditors Report
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 2017 2016 Notes 000 000 Continuing operations Revenue 2 346224 314907 Cost of sales 307543 273712 Gross profit 38681 41195 Distribution costs 16391 15975 Administrative expenses 14413 12450 Group operating profit before amortisation and nonrecurring items 9278 12982 Amortisation and nonrecurring items 4 1401 212 Group operating profit 3 7877 12770 Finance income 6 176 236 Finance costs 6 864 1009 Share of posttax profit in associates 1609 1239 Share of posttax profit in joint ventures 1204 842 Profit before taxation before amortisation and nonrecurring items 11403 14290 Amortisation and nonrecurring items 4 1401 212 Profit before taxation 2 10002 14078 Taxation 7 1707 2907 Profit for the year from continuing operations 8295 11171 Discontinued operations Profit for the year from discontinued operations 8  2817 Profit for the year 8295 13988 Profit attributable to Equity shareholders 7005 12455 Noncontrolling interests 1290 1533 8295 13988 Basic earnings per ordinary share pence Profit from continuing operations Profit from discontinued operations Diluted earnings per ordinary share pence Profit from continuing operations Profit from discontinued operations CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group Companytel 2016 Profit for the year 8295 13988 3349 26362 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Foreign exchange translation gains arising on translation of overseas subsidiaries 1835 2860 Net investment hedges Taxation creditcharge on net investment hedges Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Actuarial gainslosses on retirement benefit assetobligation Group 26 4951 2725 4951 2725 Share of associate 1070 1216 Taxation chargecredit on actuarial gainslosses on retirement benefit assetobligation Share of associate Other comprehensive incomeexpense for the year net of tax 6747 164 4109 2235 Total comprehensive income for the year 15042 14152 7458 24127 Total comprehensive income attributable to Equity shareholders 13752 12619 7458 24127 Noncontrolling interests 1290 1533 15042 14152 7458 24127 CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY BALANCE SHEETS Company Number AS AT 2 SEPTEMBER 2017
Companytel 2016
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 11 24241 11440 Other intangible assets 11 2266 286 Property plant and equipment 12 37149 35811 Investment property 13 176 182 Investment in subsidiary undertakings 14 17 26192 11478 Investment in associates 14 15 11443 8667 245 245 Interest in joint ventures 14 16 6590 6257 272 272 Other investments 14 73 72 Financial assets Noncurrent receivables 20 762 50 18007 17486 Retirement benefit asset 26 5209 311 5209 311 Deferred tax assets 18   59 2 87909 63076 49984 29794 Current assets
19 37023 33423 Trade and other receivables 20 59723 56940 21391 18831 Current tax assets 2tel922 Financial assets Derivative financial instruments 25 13 Cash and cash equivalents 22 23887 48411 8494 37945 121131 139077 30349 57698 Total assets 209040 202153 80333 87492
Current liabilities Financial liabilities Borrowings 24 17060 21642 7154 5974 Derivative financial instruments 25 18 20 Trade and other payables 23 56008 46823 1537 2214 Current tax liabilities 73718 68955 8776 8188 Noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities Borrowings 24 20966 18625 19018 15889 Deferred tax liabilities 18 4010 1817 886 56 Other noncurrent liabilities 23 4423 2668 29399 23110 19904 15945 Total liabilities 103117 92065 28680 24133 Net assets 105923 110088 51653 63359 Shareholders equity Share capital 27 2285 2280 2285 2280 Share premium 9130 9111 9130 9111 Other reserves 5265 3800 424 751 Retained earnings At beginning of the year Profit attributable to the equity shareholders Other changes in retained earnings 13743 5621 14752 5579 Total shareholders equity 91482 96731 51653 63359 Noncontrolling interests 14441 13357 Total equity 105923 110088 51653 63359 The financial statements set out on pages 55103 were approved by the Board on 22 November 2017 and signed on its behalf by Tim J Davies Neil Austin Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Treasury Equity Foreign Total Non Share Share Share Compensation Exchange Other Retained Shareholders controlling
Capital Premium Reserve Reserve Reserve Reserve Earnings Equity Interests Equity At 30 August 2015 2244 8615  1138 515 862 74706 87050 11913 98963 Profit for the year       12455 12455 1533 13988 Other comprehensive incomeexpense     3410 3246 164  164 Total comprehensive income     3410  9209 12619 1533 14152 Dividends paid       3347 3347  3347 Equity settled share based payment transactions net of tax    432   321 111 15 96 Allotment of shares 36 496      532  532 Purchase of own shares held in trust   12     12  12 Dissolution of dormant subsidiaries         104 104 Transfer   4   655 651 At 3 September 2016 2280 9111 8 706 2895 207 81540 96731 13357 110088 At 4 September 2016 2280 9111 8 706 2895 207 81540 96731 13357 110088 Profit for the year       7005 7005 1290 8295 Other comprehensive income     1779  4968 6747  6747 Total comprehensive income 1779  11973 13752 1290 15042 Dividends paid       19467 19467 245 19712 Equity settled share based payment transactions net of tax    320   Allotment of shares 5 19      24  24 Purchase of own shares held in trust   4     4  4 Transfer   12   2 10 At 2 September 2017 2285 9130  386 4674 205 74802 91482 14441 105923 The equity compensation reserve reflects the cumulative accounting impact at the balance sheet date of the fair value of the share schemes over the vesting periods.
The movement on the equity compensation reserve is taken through the consolidated income statement.
During the year 766000 2016 264000 was transferred from the equity compensation reserve to retained earnings in respect of options exercised in the year and nil 2016 57000 was also transferred on the disposal of Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
The Group has opted to use previous revaluations of property made under UK GAAP as deemed cost.
On adoption of IFRS the revaluation reserve was reclassified to other reserves.
In the prior year 642000 was transferred from other reserves to retained earnings in respect of previous revaluations of property owned by Carrs Flour Mills Ltd a subsidiary undertaking which was sold during the prior year.
In the prior year an adjustment of 104000 was made to remove balances in respect of dormant subsidiaries dissolved in the prior year from noncontrolling interests.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Treasury Equity Share Share Share Compensation Retained Total Capital Premium Reserve Reserve Earnings Equity At 30 August 2015 2244 8615  1239 30434 42532 Profit for the year     26362 26362 Other comprehensive expense     2235 2235 Total comprehensive income     24127 24127 Dividends paid     3347 3347 Equity settled sharebased payment transactions net of tax    480 7 473 Allotment of shares 36 496    532 Purchase of own shares held in trust   12   12 Transfer   4  4 At 3 September 2016 2280 9111 8 759 51217 63359 At 4 September 2016 2280 9111 8 759 51217 63359 Profit for the year     3349 3349 Other comprehensive income     4109 4109 Total comprehensive income     7458 7458 Dividends paid 19467 19467 Equity settled sharebased payment transactions net of tax Allotment of shares 5 19    24 Purchase of own shares held in trust   4   4 Transfer   12  12 At 2 September 2017 2285 9130  424 39814 51653 The equity compensation reserve reflects the cumulative accounting impact at the balance sheet date of the fair value of the share schemes over the vesting periods.
The movement on the equity compensation reserve is taken through the income statement where it relates to employees of the Company and to investment in subsidiaries where it relates to employees of the subsidiaries.
During the year 618000 2016 7000 was transferred from the equity compensation reserve to retained earnings and 201000 2016 321000 was transferred from the equity compensation reserve to investment in subsidiaries in respect of options exercised in the year.
COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Group Companytel 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated fromused in continuing operations 30 15094 6257 2939 2299 Interest received Interest paid Tax paidrecovered 1179 1098 551 777 Net cash generated fromused in operating activities in continuing operations 13194 4641 856 1065 Net cash generated from operating activities in discontinued operations Net cash generated fromused in operating activities 13194 10118 856 1065 Cash flows from investing activities Acquisition of subsidiaries net of overdraftcash acquired 12640 1258 Contingentdeferred consideration paid Disposal of subsidiary net of costs including cash disposed 23922  6685 Dividends received from subsidiaries 2303 4802 Net paymentreceipt of loans to subsidiaries 8037 14259 Investment in subsidiaries Dividend received from associate and joint ventures 1212 113 1097 Loans to joint ventures 2332  1768 Loan repaid by associates Other loans Purchase of intangible assets Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment Purchase of property plant and equipment 2854 5788 Purchase of own shares held in trust Redemption of preference shares in joint venture 14 150 150 Net cash used ingenerated from investing activities in continuing operations 14263 20226 13400 28002 Net cash used in investing activities in discontinued operations Net cash used ingenerated from investing activities 14263 19777 13400 28002 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from issue of ordinary share capital Net proceeds from loans from subsidiaries Net proceedscosts from issue of new bank loans 6000 153 6000 15 Finance lease principal repayments Repayment of loan from related party Repayment of borrowings 3110 1614 1758 550 Decrease in other borrowings 2804 192 Dividends paid to shareholders 9 19467 3347 19467 3347 Dividends paid to related party Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities in continuing operations 20448 5893 15201 1988 Net cash used in financing activities in discontinued operations Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 20448 7301 15201 1988 Effects of exchange rate changes Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 21173 23512 29451 28972 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year 22 39787 16275 37945 8973 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 22 18614 39787 8494 37945 CONSOLIDATED AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES BASIS OF ACCOUNTING The consolidated and Company financial statements are prepared on a going concern basis in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs and International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretation Committee IFRS IC interpretations endorsed by the European Union EU and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The Company is a public limited company incorporated and domiciled in England and Wales whose shares are listed and traded on the London Stock Exchange.
The address of its registered office is Old Croft Stanwix Carlisle CA3 9BA.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting year.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual results ultimately may differ materially from the estimates.
Accounting policies have been applied consistently other than where new policies have been adopted.
The consolidated and Company financial statements are prepared under the historic cost convention as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
The accounting policies for the Group and Company are as follows BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The consolidated financial statements comprise Carrs Group plc and all its subsidiaries together with the Groups share of the results of its associates and joint ventures.
The financial information of the subsidiaries associates and joint ventures is prepared as of the same reporting date and consolidated using consistent accounting policies.
Group intercompany balances and transactions including any unrealised profits arising from Group intercompany transactions are eliminated in full.
Profits and losses on transactions with the associates and joint ventures are recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Results of subsidiary undertakings acquired or disposed of during the current and prior financial year were included in the financial statements from the effective date of control or up to the date of cessation of control.
The separable net assets both tangible and intangible of the acquired subsidiary undertakings were incorporated into the financial statements on the basis of the fair value as at the effective date of the Group acquiring control.
IFRS 10 introduced a new definition of control which could affect whether an entity is consolidated into the Group accounts.
An investor controls an investee when it is exposed or has right to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee.
Control requires power over the investee exposure or rights to variable returns and the ability to use power to affect returns.
Subsidiaries are entities that meet the new definition of control.
Subsidiaries are consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group and are included until the date on which the Group ceases to control them.
Associates are entities over which the Group has significant influence but not control generally accompanied by a share of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Joint ventures are entities over which the Group has joint control established by contractual agreement.
Investments in associates and joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method.
The Groups share of its associates and joint ventures posttax profits or losses are recognised in the income statement and its share of movement in reserves is recognised in reserves.
The cumulative movements are adjusted against the carrying amount of the investment.
The Groups investment in associates and joint ventures includes any goodwill arising on acquisition.
If the Groups share of losses in an associate or joint venture equals or exceeds its investment in the associate or joint venture the Group does not recognise further losses unless it has incurred obligations or made payments on behalf of the associate or joint venture.
All subsidiaries are accounted for by applying the purchase method.
The cost of a business combination is measured as the aggregate of the fair values at the acquisition date of the assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued by the Group.
The identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree are measured initially at fair value at the acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any noncontrolling interest.
The excess of the cost of the business combination over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities is recognised as goodwill.
Acquisition related costs are expensed to the consolidated income statement in the year they are incurred.
The Group applies a policy of treating transactions with noncontrolling interests as transactions with parties external to the Group.
EMPLOYEE SHARE TRUST IFRS 10 requires that the Group consolidate a structured entity where the substance of the relationship between the parties indicates that the Group controls the entity.
The employee share trust sponsored by the Group falls within this category of structured entity and has been accounted for as if it were in substance a subsidiary.
CURRENCY TRANSLATION The financial statements for the Groups subsidiaries associates and joint ventures are prepared using their functional currency.
The functional currency is the currency of the primary economic environment in which an entity operates.
The presentation currency of the Group and Company is Sterling.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Exchange differences resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at exchange rates ruling at the balance sheet date of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are recognised in the consolidated income statement.
The balance sheets of foreign operations are translated into sterling using the exchange rate at the balance sheet date and the income statements are translated into sterling using the average exchange rate for the year.
Where this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effect of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates the exchange rate on the transaction date is used.
Exchange differences arising are recognised as a separate component of shareholders equity.
On disposal of a foreign operation any cumulative exchange differences held in shareholders equity are transferred to the consolidated income statement.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED REVENUE RECOGNITION Revenue from the sale of goods or services is measured at the fair value of the consideration net of rebates and excluding value added tax.
Revenue from the sale of goods or services is recognised when the Group has transferred the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the goods to the buyer when the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and when it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the Group.
Inter segmental transactions are on an arms length basis.
In respect of construction contracts revenue is calculated on the basis of the stage of completion and the total sales value of each contract.
The stage of completion is determined as the proportion that contract costs incurred for work performed to date bear to the total estimated total contract costs.
No profit is recognised until a contract is at least 30% complete.
Amounts invoiced for work completed are deducted from the selling price while amounts invoiced in excess of work completed are recognised as current liabilities.
Where it is probable that contract costs will exceed total contract revenue the expected loss is recognised immediately as an expense in the consolidated income statement.
RETIREMENT BENEFIT ASSETOBLIGATIONS The Group offers various pension schemes to employees including a defined benefit pension scheme and several defined contribution schemes.
The assets of the Groups pension schemes are held separately from those of the Group and are invested with independent investment managers.
Contributions to defined contribution schemes are charged to the consolidated income statement in the year to which they relate.
Carrs Group Pension Scheme The asset recognised in the consolidated and Company balance sheet at the year end is the fair value of scheme assets at the balance sheet date less the present value of the defined benefit obligation.
Independent
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of highquality corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
The service costs including pension scheme administrative costs are included in operating profit in the consolidated income statement.
A credit is made within interest which represents a net interest amount that is calculated by applying the discount rate at the beginning of the year to the net defined benefit asset at the beginning of the year.
The net interest amount also takes into account changes to the net asset during the year.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in the consolidated and Company statement of comprehensive income.
The pension scheme deficit or surplus to the extent that they are considered recoverable are recognised in full on the consolidated balance sheet.
IFRIC 14 confirms that where a company has an unconditional right to a refund of surplus from a defined benefit pension plan during the lifetime of that plan or when it winds it up and where there is expected to be surplus assets there is no limit on the asset the Company can show on its balance sheet.
At 2 September 2017 and 3 September 2016 the consolidated and Company balance sheet recognises the full surplus on the Carrs Group defined benefit pension scheme.
Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme One of the Groups subsidiaries is a participating employer in the Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme which is a multiemployer defined benefit pension scheme.
Note 26 provides further information on this scheme and how it has been accounted for in the consolidated accounts.
SHARE BASED PAYMENTS The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value at the date of the grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Fair value is measured by use of a valuation model.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimate of the number of options that are expected to vest.
Changes to the fair value recognised as a result of this are charged or credited to the consolidated income statement with a corresponding adjustment to the equity compensation reserve.
INTEREST
Interest is recognised in the consolidated income statement on an accruals basis using the effective interest method.
BORROWING COSTS General and specific borrowing costs directly attributable to the acquisition construction or production of qualifying assets which are assets that necessarily take a substantial period of time to get ready for their intended use or sale are added to the cost of those assets until such time as the assets are substantially ready for their intended use or sale.
All other borrowing costs are recognised in the consolidated income statement in the year in which they are incurred.
OPERATING SEGMENTS IFRS 8 requires operating segments to be identified on the basis of internal financial information about components of the Group that are regularly reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM to allocate resources to the segments and to assess their performance.
The CODM has been identified as the Executive Directors.
The CODM considers the business from a productservices perspective.
Operating segments have been identified as Agriculture and Engineering.
NONRECURRING ITEMS Nonrecurring items that are material by size andor by nature are presented within their relevant income statement category but highlighted separately on the face of the income statement.
Items that management consider fall into this category are also disclosed within a note to the financial statements.
The separate disclosure of profit before nonrecurring items helps provide a better indication of the Groups underlying business performance.
Events which may give rise to nonrecurring items include but are not limited to gains or losses on the disposal of subsidiariesbusinesses derivative gains or losses in respect of capital expenditure gains or losses on the disposal of properties gains or losses on the disposal of material investments the restructuring of businesses the integration of new businesses acquisition related costs contingent consideration linked to continued employment of key personnel and asset impairments including impairment of goodwill.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements
Goodwill arises on the acquisition of subsidiaries and represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the net identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquiree and the fair value of the noncontrolling interest in the acquiree.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to each of the CGUs or groups of CGUs that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Each unit or group of units to which the goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
Goodwill impairment reviews are undertaken annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate a potential impairment.
The carrying value of goodwill is compared to the recoverable amount which is the higher of value in use and the fair value less costs of disposal.
Any impairment is recognised immediately as an expense and is not subsequently reversed.
Goodwill written off to reserves under UK GAAP prior to 31 August 1998 has not been reinstated and would not form part of the gain or loss on the disposal of a business.
OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS Other intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and accumulated impairment losses.
Amortisation commences when assets are available for use.
The expected useful lives over which the assets are amortised are generally as follows Customer relationships 1  5 years Brands 15  20 years or infinite life Knowhow 5 years Proprietary technology 13 years Development costs 5  15 years Patents and trademarks contractual life Contract backlog 3 years Software 3  10 years Customer relationships and brands are amortised in line with the profit and income streams they are respectively expected to generate over their expected useful life.
Other intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis.
The cost of intangible assets acquired in a business combination is the fair value at the acquisition date.
The cost of separately acquired intangible assets comprises the purchase price and any directly attributable costs of preparing the assets for use.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS All research costs are recognised in the consolidated income statement as incurred.
Development costs are recognised as an asset only to the extent that specific recognition criteria as set out in IAS38 Intangible assets relevant to the proposed application are met and the amount recognised is recoverable through future economic benefits.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation and accumulated impairment losses.
Cost comprises purchase price and directly attributable costs.
Freehold land and assets in the course of construction are not depreciated.
For all other property plant and equipment depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis to allocate cost less residual values of the assets over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold buildings up to 50 years Leasehold buildings shorter of 50 years or lease term Plant and equipment 3 to 20 years Residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each financial yearend.
Assets not fully constructed at the balance sheet date are classified as assets in the course of construction.
When construction is complete these assets are reclassified to the appropriate heading within property plant and equipment.
Depreciation commences when the asset is ready for use.
The cost of maintenance repairs and minor equipment is charged to the consolidated income statement as incurred the cost of major renovations and improvements is capitalised.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised within the consolidated income statement.
INVESTMENT PROPERTY Investment properties are properties held for longterm rental yields.
Investment properties are carried in the balance sheet at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
For all other investment property depreciation is calculated on a straightline basis to allocate cost less residual values of the assets over their estimated useful lives as follows Freehold buildings up to 50 years The cost of maintenance repairs and minor equipment is charged to the consolidated income statement as incurred the cost of major renovations and improvements is capitalised.
Gains and losses on disposals are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised within the consolidated income statement.
IMPAIRMENT OF NONFINANCIAL ASSETS Nonfinancial assets are reviewed for impairment where there are any events or changes in circumstances that would indicate potential impairment.
In addition at each reporting date the Group assesses whether there is any indication that goodwill may be impaired.
Where an indicator of impairment exists the Group makes an estimate of recoverable amount.
Where the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is written down to its recoverable amount.
Recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use and is deemed for an individual asset.
If the asset does not generate cash flows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets the recoverable amount of the cash generating unit to which the asset belongs is determined.
Discount rates reflecting the asset specific risks and the time value of money are used for the value in use calculation.
INVENTORIES
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and those overheads that have been incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Where appropriate cost is calculated on a specific identification basis.
Otherwise inventories are valued using the firstin firstout method.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs to completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED Provision has been made where necessary for slow moving obsolete and defective inventories.
Contract work in progress is measured at the selling price of the work performed at the balance sheet date.
The selling price is measured by reference to the stage of completion at the balance sheet date and total expected income from the contract work.
Progress payments received are deducted from the value of work in progress except to the extent that payments on account exceed the value of work in progress on any contract where the excess is included in trade and other payables.
Directly attributable and separately identifiable costs of bidding for contracts are included in contract costs after the point in time at which it is considered probable that the contract will be obtained.
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents for the purposes of the consolidated and Company statement of cash flows comprise cash at bank and in hand money market deposits and other short term highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less and bank overdrafts.
Bank overdrafts are presented in borrowings within current liabilities in the consolidated and Company balance sheet.
GRANTS
Grants received on capital expenditure are recorded as deferred income and taken to the consolidated income statement in equal annual instalments over the expected useful lives of the assets concerned.
Revenue grants and contributions are taken to the consolidated income statement in the year to which they apply.
LEASES
Leases are classified as finance leases at inception where substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the Group.
Assets classified as finance leases are capitalised on the consolidated balance sheet and are depreciated over the shorter of the useful life of the asset and the term of the lease.
The interest element of the rental obligations is charged to the consolidated income statement over the period of the lease using the actuarial method.
Rentals paid under operating leases are charged to the consolidated income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Leasehold land is normally classified as an operating lease.
Payments made to acquire leasehold land are included in prepayments at cost and are amortised over the life of the lease.
Any incentives to enter into operating leases are recognised as a reduction of rental expense over the lease term on a straightline basis.
TAX
The tax charge comprises current tax and deferred tax.
The current tax charge represents an estimate of the amounts payable to tax authorities in respect of the Groups taxable profits.
Deferred tax is provided in full using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax base of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated and Company financial statements.
Deferred tax arising from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss is not recognised.
Deferred tax is measured using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the asset is realised or the liability is settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries associates and joint ventures except where the Group is able to control the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Tax is recognised in the consolidated income statement unless the tax relates to items recognised directly in shareholders equity in which case the tax is recognised directly in shareholders equity through the consolidated and Company statement of comprehensive income.
DIVIDENDS
Final equity dividends to the shareholders of the Company are recognised in the year that they are approved by the shareholders.
Interim equity dividends are recognised in the year that they are paid.
Dividends receivable are recognised in the period in which they are received.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Financial assets and liabilities are recognised on the consolidated and Company balance sheet when the Group and Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Trade receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due according to the original terms of the receivables.
Significant financial difficulties of the debtor probability that the debtor will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default or delinquency in payments are considered indicators that the trade receivable is impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of a provision for impairment and the amount of the loss is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
The provision is utilised when a trade receivable is uncollectible.
Investments
Investments are initially measured at cost including transaction costs.
Equity investments that do not have a quoted market price in an active market and whose fair value cannot be reliably measured by other means are held at cost.
Financial liabilities and equity Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group after deducting all of its liabilities.
Bank borrowings Interestbearing loans and overdrafts are recognised initially at fair value net of direct issue costs and are subsequently stated at amortised cost.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are accounted for on an effective interest method and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the year in which they arise.
Trade payables Trade payables are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Equity instruments Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities The Group primarily uses forward foreign currency contracts options and currency swaps to manage its exposures to fluctuating foreign exchange rates.
These instruments are initially recognised at fair value and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value at each balance sheet date.
The Groups policy is to hedge its international assets and it has designated foreign currency loans as a hedge against net investment in foreign operations.
The portion of the gain or loss on an instrument used to hedge a net investment in a foreign operation that is determined as an effective hedge is recognised directly in equity.
The gain or loss on any ineffective portion of the hedge is recognised immediately in the consolidated income statement.
NEW STANDARDS AND INTERPRETATIONS From 4 September 2016 the following became effective and were adopted by the Group and Company Amendment to IAS 16 and IAS 38 Clarification of acceptable methods of depreciation and amortisation Amendment to IAS 16 regarding bearer plants Amendment to IAS 16 Property plant and equipment on depreciation Amendment to IAS 27 Separate financial statements Amendment to IFRS 11 Joint arrangements on acquisition of an interest in a joint operation IFRS 14 Regulatory deferral accounts Amendment to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 on investment entities applying the consolidation exemption The adoption of these standards and interpretations has had no impact on the Group or Companys profit for the year or equity.
NEW STANDARDS AMENDMENTS AND INTERPRETATIONS ISSUED BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE AND NOT EARLY ADOPTED Amendment to IAS 7 on disclosure initiative Amendment to IAS 12 on recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses IFRIC 23 Uncertainty over income tax IFRIC 22 Foreign currency transactions and advance consideration Amendments to IAS 28 on long term interests in associates and joint ventures IAS 40 Investment property transfers of investment property IFRS 2 Sharebased payments amendment on clarifying share based payment transactions Amendment to IFRS 4 Insurance contracts regarding the implementation of IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 9 Financial instruments Amendment to IFRS 9 Financial instruments on general hedge accounting and on prepayment features with negative compensation IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers Amendments to Revenue from contracts with customers  clarifications IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 17 Insurance contracts It is considered that the above standards and amendments with the exception of IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers and IFRS 16 Leases will not have a significant effect on the results or net assets of the Group or Company.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and will therefore first apply to Carrs in the year ending August 2019.
IFRS 9 requires entities to provide for possible future credit losses on loans and receivables including trade receivables even if it is highly likely that the loan or receivable will be fully collectible.
The standard introduces an expected credit loss model that focuses on the risk that a loan or receivable will default rather than whether a loss has been incurred.
The Groups Agriculture business in particular has material amounts of trade receivables past due and it is expected that IFRS 9 will impact the value of the provision for impairment of trade receivables.
The assessment of the impact to the Group is ongoing.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 and will therefore first apply to Carrs in the year ending August 2019.
The Groups Agriculture business is not expected to be materially affected by this standard.
The Groups Engineering business however could be affected depending on the nature of contracts in place at implementation.
The assessment of the impact is ongoing.
If the performance of the contract does not create an asset with an alternative use and there is an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date then performance of the contract will continue to be recognised over time as it is currently.
IFRS 16 Leases is effective for period beginning on or after 1 January 2019 and will therefore first apply to Carrs in the year ending August 2020.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of the accounting changes that will be required in particular leases currently treated as operating leases such as short term property leases company cars and some IT equipment are likely to be recorded as an asset and a lease liability.
At the date of signing the financial statements the Directors are not yet in a sufficiently advanced stage of their reviews to be able to quantify any financial impact from these three standards.
SIGNIFICANT JUDGEMENTS KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND ESTIMATES Application of certain Group accounting policies requires management to make judgements assumptions and estimates concerning the future as detailed below.
Valuation of pension obligations The valuation of the Groups defined benefit pension scheme is determined each year following advice from a qualified independent actuary and can fluctuate based on a number of external factors.
Such factors include the major assumptions as shown in the table in note 26 and actual returns on scheme assets compared to those predicted in the previous scheme valuation.
Impairment of goodwill The carrying value of goodwill must be assessed for impairment annually or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
This requires an estimation of the value in use of the cash generating units to which goodwill is allocated.
Value in use is dependent on estimations of future cash flows from the cash generating unit and the use of an appropriate discount rate to discount those cash flows to their present value.
An impairment has been identified in the year note 11.
Provision for impairment of trade receivables The financial statements include a provision for impairment of trade receivables note 20 that is based on managements estimation of recoverability.
There is a risk that the provision will not match the trade receivables that ultimately prove to be irrecoverable.
Revenue recognition on construction contracts Under long term contracts the Group recognises revenue and profits based on the percentage completion method.
This requires management to make an assessment of the overall profitability and the stage of completion of the entire contract in order to determine the level of revenue and profit to recognise.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 1 The Company has taken advantage of the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 from presenting its own income statement.
The profit after tax for the year dealt with in the accounts of the Company was 3349000 2016 26362000.
2 Segmental information The chief operating decision maker CODM has been identified as the Executive Directors.
Management has identified the operating segments based on internal financial information reviewed by the CODM.
The CODM considers the business from a productservices perspective.
Operating segments have been identified as Agriculture and Engineering.
Operating segments have not been aggregated for the purpose of determining reportable segments.
Agriculture aims to provide for all farming requirements.
It derives its revenue from the sale of animal feed and feed blocks together with retail sales of farm equipment fuels and farm consumables.
Engineering derives its revenue from the provision of engineering services and the design and manufacture of bespoke equipment for use in the nuclear oil and gas and petrochemical industries.
Products include manipulators robotics specialist fabrication and precision machining.
Performance is assessed using operating profit.
For internal purposes the CODM assesses operating profit before material nonrecurring items consistent with the presentation in the financial statements.
Intersegmental transactions are all undertaken on an arms length basis.
As segment liabilities are not reviewed by the CODM they are not required to be disclosed under IFRS 8.
The Group has operations in the UK and overseas.
In accordance with IFRS 8 entity wide disclosures based on the geography of operations is also presented.
The geographical analysis of revenue is presented by revenue origin.
The segmental information for the year ended 2 September 2017 is as follows
Engineering
Group
Total segment revenue 315876 30390 346266 Inter segment revenue Revenue from external customers 315867 30357 346224
11302 2084 13386 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 2696 1397 4093 Depreciation of investment property Profitloss on the disposal of property plant and equipment Operating profit before amortisation and nonrecurring items 8612 666 9278 Amortisation and nonrecurring items 630 771 1401 Operating profit 7982 105 7877 Finance income Finance costs Share of posttax profit of associates Share of posttax profit of joint ventures Profit before taxation before amortisation and nonrecurring items Amortisation and nonrecurring items Profit before taxation from continuing operations Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation and before profitloss on the disposal of property plant and equipment Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 2 Segmental information continued
Agriculture
Engineering
Group
Segment gross assets 136545 72495 209040 The segmental information for the year ended 3 September 2016 is as follows
Engineering
Group
Total segment revenue 284836 30192 315028 Inter segment revenue 63 58 121 Revenue from external customers 284773 30134 314907
12931 3555 16486 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 2539 1043 3582 Depreciation of investment property 6  6 Profit on the disposal of property plant and equipment 12 72 84 Operating profit before amortisation and nonrecurring items 10398 2584 12982 Amortisation and nonrecurring items 140 72 212 Operating profit 10258 2512 12770 Finance income Finance costs Share of posttax profit of associate Share of posttax profit of joint ventures Profit before taxation before amortisation and nonrecurring items Amortisation and nonrecurring items Profit before taxation from continuing operations Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation and before profit on the disposal of property plant and equipment
Agriculture Engineering Group Segment gross assets 149777 52376 202153 Entity wide disclosures Revenues from external customers are derived from the sale of products by individual business segment.
The breakdown of revenue by business segment is provided above.
Revenues from external customers 2017 2016 Continuing operations
296905 269109
14666 13343
34457 32455 New Zealand 346224 314907 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2 Segmental information continued Noncurrent assets
UK Europe USA Zealand Total UK Europe USA Total Goodwill 9714 6081 8446  24241 11108 313 19 11440 Other intangible assets 241 491 1534  2266  257 29 286 Property plant and equipment 21764 7302 8055 28 37149 22821 6642 6348 35811 Investment property 176    176 182   182 Investment in associates 10911  532  11443 8667   8667 Interest in joint ventures 1771 2175 2644  6590 1717 2554 1986 6257 Other investments 50  23  73 50  22 72 Noncurrent receivables 50  712  762 50   50 Retirement benefit asset 5209    5209 311   311 49886 16049 21946 28 87909 44906 9766 8404 63076 Major customers There are no revenues from transactions with individual customers which amount to ten percent or more of Group revenue.
3 Group operating profit 2017 2016 Continuing Discontinued
Discontinued operations operations operations operations Group operating profit is stated after creditingcharging Amortisation of grants 53  53 100 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 215  84 6 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 4093  3582 1875 Depreciation of owned investment property 6  6 13 Amortisation of intangible assets 124  205 14 Goodwill impairment note 4 1700 Business combination expenses note 4 1349  7 Release of contingent consideration note 4 2090 Restructuring costs note 4 112 Foreign exchange gains 152  383 206 Derivative financial instruments gainslosses 17  70 74 Operating lease charges 1446  1299 730 Research and development expense 1258  1320 1046 Auditors remuneration Audit services Company 15914 2016 15450 77  76 The auditing of accounts of subsidiaries of the Company pursuant to legislation including overseas 119  159 21 Total audit services 196  235 21 Taxation compliance services   27 Other taxation advisory services   70 Other nonaudit services 10  6 Total nonaudit services 10  103 Included within Group operating profit is the following in respect of investment property leased to and occupied by external parties Rental income 41  42 13 Operating expenses 42  44 22 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 4 Amortisation and nonrecurring items 2017 2016 Amortisation of intangible assets Goodwill impairment Business combination expenses 1349 7 Release of contingent consideration Restructuring costs Loss on property disposal 1401 212 The goodwill impairment of 1700000 is discussed further in note 11.
Business combination expenses of 1349000 relate to acquisition costs incurred in the year as well as contingent consideration in relation to the prior year acquisition of Phoenix Feeds Ltd which is explained further below.
Phoenix Feeds Ltd was acquired on 1 June 2016 for cash consideration of 1744000 including 490000 of contingent consideration.
The contingent consideration is linked to the continued employment of key personnel and therefore in accordance with IFRS 3 this was not recognised as consideration in the acquisition accounting in the year ended 3 September 2016 and is instead being recognised in the income statement over a two year period.
Given the nature of the payment it has been recognised as a nonrecurring item.
The release of contingent consideration of 2090000 relates to the acquisition of Chirton Engineering Ltd which was acquired in year ended 2014.
This is discussed further in note 23.
Restructuring costs comprise redundancy costs.
A loss of 206000 was incurred on the disposal of a property that was no longer required following the relocation of one of the Groups Agriculture business stores.
5 Staff costs The tables below include Executive Directors but exclude NonExecutive Directors.
Group Companytel 2016 Continuing Discontinued Continuing Discontinued Continuing Continuing operations operations operations operations operations operations Wages and salaries 30543 Social security costs 3458 306telPension costs 2034 Share based payments 485 Included within pension costs for both Group and Company is a charge of 59000 2016 credit of 287000 in respect of the defined benefit pension scheme note 26.
The average monthly number of employees during the year was made up as follows Group Companytel 2016 Continuing Discontinued Continuing Discontinued Continuing Continuing operations operations operations operations operations operations Number Number Number Number Number Number Sales office and management 507 Manufacture and distribution 429 Key management are considered to be the Directors of the Group.
Full details of the Directors emoluments pension benefits and share options are given in the Remuneration Committee Report on pages 3343.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 6 Finance income and finance costs 2017 2016 Continuing operations Finance income Bank interest Net interest on the net defined benefit retirement asset note 26 Interest on loan with associate Other interest Total finance income Finance costs Interest payable on bank overdrafts Interest payable on bank loans and other borrowings Interest payable on finance leases Other interest Total finance costs 864 1009 7 Taxation a Analysis of the charge in the year 2017 2016 Continuing operations Current tax UK corporation tax Current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Foreign tax Current year Adjustment in respect of prior years Group current tax 1326 1805 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of timing differences Current year 442 1177 Adjustment in respect of prior years Group deferred tax note 18 381 1102 Tax on profit from ordinary activities 1707 2907 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 7 Taxation continued b Factors affecting tax charge for the year The tax assessed for the year is lower 2016 higher than the rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.58% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below 2017 2016 Continuing operations Profit before taxation 10002 14078 Tax at 19.58% 2016 20% 1958 2816 Effects of Tax effect of share of profit in associates and joint ventures Tax effect of expenses that are not allowable in determining taxable profit Tax effect of nontaxable income Effects of different tax rates of foreign subsidiaries Effects of changes in tax rates Adjustment in respect of prior years Total tax charge for the year 1707 2907 The tax effect of expenses that are not allowable in determining taxable profit includes the nonrecurring items of goodwill impairment and business combination expenses note 4.
These have been treated as disallowable for tax purposes.
The tax effect of nontaxable income includes the release of contingent consideration in respect of the Chirton Engineering acquisition in 2014 note 4.
The main rate of UK corporation tax has been reduced from 20% to 19% with effect from 1 April 2017 and from 19% to 17% with effect from 1 April 2020.
These rate reductions were substantively enacted before the year end and as the Directors consider the deferred tax balances are expected to reverse after 1 April 2020 the tax rate used for deferred tax at the year end is 17%.
8 Discontinued operations In the prior year Carrs Group plc disposed of its entire shareholding in Carrs Flour Mills Ltd for a gross consideration of 36m on a cash and debt free basis less costs to sell.
An analysis of the result of discontinued operations and the gain recognised on the remeasurement to fair value less costs to sell is as follows 2017 2016
Expenses
Profit before taxation of discontinued operations
Profit after taxation of discontinued operations Pretaxation gain recognised on the measurement to fair value less costs to sell
After taxation gain recognised on the measurement to fair value less costs sell Profit for the year from discontinued operations 9 Dividends 2017 2016
Second interim paid for the year ended 3 September 2016 of 0.95p per 2.5p share 2015 0.925p Special dividend of 17.54p per 2.5p share Final dividend for the year ended 3 September 2016 of 1.9p per 2.5p share 2015 1.85p 1736 1662 First interim paid for the year ended 2 September 2017 of 0.95p per 2.5p share 2016 0.95p 19467 3347 A special dividend of 15996351 being 17.54p per share was paid in October 2016 following the disposal of Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
Since the year end a second interim dividend of 868258 being 0.95p per share has been paid.
The financial statements do not reflect the dividend payable.
The proposed final dividend for the year ended 2 September 2017 to be considered by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting is 1919455 being 2.1p per share making a total for the year excluding the special dividend of 4.0p 2016 3.8p.
Shares held in treasury do not carry entitlement to a dividend.
The financial statements do not reflect this proposed final dividend as payable.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 10 Earnings per ordinary share Earnings per share are calculated by reference to a weighted average of 91355427 shares 2016 90087357 in issue during the year.
Amortisation and nonrecurring items that are charged or credited to profit do not relate to the underlying profitability of the Group.
Therefore an adjusted earnings per share is presented as follows 2017 2016
Earnings
Earnings per share Earnings per share 000 pence 000 pence Continuing operations Earnings per share basic 7005 7.7 9638 10.7 Amortisation and nonrecurring items Amortisation of intangible assets Goodwill impairment 1700 1.9 Business combination expenses 1349 1.5 7 Release of contingent consideration 2090 2.3 Restructuring costs Loss on property disposal Taxation effect of the above Noncontrolling interest in the above Earnings per share  adjusted 8143 8.9 9803 10.9 Discontinued operations Earnings per share  basic 2817 3.1 Amortisation and nonrecurring items Amortisation of intangible assets Profit on disposal of subsidiary Earnings per share  adjusted 2792 3.1 Total basic 7.7 12455 13.8 Total adjusted 8143 8.9 12595 14.0 For diluted earnings per share the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue is adjusted to assume conversion of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The potentially dilutive ordinary shares where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year are disclosed in note 28.
Weighted Earnings Weighted Earnings Earnings average number per share Earnings average number per share 000 of shares pence 000 of shares pence Continuing operations Earnings per share 7005 91355427 7.7 9638 90087357 10.7 Effect of dilutive securities Share option scheme     78032 Share save scheme  227605   1317329 0.2 Long term incentive plan  542288 0.1  551437 Diluted earnings per share 7005 92125320 7.6 9638 92034155 10.5 Discontinued operations Earnings per share    2817 90087357 3.1 Effect of dilutive securities Share option scheme     78032 Share save scheme     1317329 0.1 Long term incentive plan     551437 Diluted earnings per share    2817 92034155 3.0 7005 92125320 7.6 12455 92034155 13.5 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 10 Earnings per ordinary share continued Adjusted Weighted Earnings Adjusted Weighted Earnings earnings average number per share earnings average number per share 000 of shares pence 000 of shares pence Continuing operations Diluted adjusted earnings per share 8143 92125320 8.8 9803 92034155 10.7 Discontinued operations Diluted adjusted earnings per share    2792 92034155 3.0 8143 92125320 8.8 12595 92034155 13.7 11 Goodwill and other intangible assets Knowhow Brands Customer technology and patents and Contract Goodwill relationships development costs trademarks backlog Software Total
At 29 August 2015 11174 3371 240 741  560 16086 Exchange differences 3   56  77 136 Subsidiariesbusinesses acquired 783 39     822
Subsidiary disposed  2094  357   2451 Disposals 195      195 At 3 September 2016 11765 1316 240 448  691 14460 Exchange differences 319 Subsidiariesbusinesses acquired 14182 36 216 1195 232 5 15866 Additions   219 12  140 371 Disposals  1316 240   6 1562 At 2 September 2017 26266 36 442 1705 236 893 29578 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 29 August 2015 325 3290 240 494  440 4789 Exchange differences    36  64 100 Charge for the year  120  43  56 219 Subsidiary disposed  2094  280   2374 At 3 September 2016 325 1316 240 293  560 2734 Exchange differences   1 18  56 75 Charge for the year Impairment 1700      1700 Disposals  1316 240   6 1562 At 2 September 2017 2025  071 Net book amount At 29 August 2015 10849 81  247  120 11297 At 3 September 2016 11440   155  131 11726 At 2 September 2017 24241 36 420 1362 229 219 26507 During the year goodwill of 14182000 arose on acquisitions note 29.
An impairment of 1700000 was recognised in the year which is discussed later in this note.
During the year cost and accumulated amortisation of 1316000 in respect of customer relationships and cost and accumulated amortisation of 240000 in respect of knowhow were disposed from the table above.
These intangible assets have been fully amortised and have therefore been removed.
During the prior year there was a disposal of 195000 in respect of the dissolution of dormant subsidiaries.
This was partially offset by an adjustment to noncontrolling interests of 104000.
During the prior year goodwill totalling 783000 arose on the acquisitions of Green Agriculture Co and Phoenix Feeds Ltd.
Goodwill represented the excess of the consideration paid over the Groups interest in the net fair value of the net identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated to cash generating units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 11 Goodwill and other intangible assets continued The carrying value of goodwill has been allocated to the following cash generating units 2 September 3 September 2017 2016 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Johnstone Wallace Oils profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Borders profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Wooler profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Safe at Work profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Laycocks profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Wales profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Reid and Robertson profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Morpeth profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Phoenix profit centre Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd  Mortimer profit centre Carrs Agriculture Ltd  Scotmin profit centre 2068 2068 Animal Feed Supplement Inc.
Silver Springs profit centre Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH 6081 313 Carrs Engineering Ltd  Bendalls Engineering profit centre Carrs Engineering Ltd  Chirton profit centre 2526 4226 NuVision Engineering Inc.
24241 11440 Goodwill arising on the acquisition of overseas subsidiaries has been retranslated at the balance sheet date.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
Goodwill is tested for impairment by estimating future cash flows from the cash generating units to which goodwill has been allocated and discounting those cash flows to their present value.
Each unit or group of units to which goodwill is allocated represents the lowest level within the entity at which the goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes.
The key assumptions in this calculation are the levels of future cash flows particularly in the perpetuity period and the discount rate.
Management estimates discount rates using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the cash generating units.
Cash flows are estimated using the most recent budget information for the year to August 2018 which has been approved by the Board and forecast information for the four years to August 2022 based on medium term business plans and an assumption for long term growth of between 13% excluding inflation.
The pretax discount rates used to discount the forecast cash flows for all cash generating units is 4.86%  10.32% 2016 5.43%  10.38%.
The Directors consider the assumptions adopted in calculating the cash flows to be consistent with historical performance and to be reasonable given current market conditions.
Given the current state of the oil market the Directors placed particular attention to the impairment review on the carrying value of goodwill relating to the Chirton profit centre.
Although the performance of the Chirton profit centre has improved this year versus the previous year the sustained downturn in the oil and gas sector continues to work against Chirton in its major market.
The oil price is viewed as a leading indicator of the health of the future market and currently this has failed to recover to any extent from last year.
There are no immediate signs of it recovering any further so our business plan has been revised downwards to reflect this.
A pretax discount rate of 10.32% was used for the impairment testing of goodwill allocated to this cash generating unit.
Details of other key assumptions are shown in the table below.
An impairment of 1.7m has been recognised against the carrying value of goodwill.
Significant headroom exists in each of the other cash generating units and based on the stress testing performed reasonable possible changes in the assumptions would not cause the carrying amount of the cash generating units to equal or to exceed their recoverable amount.
Amortisation and impairment charges are recognised within administrative expenses and have been highlighted separately within amortisation and nonrecurring items note 4.
There is no goodwill or intangible assets in the Company 2016 none.
Significant cash generating units The following key assumptions have been used in the impairment testing for goodwill with a significant carrying value Goodwill carrying value Pretax Long term average annual Long term before impairment discount rate change in cash flows growth rate 000 % % % Cash generating unit NuVision Engineering Inc.
8427 10.32 2 2 Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH 6081 10.32  2 Carrs Engineering Ltd  Chirton profit centre 4226 10.32 4 2 Carrs Agriculture Ltd  Scotmin profit centre 2068 4.86 6 2 Stress testing of the future cash flows generated from these cash generating units shows that an impairment of goodwill would potentially arise should cash flows fall by 44% in NuVision Engineering GmbH by 35% in Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH and by 94% in the Scotmin profit centre.
Stress testing of the future cash flows generated from the Chirton profit centre show that an additional impairment of goodwill of 0.3m would have been recognised in addition to the 1.7m actually recognised in the year should cash flows fall by 5%.
This rises to 0.6m and 1.1m should cash flows fall by 10% and 20% respectively.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 12 Property plant and equipment Assets in the Land and Plant and course of buildings equipment construction Total
Cost
At 29 August 2015 36069 75656 2436 114161 Exchange differences 1023 1167 284 2474 Subsidiariesbusinesses acquired
1512 4791 948 7251 Subsidiary disposed 14648 41704  56352
5 1607  1612
1721 104 1825 At 3 September 2016 25672 38432 1843 65947 Exchange differences Subsidiariesbusinesses acquired 8 1584 10 1602
449 3032 406 3887
691 1553  2244
116 975 1091 At 2 September 2017 26243 42991 1201 70435 Accumulated depreciation At 29 August 2015 7840 47936  55776 Exchange differences 193 885  1078 Charge for the year 917 4540  5457 Subsidiary disposed 3273 27590  30863
1312  1312 At 3 September 2016 5677 24459  30136 Exchange differences Charge for the year 759 3334  4093
92 1246  1338 At 2 September 2017 6433 26853  33286 Net book amount At 29 August 2015 28229 27720 2436 58385 At 3 September 2016 19995 13973 1843 35811 At 2 September 2017 19810 16138 1201 37149 Freehold land amounting to 2938879 2016 3008879 has not been depreciated.
The net book amount of plant and equipment includes 2829604 2016 3206805 in respect of assets held under finance leases.
This consists of cost of 4241494 2016 5046733 less accumulated depreciation of 1411890 2016 1839928.
The finance lease lessors hold security over the assets held under finance leases.
Under the Groups banking facilities the lenders have legal charges over certain properties together with floating charges over the assets of certain businesses.
The net book amount of specific assets held under legal charges at the balance sheet date was 1613000 2016 1667000.
Included in the above table in respect of assets held under floating charges are assets with a net book amount of 6702000 2016 6327000.
This excludes specific assets under legal charge and assets secured under finance leases both of which are separately disclosed above.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 12 Property plant and equipment continued Depreciation is recognised within the Consolidated Income Statement as shown below 2017 2016 Cost of sales 3536 4896 Distribution costs Administrative expenses 4093 5457 The Company has no property plant and equipment 2016 none.
13 Investment property
Group
Cost
At 29 August 2015 Subsidiary disposed At 3 September 2016 and 2 September 2017 Accumulated depreciation At 29 August 2015 Charge for the year Subsidiary disposed At 3 September 2016 Charge for the year At 2 September 2017 Net book amount At 29 August 2015 At 3 September 2016 At 2 September 2017 The fair value of investment properties at 2 September 2017 is 360000 2016 360000.
Investment properties were valued by independent professionally qualified valuers in October 2016.
There is no investment property in the Company 2016 none.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 14 Investments Joint Other Associates ventures investments Total
Cost
At 29 August 2015 8439 5012 88 13539 Exchange difference
Redemption of preference shares Share of posttax profit 1239 842  2081 Share of lossesgains recognised directly in equity 1011 194  817 Dividend paid by joint venture At 3 September 2016 8667 6257 81 15005 Exchange difference
Redemption of preference shares Share of posttax profit 1609 1204  2813 Share of gains recognised directly in equity Dividend paid by associate and joint ventures 245 967  1212 At 2 September 2017 11443 6590 82 18115 Accumulated provision for impairment At 29 August 2015 3 September 2016 and 2 September 2017 Net book amount At 29 August 2015 8439 5012 79 13530 At 3 September 2016 8667 6257 72 14996 At 2 September 2017 11443 6590 73 18106 During the year Mid Columbia Engineering Inc. was brought into the Group as an associate following the acquisition of NuVision Engineering Inc. which holds 49% of the issued share capital of Mid Columbia Engineering Inc. note 15.
Other investments comprise shares in several private limited companies.
These investments have been classified as unquoted investments for which fair value cannot be reliably measured and are held at cost less accumulated impairment.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 14 Investments continued Shares in
Company
Cost
At 29 August 2015 18438 245 272 18955 Subsidiary disposed Subsidiaries dissolved 1605   1605 Share based payment credit in respect of employees of subsidiary undertakings At 3 September 2016 16272 245 272 16789 Investment in subsidiaries 14780   14780 Share based payment credit in respect of employees of subsidiary undertakings At 2 September 2017 30986 245 272 31503 Accumulated provision for impairment At 29 August 2015 6233   6233 Subsidiaries dissolved 1439   1439 At 3 September 2016 and at 2 September 2017 4794   4794 Net book amount At 29 August 2015 12205 245 272 12722 At 3 September 2016 11478 245 272 11995 At 2 September 2017 26192 245 272 26709 Investment in subsidiaries of 14780000 represents the increased shareholding in a subsidiary following the capitalisation of intercompany debt together with the investment in two new subsidiaries Carrs International Finance Limited and Carrs Engineering US Inc.
During the prior year several dormant companies with a combined cost of 1605000 and a combined accumulated provision for impairment of 1439000 were dissolved.
15 Investment in associates The associated undertakings at 2 September 2017 are
Proportion of shares held Ordinary Country of Country of
Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Ltd 49 England UK Manufacture of animal feed Mid Columbia Engineering Inc.
49 US US Engineering The investment in Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Ltd is held directly by the Company.
The investment in Mid Columbia Engineering Inc. is held directly by NuVision Engineering Inc. which was acquired during the year.
The Group does not have the ability to control the financial and operating policies of its associates.
The Group has a 49% shareholding in both associates and a minority representation on the Board of Directors.
Associates are accounted for using the equity method.
At the year end Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Ltd had capital commitments of 308000 2016 178000.
No contingent liabilities exist within the associates.
The aggregate amounts relating to the associates of which the Group recognises 49% in the net investment in associates are 2017 2016 Total assets 39878 37438 Total liabilities 16525 19751
115797 98445 Profit after tax 3284 2528 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 16 Interest in joint ventures The joint ventures at 2 September 2017 are
Interest held Equity Nonequity Country of Country of Name % % incorporation operation Activity Crystalyx Products GmbH 50  Germany Germany Manufacture of animal feed blocks Bibby Agriculture Ltd 26 26 England UK Sale of agricultural products Afgritech Ltd 50  England UK Holding company Afgritech LLC 50  USA USA Producers of ingredients of animal feed GoldBar Feed Supplements LLC 50  USA USA Manufacture of animal feed blocks ACC Feed Supplement LLC 50  USA USA Manufacture of animal feed blocks Silloth Storage Company Ltd 50  England UK Storage of molasses Crystalyx Products GmbH has a 31 December accounting year end.
Silloth Storage Company Ltd extended its accounting year end from 30 June to 31 December.
Interests in the joint ventures listed above are held directly by the holding Company with the following exceptions Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd holds 50% of the ordinary share capital and 50% of the preference share capital in Bibby Agriculture Ltd.
Carrs Agriculture Ltd holds 50% of the ordinary share capital in Silloth Storage Company Ltd.
Animal Feed Supplement Inc.
Feed Supplement LLC.
Afgritech Ltd has 100% control of Afgritech LLC.
The preference shares in Bibby Agriculture Ltd are redeemable with three months notice carry no dividend entitlement except at the Directors discretion and no voting rights.
Joint ventures are accounted for using the equity method.
At the year end the joint ventures had capital commitments of 461000 2016 nil.
No contingent liabilities exist within the joint ventures.
The aggregate amounts included in the financial statements relating to the Groups share of joint ventures are 2017 2016 Noncurrent assets 7658 6232 Current assets 6343 6144 Current liabilities 5200 4268 Noncurrent liabilities 2248 2038
30175 24204
28567 23202 Net finance cost Goodwill of 17000 arose on the investment in Silloth Storage Company Ltd.
This is included in the carrying amount of the Groups interest in joint ventures and is not shown as a separate asset.
Included within interest in joint ventures is an amount of 20000 2016 170000 which relates to the Groups interest in the preference share capital of Bibby Agriculture Ltd.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 17 Investment in subsidiary undertakings
Ordinary Country of Country of
Carrs Agriculture Ltd
UK Manufacture of animal feedmineral blocks and ingredients of animal feed Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd
UK Agricultural retailers Animal Feed Supplement Inc.
USA
USA Manufacture of animal feed blocks Horslyx LLC
USA Distributor of animal feed blocks Carrs Supplements NZ Ltd 100 New Zealand New Zealand Distributor of animal feed blocks Conegar S.
100 Uruguay Uruguay Distributor of animal feed blocks Carrs Supplements Brasil Nutrio Animal Ltda 100 Brazil Brazil Distributor of animal feed blocks Carrs Engineering Ltd
UK Engineering Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH 100 Germany Germany Engineering Carrs Engineering US Inc.
100 US US Holding Company ESI Holding Company Inc.
100 US US Holding Company NuVision Engineering Inc.
100 US US Engineering
Trust Ltd
UK Financial services Carrs Properties Ltd
UK Property holding Carrs International Finance Ltd 100 England UK Finance Company Registered Office address Old Croft Stanwix Carlisle Cumbria CA3 9BA Registered Office address 101 Roanoke Avenue Poteau Oklahoma 74953 USA Registered Office address 810 Waterman Drive Watertown New York 13601 USA Registered Office address 515a Wairakei Road Burnside Christchurch 8053 New Zealand Registered Office address Schiestattweg 16 88677 Markdorf Germany Registered Office address 2403 Sidney Street Suite 700 Pittsburgh Pennsylvania 15203 USA Registered Office address Juncal 1305 Piso 18 Montevideo Uruguay Registered Office address Avenida Bernardino de Campos 98 Andar 7 Sala 47 Paraiso So Paulo  SP 04.004040 Brasil During the prior year the Company disposed of its investment in Carrs Flour Mills Ltd note 8.
Dormant subsidiaries are listed on page 107 of this Annual Report and Accounts.
Investments in the subsidiaries listed above are held directly by the Company with the following exceptions Carrs Engineering Ltd holds 100% of the investment in Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH Carrs Agriculture Ltd holds 100% of the investment in Horslyx LLC Carrs Supplements NZ Ltd Conegar S. and Carrs Supplements Brasil Nutrio Animal Ltda and Carrs Engineering US Inc.
Company Inc. which in turn holds 100% of the investment in NuVision Engineering Inc.
Since the year end ESI Holding Company Inc. has been merged with NuVision Engineering Inc.
18 Deferred tax assets and liabilities Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following
2017 2016
Accelerated tax depreciation 2118 1230 Employee benefits
1006 531 Tax liabilities 4010 1817 Deferred tax liabilities are expected to reverse after more than one year from the balance sheet date.
Movement in deferred tax during the year
At
4 September Exchange In respect of Recognised Recognised 2 September 2016 differences acquisitions in income in equity 2017
Accelerated tax depreciation 1230 23 968 103  2118 Employee benefits
1817 69 901 381 842 4010 Other deferred tax assets and liabilities includes deferred tax on short term timing differences rolled over capital gains trading losses capital losses business combinations and overseas deferred tax.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 18 Deferred tax assets and liabilities continued Movement in deferred tax during the prior year
At
30 August Exchange In respect of In respect of Recognised Recognised 3 September 2015 differences acquisitions disposals in income in equity 2016
Other
Liabilities
Accelerated tax depreciation 2996 42 8 1995 179  1230 Employee benefits 353    193 490 56 4184 77 8 2187 225 490 1817 Net liabilities 3323 39 8 2165 1102 490 1817
Liabilities Netteltel Accelerated tax depreciation Employee benefits Other 51    51 Tax assetsliabilities Movement in deferred tax during the year
At
4 September Recognised Recognised 2 September 2016 in income in equity 2017
Accelerated tax depreciation
Liabilities
Employee benefits Net liabilities Movement in deferred tax during the prior year
At
30 August Recognised Recognised 3 September 2015 in income in equity 2016
Accelerated tax depreciation
Employee benefits Net liabilities Tax of 90000 2016 120000 in respect of tax losses has not been recognised as a deferred tax asset in the Group balance sheet.
Tax of 37000 2016 39000 in respect of tax losses has not been recognised as a deferred tax asset in the Company balance sheet.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 19 Inventories 2017 2016
Raw materials and consumables 10082 8377 Work in progress 3174 2800 Finished goods and goods for resale 23767 22246 37023 33423 Inventories are stated after a provision for impairment of 366000 2016 651000.
The amount recognised as an expense in the year in respect of the write down of inventories is nil 2016 237000.
The amount recognised as a credit in the year in respect of reversals of write downs of inventories is 127000 2016 nil.
The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales is 305977000 2016 272341000.
The Company has no inventories 2016 none.
Construction contracts disclosures 2017 2016 Contract costs incurred plus recognised profits less recognised losses to date Contract advances received 804 1257 Work in progress on construction contracts 1819 1757 Revenue from construction contracts 20 Trade and other receivables Group Companytel 2016
Trade receivables 49904 46980 Less provision for impairment of trade receivables 1675 2100 Trade receivables  net 48229 44880 Amounts recoverable on contracts 4408 5733 Amounts owed by Group undertakings note 35 18865 16494 Amounts owed by other related parties note 35 2257 1901 1686 1640 Loans receivable 47 50 Other taxes and social security receivable 872 625 248 Other receivables 1188 1121 164 370 Prepayments and accrued income 2722 2630 428 327 59723 56940 21391 18831
Amounts owed by Group undertakings note 35   18007 17486 Amounts owed by other related parties note 35 712 Other receivables 50 50 762 50 18007 17486 The movement in the provision for impaired trade receivables consists of increases for additional provisions offset by receivables written off and unused provision released back to the consolidated income statement.
The provision is utilised when there is no expectation of recovering additional cash.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 20 Trade and other receivables continued During the year a credit of 111000 2016 charge of 50000 has been recognised within administrative expenses in the consolidated income statement in respect of the movement in provision for impairment of trade receivables.
No impairment of other receivables has been recognised in the current or preceding year.
Interest bearing nontrading amounts owed by Group undertakings within current trade and other receivables carry interest at Bank of England base rate  2.50% 4.50% or 5.95%.
Such amounts are unsecured and repayable on demand.
Interest bearing nontrading amounts owed by Group undertakings within noncurrent receivables carry interest at 4.88% and 6.25%.
Such amounts are unsecured and have a term of 5 years.
2017 2016 Past due but Past due but Gross Impairment not impaired Gross Impairment not impaired The ageing of trade receivables is as follows Not past due 32683 154 NA 23273 57 NA Past due 0  30 days 7393 38 7355 9354 23 9331 Past due 31  60 days 2905 46 2859 3876 27 3849 Past due 61  90 days 1649 46 1603 3569 115 3454 Past due 91  120 days 928 48 880 2184 69 2115 Past 121 days 4346 1343 3003 4724 1809 2915 49904 1675 15700 46980 2100 21664 The Company has no trade receivables 2016 none.
In relation to trade receivables the major source of estimation uncertainty is the recoverable value of those receivables.
The judgements applied to this include the credit quality of customers taking into account their financial positions past experiences and other relevant factors.
Individual customer credit limits are imposed based on these factors and provisions for impairment are made using those judgements.
Provisions for impairment are reviewed monthly by divisional management.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the year end is the carrying value net of provision for impairment of each receivable.
The Group and Company do not hold any significant collateral as security 2016 none.
Group Companytel 2016 The carrying value of trade receivables are denominated in the following currencies Sterling 38150 38404 US Dollar 1169 1823
7994 4281 New Zealand Dollar 916 372 48229 44880 21 Current tax assets Group Companytel 2016 Corporation tax recoverable 48telGroup taxation relief 21tel922 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 22 Cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts Group Companytel 2016 Cash and cash equivalents per the balance sheet 23887 48411 8494 37945 Bank overdrafts note 24 5273 8624 Cash and cash equivalents per the statement of cash flows 18614 39787 8494 37945 23 Trade and other payables Group Companytel 2016
Trade payables 16215 13568 Payments on account 5809 2497 Amounts owed to Group undertakings note 35 Amounts owed to other related parties note 35 19371 20676 Other taxes and social security payable 1090 1073 637 442 Contingent deferred and unpaid cash consideration Other payables 6764 4193 318 355 Accruals and deferred income 4536 4816 551 1380 56008 46823 1537 2214
Contingent consideration 4160 2394 Accruals and deferred income 4423 2668 Amounts owed to Group undertakings and other related parties are interest free unsecured and repayable on demand.
During the year contingent and deferred consideration arose on acquisitions note 29.
In addition there remained initial cash consideration unpaid at the balance sheet date.
After retranslation at the balance sheet date of foreign currency denominated amounts 2223000 of these outstanding payables are recognised within current liabilities and 4160000 are recognised within noncurrent liabilities.
The contingent consideration of 2394000 on the acquisition of Chirton Engineering Ltd in year ended 2014 was recognised as potentially payable in the prior year comparative above subject to certain earnings criteria being met.
During the current year 304000 of this liability was paid to the vendor with the remaining 2090000 being released to the income statement as it was no longer payable.
Given the exceptional nature and size of this credit to the income statement it has been treated as a nonrecurring item note 4.
Included within accruals and deferred income is the following in respect of government grants Group Companytel 2016 At the beginning of the year 274 2008 Exchange differences 2 Subsidiaries disposed  1581 Subsidiaries acquired 46 Amortisation in the year 53 153 At the end of the year Included within Current liabilities 6 Noncurrent liabilities 263 274 269 274   Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 24 Borrowings Group Companytel 2016
Bank overdrafts 5273 8624 Bank loans and other borrowings 10951 12376 1693 513 Loans from Group undertakings note 35 5461 5461 Finance leases 17060 21642 7154 5974
Bank loans 19425 17108 19018 15889 Finance leases 1541 1517 20966 18625 19018 15889 Borrowings are repayable as follows On demand or within one year 17060 21642 7154 5974 In the second year 16543 1942 15454 513 In the third to fifth years inclusive 4423 16670 3564 15376 Over five years 38026 40267 26172 21863 Group and Company borrowings are shown in the balance sheet net of arrangement fees of 149000 2016 110000 of which 57000 2016 37000 is deducted from current liabilities and 92000 2016 73000 is deducted from noncurrent liabilities.
Group Companytel 2016 The net borrowingscash are Borrowings as above 38026 40267 26172 21863 Cash and cash equivalents 23887 48411 8494 37945 Net borrowingscash 14139 8144 17678 16082 Bank loans and other borrowings includes an amount of 6988000 2016 9791000 which is secured on trade receivables.
The Company together with certain subsidiaries act as guarantors on the bank loans.
In addition The Royal Bank of Scotland PLC has legal charges over certain properties.
Finance lease obligations are secured on the assets to which they relate.
Loans from Group undertakings are noninterest bearing.
Such amounts are unsecured and repayable on demand.
Other loans from related parties are noninterest bearing.
The bank loans are repayable by instalments and the overdraft is repayable on demand.
Bank loans includes a drawn down revolving credit facility of 13.9m 2016 15.0m which is repayable in June 2019.
At the year end the Group had 10.6m of undrawn revolving credit facilities 2016 4.5m.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 25 Derivatives and other financial instruments The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing its risk.
These policies have remained unchanged throughout the year.
Financial Instruments by currency 2017 2016
NZ
US
NZ
Sterling Dollar Euro Dollar Total Sterling Dollar Euro Dollar Total Gr oup
Other investments Noncurrent receivables Current trade and other receivables 44177 3699 8028 225 56129 45739 3282 4292 372 53685 Current derivatives Cash and cash equivalents 12165 6192 5323 207 23887 43738 1319 2823 531 48411 56442 10639 13351 432 80864 89577 4623 7115 903 102218
Current borrowings 15273 329 1458  17060 20179 205 1258  21642 Current derivatives Current trade and other payables 42656 2927 9269 60 54912 39697 1692 4361  45750 Noncurrent borrowings 16068  4898  20966 18625    18625 Other noncurrent liabilities 4160   4160 2394    2394 73997 7416 15643 60 97116 80895 1908 5628  88tel
US
Sterling Dollar Euro Total Sterling Dollar Euro Total
Noncurrent receivables  18007  18007  17486  17486 Current trade and other receivables 12488 1243 6984 20715 15829 1207 1468 18504 Cash and cash equivalents 7271 1009 214 8494 37463 210 272 37945 19759 20259 7198 47216 53292 18903 1740 73935
Current borrowings 7154   7154 5974   5974 Current trade and other payables 900   900 1772   1772 Noncurrent borrowings 14120  4898 19018 15889   15889 22174  4898 27072 23635   23635 Other taxes and social security receivable and prepayments are excluded from trade and other receivables in the tables above as they are not financial instruments.
For this same reason other taxes and social security payable is excluded from trade and other payables.
Deferred income in respect of government grants is excluded as it is not a financial liability.
Sensitivity analysis The impact of a weakening or strengthening in Sterling against other currencies at the balance sheet date is shown in the table below.
The Directors consider that a 10% 2016 10% weakening or strengthening in Sterling against other currencies represents reasonable possible changes.
10% 10% 10% 10% weakening strengthening weakening strengthening Impact on profit after taxation continuing operations 1429 1170 709 579 Impact on total equity 4623 3779 3012 2463 This sensitivity analysis is not an indication of actual results which may materially differ.
For the purposes of this sensitivity analysis all other variables have been held constant.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 25 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Interest rate risk The Group finances its operations through a mixture of retained earnings and bank borrowings.
The Group borrows in the desired currencies at fixed and floating rates of interest.
Weighted
Weighted average average effective effective interest rate 2017 interest rate 2016
Bank overdrafts Bank loans and other borrowings Finance lease liabilities 2.42 2377 2.60 2159 Fixed rate Floating rate The Groups floating rate financial liabilities bear interest determined as follows Bank overdrafts US prime rate  1.0% margin US prime rate  1.35% margin Bank of England base rate 1.8% margin Bank loans and other borrowings Libor  1.8% Libor  2.0% Bank of England base rate  1.25% margin 1.3%
Weighted average average effective effective interest rate 2017 interest rate 2016 Company % 000 % 000 Bank loans 1.93 20711 2.18 16402 Loans from Group undertakings  5461  5461 Floating rate The Companys floating rate financial liabilities bear interest determined as follows Bank loans Libor  1.8% Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 25 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Sensitivity analysis The impact of a decrease or increase in interest rates during the year is shown in the table below.
The Directors consider that a 1% movement in interest rates represents a reasonable possible change.
2017 2016 1% decrease 1% increase 1% decrease 1% increase Impact on profit after taxation continuing operations 283 283 366 366 Impact on total equity 283 283 366 366 This sensitivity analysis is not an indication of actual results which may materially differ.
For the purposes of this sensitivity analysis all other variables have been held constant.
Liquidity risk The Groups policy throughout the year has been to maintain a mix of short and medium term borrowings.
Shortterm flexibility is achieved by overdraft facilities.
In addition it is the Groups policy to maintain committed undrawn facilities in order to provide flexibility in the management of the Groups liquidity.
The tables below analyse the Group and Companys financial liabilities which will be settled on a net basis into relevant maturity groupings based on the remaining period at the balance sheet date to the contractual maturity date.
The amounts disclosed in the tables are the contractual undiscounted cash flows which have been calculated using spot rates at the relevant balance sheet date.
Within One to Two to Over Within One to Two to Over one two five five one two five five Total year years years years Total year years years years
Bank overdrafts 5273 5273    8624 8624 Bank loans and other borrowings 31357 11415 16227 3715  30632 12807 1726 16099 Finance lease liabilities 258tel 236tel17 Derivatives 18 18    20 20 Trade and other payables 54912 54912    45750 45750 Other noncurrent liabilities 4378  2189 2189  2394   2394 98518 72521 19153 6844  89782 67906 2394 19465tel Within One to Two to Within One to Two to one two five one two five Total year years years Total year years years Company 000 000 000 Bank loans 20711 1693 15454 3564 17491 906 895 15690 Loans from Group undertakings 5461 5461   5461 5461 Trade and other payables 900 900   1772 1772 27072 8054 15454 3564 24724 8139 895 15690 Trade and other payables in the tables above exclude other taxes and social security which do not meet the definition of financial liabilities under IFRS 7.
Deferred income in respect of government grants has also been excluded as it does not give rise to a contractual obligation to pay cash.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 25 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Future minimum lease payments of finance leases Repayment profiletel 2016
Amount payable Within one year 90telIn the second year 73telIn the third to fifth years inclusive 94telOver five years  17  13 2580 2362 2377 2159 Less future finance charges 203 203 Present value of lease obligations 2377 2159 The Company has no finance lease obligations 2016 none.
Borrowing facilities The Group has various undrawn facilities.
The undrawn facilities available at 2 September 2017 in respect of which all conditions precedent had been met were as follows 2017 2016 Floating rate Floating rate Expiring in one year or less 5957 18514 Expiring within two and five years inclusive 24273 4500 30230 23014 The Companys overdraft is within a Group facility and it is therefore not possible to determine the Companys undrawn facilities at the balance sheet date.
Capital risk management The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern in order to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders and to maintain an efficient capital structure to optimise the cost of capital.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Group monitors capital on the basis of the gearing ratio.
This ratio is calculated as net debt divided by total equity.
Net debt is calculated as total borrowings including current and noncurrent borrowings as shown in the consolidated balance sheet less cash and cash equivalents.
Total equity is as shown in the consolidated balance sheet.
At 2 September 2017 the Group had net debt of 14.1m 2016 net cash of 8.1m.
Gearing was 13.3% at the year end.
The Group monitors cash balances and net debt on a daily basis to ensure adequate headroom exists on banking facilities and that it is compliant with banking covenants.
Fair value hierarchy IFRS 13 requires financial instruments that are measured at fair value to be classified according to the valuation technique used Level 1  quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2  inputs other than Level 1 inputs that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. as prices or indirectly i.
Level 3  unobservable inputs All derivative financial instruments are measured at fair value using Level 2 inputs.
There were no transfers between levels in the above hierarchy in either the current or prior year.
The Group holds shares in several private limited companies.
These have been classified as unquoted investments for which fair value cannot be reliably measured and are held at cost less accumulated impairment.
Had fair value been applied this financial asset would have been Level 3.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED 25 Derivatives and other financial instruments continued Fair values of financial assets and liabilities The fair value of Group and Company financial assets and liabilities are not materially different to book value.
Derivative financial instruments Hedge of net investment in foreign subsidiaries The Group hedges foreign denominated loans against its investment in foreign subsidiaries.
A foreign exchange pretax gain of 36000 2016 504000 was recognised in equity during the year on translation of US dollar denominated loans with a fair value of 1608000 2016 24908000 to sterling.
A foreign exchange pretax loss of 106000 2016 pretax gain of 183000 was recognised in equity during the year on translation of Euro denominated loans with a fair value of 5330000 2016 1750000 to sterling.
The Groups net investment hedge was fully effective in both the current and prior year and therefore no gain or loss is recognised in the consolidated income statement.
Currency derivatives The Group and Company use forward foreign currency contracts and options to manage exchange risk exposure.
At the balance sheet date the fair value of outstanding forward foreign currency contracts and options are as below 2017 2016
Contractual
Fair or notional Fair or notional value amount value amount
At beginning of the year 20 1462 32 7402 Subsidiaries disposed   146 1305 Gainslosses during the year 17 1359 134 4635 At end of the year 3 2821 20 1462 Included within Current assets 13 2152 Current liabilities 16 669 20 1462 3 2821 20 1tel
Contractual
Fair or notional Fair or notional value amount value amount
At beginning of the year   30 5066 Losses during the year   30 5066 At end of the year The Group uses currency swaps to manage exchange risk exposure.
At the balance sheet date the fair value of outstanding currency swaps are as below 2017 2016
Contractual
Fair or notional Fair or notional value amount value amount Gr oup At beginning of the year   10 394 Losses during the year 2 146 10 394 At end of the year current liabilities 2 146 The Company has no currency swaps 2016 none.
Fair value has been determined by reference to the value of equivalent forward foreign currency contracts options and currency swaps at the balance sheet date.
Gains and losses on currency related derivatives are included within administrative expenses.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 26 Retirement benefits The Group participates in two defined benefit pension schemes Carrs Group Pension Scheme and Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme.
Carrs Group Pension Scheme The Company sponsors the Carrs Group Pension Scheme and offered a defined contribution and a defined benefit section.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Group and are invested with independent investment managers.
From 1 September 2015 the defined contribution section was closed.
Members of that section were enrolled in a new defined contribution scheme the Carrs Group Retirement Savings Scheme Carrs Group RSS set up under a Master Trust arrangement.
The defined benefit section of the scheme was previously closed to new members and has closed to future accrual with effect from 31 December 2015.
Members of this section became entitled to become members of the Carrs Group RSS from 1 January 2016.
The pension contribution made by the Group over the year to the defined benefit section was nil 2016 888000.
Contributions to the scheme for the year ending August 2017 are expected to be nil.
The following disclosures relate to the defined benefit section of the Carrs Group Pension Scheme.
The last full actuarial valuation of this scheme was carried out by a qualified independent actuary as at 31 December 2014 and updated on an approximate basis to 2 September 2017 by a qualified independent actuary.
Major assumptions 2017 2016 % % Inflation RPI Inflation CPI Rate of discount Pension in payment increases RPI or 5.0% per annum if less RPI or 5.0% per annum if less minimum 3.0% per annum The mortality tables used in the valuation as at 2 September 2017 are 100% of S2PMA males and S2PFA females with allowance for mortality improvements using CMI2016 with a 1.25%pa underpin.
The mortality assumptions adopted imply the following life expectancies at age 65 as at 2 September 2017 At At 2 September 3 September 2017 2016 Males currently age 45 23.5 years 23.9 years Females currently age 45 25.4 years 26.1 years Males currently age 65 22.1 years 22.2 years Females currently age 65 23.9 years 24.2 years Amounts recognised in the Income Statement in respect of defined benefit schemes 2017 2016 Service cost  including current service costs past service costs and settlements Service cost  administrative cost Net interest on the net defined benefit asset Total expenseincome As a result of the closure to future accrual on 31 December 2015 a negative past service cost net of associated costs of approximately 350000 has been recognised in the prior year income statement.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 Retirement benefits continued The expenseincome is recognised within the Income Statement as shown below 2017 2016 Within operating profit Cost of sales Administrative expenses Within interest Finance income Total expenseincome Remeasurements of the net defined benefit asset to be shown in the Statement of Comprehensive Income 2017 2016 Net measurement  financial 1492 16623 Net measurement  demographic 1283 1051 Net measurement  experience 1888 2012 Return on assets excluding interest income 4064 10835 Total remeasurement of the net defined benefit asset 4951 2725 Amounts included in the Balance Sheet 2017 2016 Present value of funded defined benefit obligations 69921 73355 Fair value of scheme assets 75130 73666 Surplus in funded scheme 5209 311 Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the present value of the defined benefit obligation 2017 2016 Benefit obligation at the beginning of the year 73355 60352 Service cost  89 Interest cost 1463 2239 Contributions by scheme participants  61 Net measurement gainslosses  financial 1492 16623 Net measurement gains  demographic 1283 1051 Net measurement lossesgains  experience 1888 2012 Benefits paid 4010 2431 Past service cost  515 Benefit obligation at the end of the year 69921 73355 Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the fair value of scheme assets 2017 2016 Fair value of scheme assets at the beginning of the year 73666 62119 Interest income on scheme assets 1469 2333 Return on assets excluding interest income 4064 10835 Contributions by employers  888 Contributions by scheme participants  61 Benefits paid 4010 2431 Scheme administrative cost 59 139 Fair value of scheme assets at the end of the year 75130 73666 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 26 Retirement benefits continued Analysis of the scheme assets and actual return Fair value of assets 2017 2016 Equity instruments 22979 34771
3278 5449
48601 33401
75130 73666 Actual return on scheme assets 5533 13168 Sensitivity analysis A sensitivity analysis of the principal assumptions used to measure the scheme liabilities Impact on scheme Change in liabilities assumption 2 September 2017 Discount rate Increase by 0.25% Decrease by 2.7m Rate of inflation Increase by 0.25% Increase by 1.6m Assumed life expectancy at age 65 Increase by 1 year Increase by 2.1m Characteristics and the risks associated with the Scheme Information about the characteristics the Scheme The Scheme provides pensions in retirement and death benefits to members.
Pension benefits are linked to a members final salary at 31 December 2015 or date of leaving if earlier and their length of service.
Since 31 December 2015 the Scheme has been closed to future accrual.
The Scheme is a registered scheme under UK legislation.
The Scheme is subject to the scheme funding requirements outlined in UK legislation.
The Scheme was established under trust and is governed by the Schemes trust deed and rules dated June 2008.
The Trustees are responsible for the operation and the governance of the Scheme including making decisions regarding the Schemes funding and investment strategy in conjunction with the Company.
Information about the risks of the Scheme to the Company The Scheme exposes the Company to actuarial risks such as market investment risk interest rate risk inflation risk currency risk and longevity risk.
The Scheme does not expose the Company to any unusual Schemespecific or Companyspecific risks.
Amount timing and uncertainty of future cash flows The Schemes investment strategy The Schemes investment strategy is to invest in return seeking assets and matching assets.
This strategy reflects the Schemes liability profile and the Trustees attitude to risk.
The Schemes investments include vehicles for interest rate and inflation hedging.
Expected future cash flows to and from the Scheme The last scheme funding valuation of the Scheme was as at 31 December 2014 and revealed a funding deficit of 278000.
In the most recent recovery plan the Company agreed to pay 195000 per month with the view to eliminating the shortfall by 31 December 2015.
In accordance with the current schedule of contributions the Company is expected to pay no contributions over the next accounting period.
The liabilities of the Scheme are based on the current value of expected benefit payment cash flows to members of the Scheme over the next 60 years.
The average duration of the liabilities is approximately 15 years.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 26 Retirement benefits continued Carrs Group Retirement Savings Scheme The Company offers membership in a Master Trust arrangement Carrs Group RSS following the closure of both sections of the Carrs Group Pension Scheme.
The pension expense for this scheme for the year was 911000 2016 902000 including 189000 in respect of Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme One of the Groups subsidiaries Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd is a participating employer in the Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme which is a multiemployer defined benefit pension scheme.
For the reasons explained below this scheme is accounted for as a defined contribution scheme.
The scheme is closed to new entrants and has been closed to future accrual since 1 December 2007.
There is currently a deficit calculated in accordance with IAS 19 of 2.3m 2016 5.1m.
The sponsoring employer Carrs Billington Agriculture Operations Ltd is currently paying 0.8m per annum under the terms of the recovery plan agreed between them and the Trustees of the scheme.
Under the rules of the scheme any employer wishing to exit the scheme would trigger a partial windup of the scheme and would therefore be responsible for their s75 debt.
A full windup of the plan would also trigger s75 debts for each participating employer.
The history of the scheme is that it was brought together from many other pension schemes and employers following multiple acquisitions over several years.
Many of those acquisitions had little or no records of employee histories.
Because of this approximately 85% of the scheme liabilities are Orphan Liabilities.
Under the rules of the scheme on a windup the orphan liabilities would be split between the participating employers in the same proportion as their calculated share of nonorphan liabilities.
At the last actuarial valuation the buyout deficit was 15.7m and the Groups estimated liability on the wind up of the scheme was 7.6m.
Because of the scheme history described above it is not possible to calculate the Groups share of the assets and liabilities of the scheme and consequently despite it being a defined benefit pension scheme the Group treats it as a defined contribution pension scheme for accounting purposes.
The Group does not expect to pay any contributions to the scheme in the next reporting period 2016 nil.
Currently the deficit repair contributions are being funded solely by the sponsoring employer and this is expected to remain the case in the future.
Those deficit repair contributions are based on the last triennial valuation of the scheme as at 31 December 2015 which showed that the scheme had a deficit of 4.4m on a technical provisions basis.
The Groups level of participation in the scheme is estimated at 48.5% which is based on its estimated share of the total buyout liabilities.
The Group has a 49% shareholding in its associate company which is the sponsoring company of the pension scheme.
As a result of equity accounting for its share of the net assets of the associate the Group recognises 49% of the deficit calculated on an IAS 19 accounting basis within its Investment in Associates in its consolidated balance sheet.
Other pension schemes Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd offers a Group Personal Pension Plan to some of its employees and the pension expense for this plan in the year was 521000 2016 508000.
The Group offered a Group Personal Pension plan to certain employees of Carrs Flour Mills Ltd.
The pension expense for this scheme for the year up to the date of disposal of the subsidiary was nil 2016 205000.
The pension expense in respect of defined contribution pension arrangements in foreign subsidiaries during the year was 308000 2016 215000.
Pension contributions into NEST during the year amounted to 39000 2016 45000.
The Group also pays contributions into various defined contribution schemes acquired through business combinations.
The pension expense during the year in respect of these schemes was 36000 2016 101000.
27 Share capitaltel 2016 Group and Company Shares 000 Shares 000
Ordinary shares of 2.5p each 140000000 3500 140000000 3500 Allotted and fully paid ordinary shares of 2.5p each At start of the year 91192804 2280 89760090 2244 Allotment of shares 202737 5 1432714 36 At end of the year 91395541 2285 91192804 2280 The consideration received on the allotment of shares during the year was 23628 2016 532221.
For details of share based payment schemes see note 28.
Since the year end there was a further allotment of 7100 shares with a nominal value of 178 due to the exercise of share options.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 28 Sharebased payments
The Group operates two active share based payment schemes at 2 September 2017.
Under the long term incentive plan shares will be awarded to eligible individuals subject to an earnings per share EPS target measured against average annual increases over a three year period.
For the awards granted in November 2014 November 2015 and November 2016 an average annual growth of EPS must exceed 3.0% for 25% of the awards to vest and 100% vest at 10.0% with a straight line calculation between 25% and 100% of the award.
All employees subject to eligibility criteria may participate in the share save scheme.
Under this scheme employees are offered savings contracts for both 3 year and 5 year vesting period plans.
The exercise period is 6 months from the vesting date.
The fair value per option granted and the assumptions used in the calculation of fair values are as follows Share Save Share Save Long Term Long Term Long Term Scheme Scheme Incentive Plan Incentive Plan Incentive Plan 3Year Plan 5Year Plan November 2016 November 2015 November 2014 2014 2014 Grant date 141116 91115 101114 9614 9614 Share price at grant date weighted average Exercise price weighted average Fair value per option at grant Number of employees Shares under option 541574 511785 442900 22280 199330 Vesting period years Model used for valuation Market value Market value Market value Black Scholes Black Scholes Expected volatility 30.0% 26.9% Option life years Expected life years Riskfree rate 1.51% 2.07% Expected dividends expressed as a dividend yield 1.78% 2.54% 2.81% 1.93% 1.93% Expectations of vesting 48.76% 59.27% 0% 100% 95% discounted for dividends forgone over the three year vesting period The expected volatility has been calculated using historical daily data over a term commensurate with the expected life of each option.
The expected life is the midpoint of the exercise period.
The riskfree rate of return is the implied yield of zerocoupon UK Government bonds with a remaining term equal to the expected term of the award being valued.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 28 Sharebased payments continued Number of options Share Save Share Save Share Save Long Term Long Term Long Term Long Term Long Term Scheme Scheme Scheme Incentive Plan Incentive Plan Incentive Plan Incentive Plan Incentive Plan 3Year Plan 5Year Plan 5Year Plan November 2016 November 2015 November 2014 November 2013 May 2013 2014 2014 2011 Number Number Number Number Number Number Number Number
At 29 August 2015   51tel324 735 Granted in the year  625 Exercised in the year Forfeited in the year      76 42 6 At 3 September 2016  62tel428 282 19 Granted in the year 579 Exercised in the year    178 331 5  19 Forfeited in the year 37 113 69 297  401 83 At 2 September tel443   22 199
At 3 September 2016     331   19 At 2 September 2017      22 Weighted average Remaining contractual Remaining expected life years 5.50 4 .50 3.50 The total expenseincome recognised for the year arising from share based payments are as follows 2017 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2016 105 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2015 243 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2014 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2013 87 63 Share Save Scheme 3Year Plan 2014 37 52 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2014 13 23 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2011  20 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 28 Sharebased payments continued
The movement in the number of outstanding options under the share schemes for the Company is not shown as it is immaterial and disclosure would be excessively lengthy.
The total expenseincome recognised for the year arising from share based payments are as follows 2017 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2015 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2014 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2013 Share Save Scheme 3Year Plan 2014 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2014 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2011 Share based payments awarded to employees of subsidiary undertakings and recognised as an investment in subsidiary undertakings in the Company are as follows 2017 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2016 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2015 Long Term Incentive Plan November 2013  49 Share Save Scheme 3Year Plan 2014 9 104 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2014 58 48 Share Save Scheme 5Year Plan 2011  3 Total carrying amount of investments 29 Acquisitions NuVision Engineering Inc On 4 August 2017 Carrs Group plc acquired the entire issued share capital of ESI Holding Company Inc. engineering company NuVision Engineering Inc.
NuVision for a total cash consideration of up to 20m including continent consideration of up to 8.5m which represents the maximum earn out payable dependent on future financial performance.
NuVision is a leading technology and applications engineering company focused on providing value in commercial nuclear and power plant facilities government waste remediation facilities and waste cleanup.
Its customers include the USA Department of Energy major nuclear energy suppliers public utilities and international governments.
The acquisition provides a strong foothold into the main nuclear markets in the USA and will enable revenue synergies with the Groups existing nuclear engineering businesses including the opportunity to market Wlischmillers products in the USA.
It will also extend the Groups service capability in the nuclear market due to the complementary nature of NuVisions product range.
NuVision will also act as a key supplier under a major nuclear contract signed on 20 July 2017 and being delivered by our UK Manufacturing business in the next financial year.
STABER GmbH On 24 October 2016 Wlischmiller Engineering GmbH Wlischmiller acquired the entire issued share capital of STABER GmbH STABER for cash consideration of 7.85m including deferred consideration of 2.0m which is payable by 30 June 2018 at the latest.
STABER and Wlischmiller have been working together closely for over 50 years and STABER has most recently been a key supplier of parts for the remote handling business.
STABER has designed and developed specialised technology which will be strategically beneficial to Wlischmiller in both the near and long term.
This technology will accelerate the ongoing strategic development work on the Telbot and the Demo 2000 Telbot by Wlischmiller.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 29 Acquisitions continued Mortimer Feeds Ltd On 5 June 2017 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Limited acquired the business and certain assets of Mortimer Feeds Ltd for cash consideration of 579000 including 125000 of contingent consideration.
30000 of the contingent consideration is linked to the continued employment of key personnel and therefore in accordance with IFRS 3 this has not been recognised as consideration in the acquisition accounting and is instead being recognised in the income statement over a one year period.
Given the nature of the payment it is intended to recognise this as a nonrecurring item.
The principal activity of the business acquired is that of a feed merchant.
The primary reason for the business combination was the expansion of the existing agriculture business.
Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd On 17 March 2017 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Limited acquired the entire issued share capital of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd for cash consideration of 139000.
The principal activity of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd is a retailer of animal products for the pet equine and smallholding market.
The primary reason for the business combination was the expansion of the existing agriculture business.
All of the above purchases have been accounted for as acquisitions.
Given the size and timing of the acquisitions no separate disclosure has been presented on the face of the consolidated income statement as the impact would not be material.
Aggregate disclosures The total goodwill arising from acquisitions in the year amounts to 14182000.
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration paid over the Groups interests in the net fair value of the net identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities acquired.
The following amounts have been recognised within the consolidated income statement in respect of acquisitions made in the year NuVision STABER Other Total
167  908 1075 Profit before taxation There were no other recognised gains and losses other than the profit shown above.
Acquisition related costs amounted to 993000 which have been recognised within administrative expenses in the consolidated income statement and have been highlighted separately within nonrecurring items note 4.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 29 Acquisitions continued The assets and liabilities recognised in the acquisition accounting are set out below.
The assets and liabilities recognised for NuVision are provisional.
Due to the timing of the acquisition of NuVision the aquisition accounting has not yet been finalised.
Provisional Fair Fair Total fair value value value provisional NuVision STABER Other fair value Intangible assets 1488 160 36 1684 Property plant and equipment 1250 341 11 1602 Investment in associate
Receivables
Loan due from associate Current taxation asset Cash at bank 1196 506 23 1725 Bank overdraft Bank loan
1147 240 248 1635 Deferred grant income Taxation liabilities
Deferred
Net assets acquired 3844 1400 311 5555
8293 5584 305 14182 12137 6984 616 19737 Satisfied by Cash consideration 8044 5204 521 13769 Deferred consideration 1780  1780 Contingent consideration 4093  95 4188 12137 6984 616 19737 Cash consideration includes 285000 in respect of NuVision and 112000 in respect of other acquisitions that remains unpaid at the year end.
Intangible assets represents the fair value of knowhow in STABER GmbH the fair value of customer relationships in the business acquired from Mortimer Feeds Ltd and the contract backlog trade name patents and proprietary technology acquired in NuVision Engineering Inc.
The fair value exercise on the acquisition of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd in the year resulted in no significant intangible assets being identified other than the value of employees.
Pro forma full year information IFRS3 revised requires disclosure of information as to the impact on the financial statements if the acquisitions had occurred at the beginning of the accounting year.
The unaudited pro forma summary below presents the Group as if the acquisitions had been acquired on 4 September 2016.
The pro forma amounts include the results of the acquisitions and the interest expense on the increase in net debt as a result of the acquisitions.
The pro forma amounts do not include any possible synergies from the acquisition.
The pro forma information is provided for comparative purposes only and does not necessarily reflect the actual results that would have occurred nor is it necessarily indicative of future results.
Continuing operations
Profit before taxation 10356 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 30 Cash generated fromused in continuing operations Group Companytel 2016 Profit for the year from continuing operations 8295 11171 3349 26362 Adjustments for
1707 2907 77 58 Tax credit in respect of R and D 129 176 Dividends received from subsidiaries 2303 19935 Dividends received from associate and joint ventures   1097 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 4093 3582 Depreciation of investment property 6 6 Goodwill impairment 1700 Intangible asset amortisation 124 205 Lossprofit on disposal of property plant and equipment 215 84 Loss on disposal of investment  10 Loss on dissolution of dormant subsidiary    85 Profit on disposal of subsidiary    6478 Release of contingent consideration 2090 Business combination expenses 1299 Amortisation of grants 53 53 Net fair value lossgain on share based payments Net foreign exchange differences Net fair value gainslosses on derivative financial instruments in operating profit 17 70  30 Finance costs Interest income 176 236 1861 959 Interest expense and borrowing costs 901 1045 329 464 Share of profit from associates and joint ventures 2813 2081 Pension contributions  deficit reduction ongoing  108  108 IAS19 income statement chargecredit excluding interest Changes in working capital excluding the effects of acquisitions and disposals Increase in inventories 2379 1620 Increase in receivables 383 3606 224 193 Increasedecrease in payables 4402 3226 720 293 Cash generated fromused in continuing operations 15094 6257 2939 2299 31 Analysis of net cashdebt
Other
At
4 September noncash Exchange 2 September 2016 Cash flow changes movements 2017
Cash and cash equivalents 48411 24868  344 23887 Bank overdrafts 8624 3351   5273 39787 21517  344 18614 Loans and other borrowings current 12376 3506 1959 122 10951 noncurrent 17108 3592 1382 107 19425 Finance leases current noncurrent 1517  24  1541 Net cashdebt 8144 20757 1641 115 14139 Other noncash changes relate to finance leases debt acquired with subsidiaries and transfers between categories of borrowings.
It also includes the release of deferred borrowing costs to the consolidated income statement.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 31 Analysis of net cashdebt continued
Other
At
4 September noncash Exchange 2 September 2016 Cash flow changes movements 2017
Cash and cash equivalents 37945 29457  6 8494 Loans and other borrowings current 5974 650 530  7154 noncurrent 15889 3592 569 106 19018 Net cashdebt 16082 33699 39 100 17678 Other noncash changes relate to the release of deferred borrowing costs to the consolidated income statement and transfers between categories of borrowings.
32 Capital commitments 2017 2016 Group 000 000 Capital expenditure on property plant and equipment that has been contracted for but has not been provided for in the accounts The Company has no capital commitments 2016 none.
33 Other financial commitments
At 2 September 2017 the Group had commitments under noncancellable operating leases as follows 2017 2016 Land and Land and buildings Other buildings Other Within one year 109telWithin two and five years inclusive 2761 738 2752 748 After five years 5764 1 6255 9620 1364 9758 1201 The Company has no commitments under noncancellable operating leases 2016 none.
34 Financial guarantees The Company together with certain subsidiary undertakings has entered into a guarantee with Clydesdale Bank PLC in respect of the Group loans overdraft asset finance and guarantee facilities with that bank which at 2 September 2017 amounted to 1593000 2016 3980000.
Certain subsidiary undertakings utilise guarantee facilities with financial institutions which include their own bankers.
These financial institutions in the normal course of business enter into certain specific guarantees with some of the subsidiaries customers.
All these guarantees allow the financial institutions to have recourse to the subsidiaries if a guarantee is enforced.
The total outstanding of such guarantees at 2 September 2017 was 6760000 2016 3284000.
The Company has provided specific guarantees to certain customers of subsidiaries.
These are in place to guarantee the completion of the contract in any event.
At 2 September 2017 the contracts under guarantee that have still to be completed and delivered have a total contract value of 2037000 2016 nil.
The Company has provided a guarantee over the lease of a premises occupied by a subsidiary.
The guarantee is in respect of prompt and full payment of rents due throughout the term of the lease.
As at 2 September 2017 the cumulative rent payable over the remaining term of the lease is 1362000 2016 1455000.
The Company has entered into a guarantee with the Trustees of the Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme in respect of the punctual payment of obligations due to the pension scheme by the participating employers of the scheme.
The Companys total liability shall not exceed 1500000 2016 1500000.
One of the Groups subsidiary undertakings is a participating employer in the Carrs Billington Agriculture Pension Scheme.
On a windup of the scheme the buyout deficit would be split between the participating employers with the Groups level of participation in the scheme estimated at 48.5%.
At the last actuarial valuation the Groups estimated liability on the windup of the scheme was 7.6m 2016 7.5m.
The Group and Company does not expect any of the above guarantees to be called in.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 35 Related parties Group and Company Identity of related parties The Group has a related party relationship with its subsidiaries associates and joint ventures and with its Directors.
Transactions with key management personnel Key management personnel are considered to be the Directors and their remuneration is disclosed within the Remuneration Committee Report.
Group Companytel 2016 Balances reported in the Balance Sheet Amounts owed by businesses controlled by key management personnel in a trading capacity Trade receivables 74 75 Transactions reported in the Income Statement
Transactions with subsidiaries
2017 2016 Balances reported in the Balance Sheet Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings
36682 33861 Other receivables 36872 33980 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings
5461 5461 Other payables 5492 5498 Transactions reported in the Income Statement Management charges receivable 2360 2489 Dividends received 2303 19935 Interest receivable 1759 756
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements 35 Related parties continued Transactions with associates Group Companytel 2016 Balances reported in the Balance Sheet Amounts owed by associates Trade and other receivables 1Amounts owed to associates Trade and other payables 19338 20665 Transactions reported in the Income Statement
Rental income Management charges receivable Dividends received   245 Interest receivable 6 Management charges payable 126 202 Purchases 97922 99192 Included within Group trade and other receivables is 949000 2016 nil in respect of loans owed by associates.
Of this 237000 is within current receivables and 712000 is within noncurrent receivables.
Transactions with joint ventures Group Companytel 2016 Balances reported in the Balance Sheet Amounts owed by joint ventures Trade and other receivables 1736 1674 1669 1628 Amounts owed to joint ventures Trade and other payables 33 11 Included within Group trade and other receivables is 1663000 2016 1627000 in respect of loans owed by joint ventures.
Included within Company trade and other receivables is 1663000 2016 1627000 in respect of loans owed by joint ventures.
Group Companytel 2016 Transactions reported in the Income Statement Revenue 554 56 Management charges receivable 139 125 Dividends received   852 Purchases 757 1116 36 Post balance sheet event On 31 October 2017 after the year end the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Pearson Farm Supplies Ltd an agricultural retail business for cash consideration of 1.3m.
Of this cash consideration 0.1m is deferred until February 2018 and a further 0.1m is deferred until the third anniversary of completion.
The primary reason for the acquisition was the expansion of the existing agriculture business.
Given that this has been a recent acquisition the identifiable assets and liabilities at completion and goodwill have yet to be finalised.
The Directors therefore consider it impracticable to be able to disclose this information in these financial statements.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Restated
Restated
Continuing operationstel 2016 2017 Revenue and Results
373906 341849 331285 314907 346224 Group operating profit 11529 11638 12090 12770 7877 Analysed as Operating profit before amortisation and nonrecurring items 11763 11937 12341 12982 9278 Amortisation and nonrecurring items Group operating profit 11529 11638 12090 12770 7877 Finance income Finance costs 1379 1171 1045 1009 864 Share of posttax profit in associates and joint ventures 2819 2486 2307 2081 2813 Profit before taxation 13482 13217 13690 14078 10002 Analysed as Profit before taxation before amortisation and nonrecurring items 13716 13516 13941 14290 11403 Amortisation and nonrecurring items Profit before taxation 13482 13217 13690 14078 10002
2989 2873 3010 2907 1707 Profit for the year from continuing operations 10493 10344 10680 11171 8295 Profit for the year from discontinued operations 1822 2549 3013 2817 Profit for the year 12315 12893 13693 13988 8295 Ratios continuing operations Operating margin excluding nonrecurring items and amortisation 3.1% 3.5% 3.7% 4.1% 2.7% Return on net assets excluding nonrecurring items and amortisation 19.7% 18.8% 17.9% 13.0% 10.8% Earnings per share basic adjusted Dividends per ordinary share Revenue and results included in the table above have been restated to reflect the disposal of Carrs Flour Mills Ltd in the year ended 3 September 2016.
The profit after taxation from this business has been included within profit for the year from discontinued operations in the table above.
Restated for IAS 19 revised Restated for the reclassification to interest income of the net interest on the net defined benefit retirement asset previously recognised within operating profit Restated for the effect of the 101 share split in January 2015 FIVE YEAR STATEMENT Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements Restatedtel 2016 2017 Net assets employed Noncurrent assets
5215 9798 10849 11440 24241 Other intangible assets 61tel2266 Property plant and equipment 53068 56626 58385 35811 37149 Investment property
10395 11796 13530 14996 18106 Financial assets Noncurrent receivables Retirement benefit asset 2056 1767 311 5209 Deferred tax assets 2044 1507 861 72013 83439 86526 63076 87909 Current assets
33445 33315 35031 33423 37023 Trade and other receivables 66434 63623 64454 56940 59723 Current tax assets 178 4telFinancial assets Derivative financial instruments Cash and cash equivalents 22884 17268 20052 48411 23887 122943 114253 120426 139077 121131 Total assets 194956 197692 206952 202153 209040 Current liabilities Financial liabilities
15545 19688 18721 21642 17060 Derivative financial instruments Trade and other payables 58282 54236 54496 46823 56008 Current tax liabilities 1639 1631 472 470 632 75474 75570 73761 68955 73718 Noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities
29448 22189 25744 18625 20966 Retirement benefit obligation Deferred tax liabilities 3765 4111 4184 1817 4010 Other noncurrent liabilities 4956 5995 4300 2668 4423 41441 32295 34228 23110 29399 Total liabilities 116915 107865 107989 92065 103117 Net assets 78041 89827 98963 110088 105923 2015 has been restated for the grossing up of cash and cash equivalents and bank overdrafts included within current borrowings for accounts with right of offset within the same banking facility.
Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Carrs Group plc Old Croft Stanwix Carlisle Cumbria CA3 9BA tel00 Web site Animal Feed Supplement Inc East Highway 212 PO Box 188 Belle Fourche South Dakota 57717 USA Tel 001tel Animal Feed Supplement Inc PO Box 105 101 Roanoke Avenue Poteau Oklahoma 74953 USA Tel 001tel Animal Feed Supplement Inc PO Box 569 1700 US 50 East Silver Springs Nevada 89429 USA Tel 001tel
Solway Mills Silloth
Cumbria CA7 4AJ tel2
13 Whitfield Drive Heathfield Industrial Estate Ayr KA8 9RX Tel 0telAminoMax Lansil Way Lancaster LA1 3QY Tel 0telHorslyx LLC 810 Waterman Drive
New York 13601 USA Tel 001tel GoldBar Feed Supplements LLC 783 Eagle Boulevard Shelbyville TN 37160 USA Tel 001tel Crystalyx Products GmbH Am Stau 199203 26122 Oldenburg Germany Tel 00tel 92142 ACC Feed Supplement LLC 5101 Harbor Drive Sioux City Iowa 51111 Tel 001tel Carrs Billington Agriculture
Parkhill Road Kingstown Industrial Estate Carlisle CA3 0EX tel60 Carrs Billington Agriculture
Lansil Way Lancaster LA1 3QY Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture
High Mill Langwathby Penrith CA10 1NB Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture
Cold Meece Stone ST15 0QW Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Anglesey Unit 36 Gaerwen Industrial Estate Anglesey LL60 6HR tel86 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Annan 2 Annan Business Park Annan Dumfriesshire DG12 6TZ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Appleby Crosscroft Industrial Estate Appleby Cumbria CA16 6HX Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ayr 1A Whitfield Drive Heathfield Ind Est Ayr Ayrshire KA8 9RX tel35 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Bakewell Unit 46 Kingfisher Building Buxton Road Bakewell Derbyshire DE45 1GZ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Barnard Castle Montalbo Road Barnard Castle Co Durham DL12 8ED Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Berwick upon Tweed 29 Northumberland Road Berwick upon Tweed
Northumberland TD15 2AS Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Brecon Warren Road Stores Warren Road Brecon Powys LD3 8EF tel70 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Brock Brockholes Way Claughton Trading Estate Lancaster Old Road Claughton on Brock Preston PR3 0PZ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Carlisle Montgomery Way Rosehill Estate Carlisle CA1 2UY Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Cockermouth Unit 5 Lakeland Agricultural Centre Cockermouth CA13 0QQ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Gisburn Pendle Mill Mill Lane Gisburn Clitheroe Lancashire BB7 4ES Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Hawes Burtersett Road Hawes North Yorkshire DL8 3NP Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Hexham Tyne Mills Industrial Estate Hexham Northumberland NE46 1XL Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Jedburgh Mounthooly Crailing Jedburgh TD8 6TJ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Kendal Unit 1 J36 Rural Auction Centre Crooklands Milnthorpe Kendal Cumbria LA7 7FP Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Leek Macclesfield Road Leek Staffordshire ST13 8NR Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Malton 31 Horsemarket Malton North Yorkshire YO17 7NB Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Milnathort Stirling Road Milnathort Kinross KY13 9UZ Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Morpeth Unit 20c Coopies Lane Industrial Estate Morpeth Northumberland NE61 6JN Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Morpeth Greens Old Station Buildings Coopies Lane Morpeth Northumberland NE61 2SL tel74 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Penicuik Unit 2 4 Eastfield Park Road
Midlothian EH26 8EZ tel40 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Penrith Haweswater Road Penrith Industrial Estate Penrith Cumbria CA11 9EU Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Perth 1718 Arran Place Arran Road Perth PH1 3DU tel22 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Rothbury The Store Coquet View Rothbury Morpeth Northumberland NE65 7RZ tel20 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Selkirk Dunsdale Haugh Selkirk Selkirkshire TD7 5EF Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Settle Unit 6 The Sidings Industrial Estate Settle North Yorkshire BD24 9RP Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Skipton Skipton Auction Mart Gargrave Road Skipton North Yorkshire BD23 1UD Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Spennymoor Southend Works Byers Green
Co.
Durham DL16 7NL Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Stirling Stirling Agricultural Centre Stirling FK9 4RN Tel 0telCarrs Billington Agriculture Sales Wigton Hopes Auction Co Ltd.
Skye Road Wigton Cumbria CA7 9NS tel4 Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Wooler Bridge End South Road Wooler Northumberland NE71 6QE Tel 0telPhoenix Feeds a division of Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd 1 Station Park Ramsgreave Road Blackburn Lancashire BB1 9BH Tel 0telReid and Robertson a division of Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd Livestock Auction Mart Whiteford Hill Ayr KA6 5JW Reid and Robertson a division of Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd Ballagan Stirling Road Balloch G83 8LY tel00 Reid and Robertson a division of Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd Unit 3 Oban Livestock Centre Soroba Oban Argyll
Kingstown Broadway Kingstown Industrial Estate Carlisle CA3 0HA Tel 0telWallace Oils Kingstown Broadway Kingstown Industrial Estate Carlisle CA3 0HA Tel 0telJohnstone Wallace Fuels Castle Douglas Abercromby Industrial Park Castle Douglas Dumfriesshire DG7 1BA Johnstone Wallace Fuels
Dargavel Stores Lockerbie Road
Dumfriesshire DG1 3PG Tel 0telJohnstone Wallace Fuels
Droughduil Dunragit Stranraer DG9 8QA Afgritech LLC 810 Waterman Drive
New York 13601 USA Tel 001tel Bibby Agriculture Priory House Priory Street Carmarthen SA31 1NE Tel 0telBibby Agriculture 1A Network House Badgers Way Oxon Business Park Shrewsbury Shropshire SY3 5AB Tel 0telBendalls Brunthill Road Kingstown Industrial Estate Carlisle CA3 0EH Tel 0telR Hind Kingstown Broadway Kingstown Industrial Estate Carlisle CA3 0HA Tel 0telCarrs MSM Unit 1 Spitfire Way Hunts Rise South Marston Park Swindon Wiltshire SN3 4TX Tel 0telChirton Engineering Unit 4A High Flatworth Tyne Tunnel Trading Estate North Shields Tyne and Wear NE29 7SW tel
Engineering GmbH Schiestattweg 16 88677 Markdorf Germany tel0
Engineering GmbH Kesselbachstrae 5 88697 Bermatingen Germany tel0 NuVision Engineering Inc 2403 Sidney Street Suite 700
Pennsylvania 15203 USA Tel 001tel NuVision Engineering Inc 184 B Rolling Hill Road
North Carolina 28117 USA Tel 001tel Mid Columbia Engineering Inc 2155 Robertson Drive
Washington 99354 USA Tel 001tel Carrs Supplements NZ Limited 515a Wairakei Road Burnside Christchurch 8053 New Zealand Silloth Storage Company Station Road Silloth Wigton Cumbria CA7 4JQ joint venture company associate company DIRECTORY OF OPERATIONS Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report  Corporate Governance  Financial Statements REGISTERED OFFICE AND ADVISERS DORMANT SUBSIDIARIES AT 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Registered and Located England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales
Scotland
England and Wales England and Wales
England and Wales England and Wales
England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales England and Wales Company Name
E.
Williams Ltd Caltech Biotechnology Ltd Carrs Animal Feed Supplements Ltd Carrs Feeds Ltd Carrs Fertilisers Ltd Carrs Group Corporate Trustee Ltd Carrs International Industries Ltd Carrs Milling Industries Ltd Carrs Milling Ltd Carrs Natural Feeds Ltd Chirton Engineering Ltd Forsyths of Wooler Ltd Greens Flour Mills Ltd Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd Johnstone Fuels and Lubricants Ltd Phoenix Feeds Ltd R Hind Ltd Reid and Robertson Ltd Robert Hutchison Ltd Safe at Work Ltd Scotmin Nutrition Ltd Simarghu Ltd Walischmiller Solutions Ltd Wallace Oils Ltd
Nicholls and Company Crickhowell Ltd Financial Adviser and Broker Investec Bank UK Ltd 2 Gresham Street
EC2V 7QP Financial and Corporate PR Advisers
1 Tudor Street
EC4Y 0AH
Hill Dickinson LLP 1 St Pauls Square
L3 9SJ
Link Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU Registered Office Carrs Group plc Old Croft Stanwix
CA3 9BA Registered No.
Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Central Square South Orchard Street Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3AZ
Clydesdale Bank PLC 82 English Street
CA3 8HP The Royal Bank of Scotland PLC 37 Lowther Street
CA3 8EL 100% owned by Carrs Billington Agriculture Sales Ltd which is a 51% subsidiary of Carrs Group plc.
Companies registered in England and Wales have a registered office of Old Croft Stanwix Carlisle Cumbria CA3 9BA.
Companies registered in Scotland have a registered office of 13 Whitfield Drive Heathfield Ind.
Est.
Ayr KA8 9RX with the exception of Horse and Pet Warehouse Ltd which has a registered office of 1a Whitfield Drive Heathfield Ind.
Est.
Ayr KA8 9RX.
Ownership
51% 100% 100% 51% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 51% 100% 51% 51% 51% 100% 51% 100% 51% 100% 51% 100% 51% 51% 1 Carrs Group plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES Designed and produced by corporateprm Edinburgh and London.
