Retirement living to the full 4th Floor 100 Holdenhurst Road
Dorset
BH8 8AQ Tel 0telWebsite site Email investoremail
Facebooksitemccarthystone
McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 site Job 27517McCartyStoneAR17cvrAW V2 Proof Read by Operator Martyn Proof 03 Setup Kevin Date 24 November 2017 253 PM First ReadRevisions Job 27517McCartyStoneAR17cvrAW V2 Proof Read by Operator Martyn Proof 03 Setup Kevin Date 24 November 2017 253 PM First ReadRevisions For more information please visit siteinvestors Annual Report and Accounts 201 7 Retirement living to the full 04 McCarthy and Stone plc Our driving ambition is to enrich the lives of our customers so that they can experience retirement living to the full
Front Cover Horizons Poole Keatley Place MoretoninMarsh HBF award presentation at Alder View Scarborough Job 27517McCartyStoneAR17cvrAW V2 Proof Read by Operator Julia Proof 04 Setup Kevin Date 24 November 2017 253 PM First ReadRevisions Job 27517McCartyStoneAR17cvrAW V2 Proof Read by Operator Julia Proof 04 Setup Kevin Date 24 November 2017 253 PM First ReadRevisions STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts
STRATEGIC REPORT 2 Highlights 6 Our Business
10 Chairmans Statement
12 Our Market 16 Our Products 24 Our Lifestyle 26 Chief Executives Statement 32 Our Business Model 48 Our MediumTerm Strategy
52 Financial Review
54 Risk Management
56 Principal Risks and Uncertainties Corporate Social Responsibility Report CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 70 Board of Directors 74 Corporate Governance 80 Nomination Committee Report 82 Risk and Audit Committee
86 Directors Remuneration Report
94 Annual Report on
106 Directors Report 109 Statement of Directors
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Independent Auditors Report
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 121 Consolidated Cash Flow
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Parent Company Statement of Financial Position Parent Company Statement of Changes in Equity Parent Company Cash Flow
Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements 154 Warning to shareholders 155 Historical statistics 156 General information
Lawson Grange Wilmslow 2 McCarthy and Stone plc Strategic and
Operational Highlights
Image
The Laureates
40 years and Stone retirement development at Waverley Access to the growing rental market allowing access the growing rental market 75 sites added to the land bank Five Star rating Awarded full Five Star rating for customer achieve this accolade 3000 units mediumterm platform now fully in place to deliver strategic 15 Quality Awards PfP Capital is a fund management business of Places for People STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Excluding commercial units See page 158 for glossary of terms
Highlights
Revenue
FY17
FY16
FY15
FY14
Legal completions
FY17
FY16
FY15
FY14
Return on capital employed % 16%
FY16
FY15
FY14
FY17
FY16
FY15
FY14
Tangible net asset value
FY16
FY15
FY14
FY17
FY16
FY15
FY14
1 m
FY16
FY15
FY14
Average selling price 27telFY17
FY15
FY14
Yearend net cashdebt
FY16
FY15
FY14
REVENUE PROFIT RETURNS 4 McCarthy and Stone plc Strategic Report 2 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts
River View Court West Bridgford Churchmead Court Hinckley 6 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business We are the sector leader with share of the Retirement living to the full
Bowes Lyon Court Poundbury designed for the elderly with the NHBC during 18 month period ended STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Case study Mr and Mrs Price recently left their life in Wales behind to move closer to their family in the West Midlands.
Since moving to McCarthy and Stones Algar Court Retirement Living development in Wolverhampton there have been smiles all round as they spend more time seeing their grandchildren grow up.
Commenting on the decision to relocate Mrs Price said We visited Algar Court with our son daughter inlaw and grandchild and we instantly fell in love  we felt the highquality living and beautiful we could get used to.
We were pleasantly surprised at how simple and stressfree McCarthy and
Manager was really helpful with the transition she even showed us the local area and sorted our bus passes.
As well as more quality time with family the couple were also seeking companionship and security as Mrs Price commentss While we have only been here a short time we already feel right at home among the fantastic community at the development.
We can go to the and there will always be someone to chat to.
Everyone has been really welcoming  our family visit a lot and join in the social events with us and our grandson has been a hit with the other homeowners Our model securing detailed planning consent and retirement developments.
Importantly
Our customers their independence with private home a little more assistance with everyday tasks and the knowledge that support needs and help our customers live healthier and happier lives. to recommend us.
We are pleased that almost nine out moving to one of our developments As well as the general lifestyle we provide this is testament to our sales approach and management services their families are supported and guided through the purchasing process and receive all the support they need while living with us.
McCarthy and Stone plc achievements and success which gives us unrivalled expertise in this sector.
We would like to thank our dedicated employees as well as our homeowners and our suppliers who have helped us reach this milestone.
Our 40th year Our Business continued to the campaign please visit sitervs DID YOU KNOW STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Our awards
Oak Grange Hartford Experience Director with the South East regional team receiving the Innovation Award th 10 McCarthy and Stone plc
Chairmans Statement
On track to deliver our mediumterm growth objective Group NonExecutive Chairman 5.4 pence FY16 4.5 pence I am pleased to present our second set performance this year notwithstanding the headwinds experienced as a result of increased political and economic attractive demographic opportunity and structural shortage of supply of retirement housing in the UK.
As previously announced trading in the market uncertainty following the EU an increased weighting of completions from newer higher margin sites age and mix of units sold increased STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts DID YOU to support our growth strategy.
We have a strong and experienced management team that is focused operational expertise and infrastructure more than 3000 units per annum. sector on customer satisfaction.
We or type to have received the full Five Federation customer satisfaction survey for twelve consecutive years in would recommend us to a friend.
Outlook
Economic and political environment and low levels of unemployment. to dramatically exceed supply.
Dividend pence per share giving a total dividend is in line with our progressive dividend policy as stated at the time of our Initial Board changes during the year.
Perkins plc which owns many of the pleased to announce the appointment shareholders will take over from me plc and was formerly a director of The Department for Communities and Local Government and I am proud to have served on the uncertainty following recent political events has acted as a stern test for opportunity in retirement housing and the team can look to the future with progress towards achieving its strategic all employees the management team John White McCarthy and Stone plc Our Market
Chestnut Court Bridlington Homeowners at Elm Tree Court Huntingdon Attractive demographic opportunity STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Our market and continues to get older. the housing system and care providers.
UK to date.
Property consultancy Knight across all tenures each year and yet the sector has the capacity to grow to c.30000 units per annum meaning few providers operate at scale.
As a result we continue to maintain our retirement housing market a wider housing shortage.
In total new homes were started in suggest that up to 300000 new homes are needed per year creating a yearly shortfall of half this amount.
Downsizing older people are looking to move to a smaller property and an additional the UK population July 2017 Department for Communities and Local Government DCLG 2014based household projections England 20142039 Based on 4778 registrations of crosstenure 5 EAC data based on owneroccupied retirement housing DCLG 2017 Housing starts hit 9year high 300000 homes a year YouGov 2017 research provided by YouGov ONS total housing wealth by region and age group Our target demographic group is discussed further in Our Products and Our Lifestyle on pages Of which 11.8m c.
McCarthy and Stone plc Our Market continued
2 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Government support choice of accommodation helps them to live independently for longer and reduces costs to the health and social care system.
It also notes that helping older people to move at the right time for families.
Housing White Paper in summary 1 60000 DID YOU KNOW 1 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Products
Darroch Gate Blairgowrie Bowes Lyons Court Poundbury STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Retirement Living House manager and shared facilities including homeowners lounge and guest suite Retirement Living Plus previously Assisted Living care packages among other facilities and services Lifestyle Living previously Ortus Homes OUR P R ODUC T S McCarthy and Stone plc Our Products Retirement Living
McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts c.57% For those aged 60 Onsite house manager Homeowners lounge Guest suite Extensive landscaped grounds Lifetime Homes Standard Typically 3050 apartments Apartments feature one or two extra storage ensuite bathrooms and typically private outside space in the form of balconies terraces or designed with our customers in mind bathrooms and the lever taps for easier operation to the electric plug sockets at waist height.
In addition the developments have cameradoor entry and a 24hour emergency call system with pendant alarms.
They also feature a large amount of communal space to help shared lounge guest suite to accommodate visiting family and friends and landscaped grounds.
Our sitebased house managers provide help and assistance for homeowners and are responsible for the daytoday running of each development.
Image
Elm Tree Court Huntingdon Case study Regaining our independence was a really important factor in our relocation as getting out and where we lived before.
Now we have easy access in and out of our home whether were meeting friends in the homeowners lounge at Churchmead Court or heading into town.
We have the most amazing House Manager Tina.
She has become a good friend to us and is always happy to help us at any time of day.
Tina organises lots of events to get everyone together including to the local theatre and shes currently organising trips to York and Skegness which we are really looking forward to.
Mr and Mrs Towers Churchmead Court Hinckley The Lifetime Homes Standard is a series of sixteen design criteria intended to make homes more easily adaptable for lifetime use at minimal cost 20 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Products Retirement Living Plus A retirement apartment you care and support 1 Image Sydney Court Sidcup STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts For those aged 70 Estate manager and onsite team Homeowners lounge Restaurantbistro wellbeing suite Wheelchair Accessibility Standards
Typically 5070 apartments Our Retirement Living Plus developments management services domestic assistance and personal care.
It is an attractive alternative for people seeking additional support whilst maintaining their independence.
Developments are similar to Retirement Living but have a number of additional features including a full tableservice restaurant or bistro with meals freshly prepared onsite a function room laundry and secure mobility scooter store room.
There is also a dedicated estate management team onsite 24 hours a day 365 days a year which is led whether it is shopping cleaning or more care services.
Tailored and mean homeowners only pay for the additional help they use.
Case study I viewed the development with my daughters and soninlaw and was shown a southfacing onebedroom apartment which I was immediately taken by.
I was impressed with the beautiful dcor and wide range of facilities and was delighted I would be able to bring my 13 yearold cat with me.
I really enjoy being part of the active community here and everyone has been so friendly and welcoming.
Ive
Rowena Hampton Bowes Lyon Court Poundbury See page 158 for glossary of terms 22 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Products Lifestyle Living Downsize for your leisure years 1 Image Ocean House Carlyon Bay STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts For those aged 55 Highquality lowmaintenance Prestigious locations 23 bedrooms Increased space and car parking Openplan living Visiting manager oncall Typically 2040 apartments Lifestyle Living is our product for customers aged 55 and over looking to downsize into modern highquality and lowmaintenance apartments in prestigious locations.
Developments typically have fewer but larger apartments than our other core products with more car parking.
They are intelligently and attractively designed to futureproof later living.
Features are incorporated discreetly developments typically feature an enhanced lobby area and an openplan feel with fewer shared facilities.
Each apartment has two or three bedrooms an ensuite bathroom and a walkin wardrobe.
As homeowners tend to be more independent developments have a visiting manager who is also oncall.
As part of our Lifestyle Living range bungalow development of 30 units at Wymondham Norfolk with construction starting in FY18.
There is a growing need for lowmaintenance and well situated bungalows among the older population and the appropriateness of this form of housing in later life is wellproven.
The supply of bungalows in the UK has also been in steady decline with only 2210 new bungalows registered with the NHBC in 2016 in comparison to in 1986.
The particular shortage of bungalows and other houses for older people means they are likely to attract a premium compared to standard housing.
As of 31 August 2017 we had 222 bungalows in our land bank.
Case study For Martin and Marion Irving from Stamford Bridge the key to a happy marriage and indeed a happy and active retirement isnt having his and hers TV remotes but riding in perfect harmony on their tandem bike.
We love to go on adventures together and see where we end up says Martin.
Theres nothing better than being out on the bike and its amazing the things you can discover and some of the beautiful places it can take you.
Weve had our bike for over 10 years now and its one of the best things weve ever done Having recently moved to a new apartment at McCarthy and Stones Lifestyle Living development Sovereign Court in Stamford Bridge the couple have been able to enjoy even more of the cycling they love.
We were attracted to the development because of its beautiful rural setting which was perfect for our love of spending time outdoors.
Martin and Marion Irving Sovereign Court Stamford Bridge McCarthy and Stone plc Our Lifestyle Management and Providing peace of mind that we will look after our customers and their properties STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts and maintenance services are important to our homeowners.
Our team provides homeowners with peace of mind that we will support them and look after their properties over the long term.
This is a key part of how we seek to enrich our homeowners lives.
Providing an inhouse management services solution allows us to establish a unique relationship with our customers that not only help them but also support satisfaction.
It also links together our expertise in housebuilding and property management.
Our property management business provides property management support and care services across our two development products Retirement Living and Retirement Living Plus.
They also provide property management services to our Lifestyle Living developments.
Each Retirement Living development typically has a dedicated House Manager hours managing the daytoday running of the development whilst also helping to facilitate various social activities.
Each Lifestyle Living development has a visiting Manager who is in charge of all aspects of property maintenance.
Case study Don and Brenda decided it was time to downsize when the upkeep of their family home started to become too much trouble.
Don said While years ago my wife and I remained in the family home.
When taking care of the maintenance of the house and especially the garden  started to become a real hassle we decided the time was right to downsize to a lowmaintenance twobedroom apartment.
Homeowners at Squire Court can relax in the homeowners lounge as well as the developments beautiful landscaped gardens.
Should friends or relatives wish to stay over a guest suite is available to ensure all visitors enjoy a comfortable rest.
Brenda commented We didnt want to lose our ability to have our children stay over when they visit us so having the guest suite is ideal.
Our House Manager Maria Stratton is always coming up with ideas for fun activities and events and there is always something fun going on.
Living in a lowmaintenance apartment means we have so much more free time to enjoy ourselves.
Don and Brenda Rhodes Squire Court South Molton YourLife Management Services YLMS is owned 5050 by MSMS and Somerset Care Group a It provides management services domestic assistance catering personal care and additional support in our Retirement Living Plus developments.
Each development is run by an Estate Manager who leads a these services 24 hours a day 365 days a year.
McCarthy and Stone plc Chief Executives Statement Operational Review Our results improved consistently throughout the year notwithstanding the increased uncertainty in the secondary market increase in average selling prices from of sites.
Legal completions were slightly 4.3 FY16 4.4 years STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts DID YOU
Image
PfP are well placed to provide them with access to the retirement housing sector.
We intend to develop this relationship Investment and growth strategy We continue to pursue our strategy more than 3000 units per annum over demand for our products and we are us to achieve our planned growth.
We capital structure and the necessary is focused on achieving this goal.
Market demand supply and demand within the housing market continues to provide us with an exceptional market opportunity.
Stone stands alone among the national focuses entirely on this market. more suited to their needs and lifestyle.
Land bank secured with a high level of optionality.
See page 158 for glossary of terms 28 McCarthy and Stone plc Chief Executives Statement continued in North London South West East senior management teams in place operational expertise. structure to manage our nine regions. our planned operational growth.
Strategic initiatives our working capital cycle has allowed us to deliver further improvement improving sales rates reducing time Sales initiative to reserve out all remaining units improvements and the development of 53% DID YOU
Image
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts to site sales launches.
New relationship management teams are now in place in sold more than 80% of apartments accelerated sales rates in a challenging market whilst also improving pricing.
Development initiative of process improvements with particular focus on ways of working the planning process and increased developments accelerate growth plans accelerate this cycle were implemented during the year.
In particular we have focused on local consultations within the planning process and implemented and design standardisation and value we saved an average of four weeks per scheme with the total time taken from identify and resolve persistent representatives from Sales and to achieve greater standardisation selection and improve design.
Build initiative continued to drive improvements to supply chain management to maximise savings as well as driving towards longer of modern methods of construction.
Our product ranges our marketing spend and create consistency across our product names.
As part of our Lifestyle Living range McCarthy and Stone plc
Wymondham Norfolk which is now among the older population and the appropriateness of this form of housing new older people means they are likely to attract a high level of demand.
We are also exploring the provision larger schemes opening up exciting development potential on certain sites as well as providing for completely new land opportunities.
As of Our Management Services business year adding 48 new developments to our own management services allows with our customers providing personal standards of customer satisfaction.
Our customers We are pleased to report that we have once again achieved the full Five Star customers have said that they would every year since it was introduced in and service we deliver is a strong endorsement of our continued desire
Our employees dedication enthusiasm and expertise of excellence that provides opportunities for development and recognises those employees who go the extra mile for a customer or colleague through to report that in our most recent I am also pleased to report that we have continued to make good progress with developing a culture of excellence Chief Executives Statement continued STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts DID YOU
Image
Walmsley Place Bishops Waltham safety culture across our organisation. reduce the need for work at height.
Housing White Paper Housing White Paper Fixing our were particularly pleased to see a the need to increase the provision of specialist retirement housing.
Act on the Secretary of State to for local planning authorities on how their local development documents should meet the housing needs of older this duty will set clearer expectations older people including supporting the development of such homes near local services and we understand In addition the White Paper notes the explore ways to help older people move future incentives.
We are working information on how this incentive might older people to move which would also housing ladder and encourage further demand for retirement housing.
Government consultation on launched a consultation on tackling unfair practices in the leasehold market with particular reference to leasehold housing and unfair escalation clauses for ground rents.
We understand and support the need for action in this area.
Leasehold is a common and widely accepted form of tenure for apartment the same site often with competing guidance in place it can work well and keep the freeholder actively involved in the development and is a key part of this system.
We have responded consultation and we await its outcome.
Outlook and current trading on track to support our growth of the c.80 sales releases which the successfully launched and this has occupations are planned to increase the second half of the year due to the a strong net cash position and an experienced management team in place.
We also have the necessary regional infrastructure and strength to deliver our strategic growth than 3000 units per annum and Clive Fenton McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model Our customers and companionship Addressing undersupply of homes dedicated to and marketing construction in a sa e environment management services land buying and design Unique sales
Customer ocused
E ective planning We build our products We buy land and secure detailed planning consents in locations where we know our customers would be happy to live shareholders We provide Our developments are marketed to attract older homeowners looking to downsize Our apartments are high quality and designed around the needs of older n customers STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts sales through to legal completion to our customers and homeowners changing needs 34 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued Targeted land buying Strategic aim KPI  Land bank units Finished stock 1512 4.4 years FY16 10186 0.5 bn FY16 0.5bn
Image
Willoughby Place BourtonontheWater STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts land and build We have continued to make good Strategic priority Investment in land and build Retirement Living Retirement Living Plus Lifestyle Living sites 27% 48 sites 64% 7 sites 9% Highlights in the year Land secured with a high level of still highly fragmented operational focus and discipline in the assessment of its land purchases to ensure that returns continue to Land was secured across all Land bank occupations occupations Ocean House Carlyon Bay The story agreement to purchase the site of planning issues relating to the loss of the hotel and employment and to Extensive engagement with local community interest groups and the providing specialist retirement concerns regarding the loss of the existing use.
Each luxurious Lifestyle Living McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued Targeted land buying Background to our land buying located within towns and cities Less competition for our sites locations payments team ensuring a consistent negotiation of planning applications
Olivier Place Wilton See page 158 for glossary of terms Land and Planning Director STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts
Calico Court Glossop Blake Court Bridgwater Effective planning and design Strategic aim 75% FY16 69% 64% FY16 42% c.4 FY16 c.17 weeks Five star HBF
McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued Effective planning and design The story standard apartment types and standard details to simplify the design process whilst producing an external design that was with the local style drainage car parking design to the construction of the new development Tenterden Kent Group Product and Development Director STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Highlights in the year Planning consents planning with detailed planning Product Approval Group Services and Health and Safety.
It meets regularly to deliver optimum product Continuous product improvements to our customers needs has led to a dining experience Electric car charging points have concept for our sites Improved kitchen design making the content and its functionality. development cycle. and value engineering.
Development initiative accelerate this cycle were implemented focusing on the planning process improved local consultations increased product and design standardisation and a further c.
Strategic priorities Development cycle satisfaction rating was retained annual legal completions Lifestyle Living continued to grow during Continued product innovation Planning Inspectorate Statistics PINS August 2017 based on 11052 appeals during the year ended 30 June 2017 with 3578 appeals allowed McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued Industryleading construction in a safe environment Strategic aim c.4 weeks FY16 c.3 weeks 20% FY16 21%
Image
Savoy House and Tudor Rose Court Southsea STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Highlights in the year Progress on build activity Health and Safety remains a top priority New pioneering processes have and Safety apprenticeship scheme programme rolled out to our Health and Safety inspections Every region now has their own dedicated Health and Safety Adviser new site Pride in the Job awards construction site managers who achieve BSG awards for our pioneering work using drones need for work at height
Build initiative Strategic priority Build cycle management to maximise savings as well via the increased use of modern methods of critical controls introduced last year regions and is driving improvements improvements and some additional land renegotiation costs.
McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued accelerate timescales The story the cricket ground with various apertures and shared access with the In addition we had to accommodate to cricket matches during the season. the inclement weather.
As a result we delivered the scheme one month Freeman House Canterbury Kent
Lancaster House Ickenham Industryleading construction in a safe environment STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Unique sales and marketing Strategic aim 53% FY16 50% FY16 2296 KPIs 44 McCarthy and Stone plc Our Business Model continued Group Marketing and Customer Experience Director The story our teams with a detailed insight of the prospects allowing customers to move Jameson Gate Portobello Edinburgh Unique sales and marketing STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Strategic priorities Highlights in the year consistency across our product names.
Website redesign A new digital agency was also appointed to support search engine optimisation pay per click and online display activity Improved marketing materials A more consistent creative style was implemented during the year to deliver stronger customer response to media. driving improved conversion rates to visits.
Continued investment in sales training to sales performance and have set up a new national training academy. purchases the customers property.
Sales growth
Unit sales strategic target of selling more ahead of the prior year despite Average time to sell out higher than in the prior year due to the plan reservations and then reserve out remaining apartments within development of early relationships with are now in place in all regions.
McCarthy and Stone plc Customer experience Strategic aim c.1 4600 FY16 c.12000 CQC score 98% FY16 98% c.
1 0860 FY16 c.8400 c.60500 FY16 c.43200
Five star
Highlights in the year management services division remained focused approach ensuring its speed of results from a recent customer satisfaction survey demonstrated this attention to detail undertaken desire to deliver innovative new services which allowed Improvements in the handover process and aligning the handover process from the construction teams to provide a much enhanced customer experience.
All the regions have now implemented a new phased occupation protocol which looks at the development from our customers perspective.
CQC score to develop our people and improve our processes in order to provide a pay attention to the detail to make a always go the extra mile.
Our awards Initiative for our approach to ensuring Our Business Model continued STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Managing Director McCarthy and Stone Management Services Limited The story was a fantastic achievement. companionship and security.
She is rewarding role in her career so far.
Whilst sustaining an active and stimulating activities calendar straightforward the amount of underestimated especially when a deeply felt vocation to ensure the welfare and happiness of the homeowners under her care.
Whether organising a programme of stimulating social activities dealing with emotional distressing circumstances routine development empathy attention to detail and sense of fun shines through.
She is Sharon Gratton House Manager 48 McCarthy and Stone plc Our MediumTerm Strategy Creating an efficient and scalable business Sales growth
Operational
We aim to create a shortening the working capital cycle across our
We aim to meet our customers changing needs and expand our increasing capacity and ongoing innovation across our products STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts
3000 units per annum at an average selling price of c.
Legal completions new strategic relationship allowing access to the growing rental market upward momentum in forward order an increased level of sales releases completion chains sales releases occupations rental opportunity
3% improvement in ASP improvement in sales mix Achieved 4% revenue growth despite a weakened forward occupations in land and support growth and capture a larger share of the retiree market investment in investment in year despite seasonal cash in accordance with our strict site purchase criteria securing contract conditionality where appropriate units and represents sites sites sites momentum within our land sites McCarthy and Stone plc support planned investment and targeted growth
Exceeded our target to developments exceeding Average time taken to sell out increased slightly to rates and target in plan reservations occupations reductions in time our development initiative and target further reductions in average time taken from land start in place to support standardisation value engineering and cost management completed during the year delivering a Focus on tighter management consistent working practices and rolling modern methods of construction in order to reduce and pursue further margin improvement Ensure maximum is maintained across all developments Our MediumTerm Strategy continued STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts customers changing needs and expand our satisfaction customer satisfaction rating satisfaction rating 5 star 5 star 5 star satisfaction rating retained Successfully increased our management services we can meet the needs of customers at all new developments managed satisfaction rating increase capacity of management order to keep pace with growth in new developments
Lifestyle Living completions % of total Lifestyle Living now four new Lifestyle Living developments released for innovation in our core products ensuring that we are meeting the needs of our customers through Private opportunities and our Lifestyle Living margins and returns on capital
Underlying operating and underlying operating of the age and mix of units sold increased incentive costs some additional land renegotiation costs and our continued investment in our regional infrastructure with attractive margins initiative and focus on cash management achieve operational leverage result of a decrease in the increased level of investment position due to a disciplined approach to land and McCarthy and Stone plc Net cash
Financial Review
Revenue an increase in average selling prices from of sites.
Legal completions remained new strategic relationship allowing us to access the growing rental market.
See page 158 for glossary of terms STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts and mix of stock sold an increase in close out completion chains in light of the increased uncertainty in the and our continuing investment in regional operational infrastructure to support our growth strategy.
Capital structure and interest investment during the year.
Similarly on disciplined cash spend in response to continuing economic uncertainty and was achieved notwithstanding the negative cash impact of our new year of lower interest costs under the exceptional costs recognised within management incentives restructuring the statutory rate during the current Earnings and dividend
Risk management
In addition our distinct decisions in light of planning outcomes and latest market conditions prior Target returns together with the lower underlying will recover however once our growth on track as a result of our continuing investment for growth and allows us to Rowan Baker
Our risk management process
McCarthy and Stones governance assessment and mitigation at Board level operational controls and reporting policies and procedures
McCarthy and Stone plc
Risk Management
How we manage the risks to our business scorecards and regional risk registers to recognised an increase in the following a result of the recently announced government consultation on ground rents increased risk in relation to the timing skewed towards the year end which increases the risk in respect of forecasting accuracy and the timing further growth STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts provide early warning of potential issues regional levels.
Monitoring key business risks assessment of the principal risks facing every six months using a risk scoring methodology.
Each risk is categorised the likelihood or impact.
A rating is given no further attention if the risk is crystallising and therefore action should key risk indicator is reviewed for all risks whether the proposed actions are still predetermined criteria and form which approves each land purchase. development risk register.
A range managed throughout the construction managed and opportunities realised.
Internal control environment internal control environment are organisational structure culture and values corporate strategy and a key controls framework.
Organisational structure and regulatory matters.
Culture and values alignment with strategic aims and to actively encourage a culture that promotes teamwork involvement and empowerment at all levels of the Corporate strategy priorities as discussed on page 48.
McCarthy and Stone plc Principal Risks and Uncertainties economy.
A deterioration in the economic outlook scheme. negotiations continue. regional limits. market.
Reputation and customer ongoing management and personal care services.
Any could impact on reputation or customer satisfaction to in lower resale values which in turn can adversely impact internal surveys. up the sales process and maximising value on resale.
Sales products at attractive prices.
Any volume shortfall or pricing and pricing at a site and unit level and regularly review performance against expectation with regional introduced during the year for awarding discounts and incentives in excess of certain thresholds.
Government legislation consultations and seeks alternative solutions including assessment of lower and no ground rents and reviewed its land appraisal process accordingly.
Build programmes and build costs sales or reduced margins.
Independent assurance is provided through a dedicated commercial internal audit resource.
Framework agreements suppliers to provide greater certainty of price and supply.
In framework over higher risk more complex developments.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Viability statement In addition to making a going concern statement the assessment as our capital cycle from land completion to for the next three years.
Accordingly we consider it with the expected longevity of our owned land supply. taken to mitigate the impact of the downside. assessment period.
Increased No change growth plans.
Carrying value decline due to changes in the property market or other planning consent on land purchased unconditionally.
Health and site inspection process which routinely assesses and
Cyberdata relating to customer data surveying and valuation could McCarthy and Stone plc
Celebrating the opening of Hamon Court Hunstanton A responsible housebuilder Corporate Social Responsibility Report STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts developments.
It explains how we interact with our stakeholders namely our employees our customers our homeowners and the communities in which we operate.
As the UKs leading retirement the lives of our homeowners and creating a great place to work for our employees minimising the environmental impact of our activities engaging positively with the local communities in which our health and safety across all our developments to help older people lead healthy independent lives ensuring that they experience retirement living to the full It includes representatives from directly to the Executive Leadership implementing a framework for greenhouse gas emission reporting performance Planning and design We understand that our homeowners want to remain active within their community and near to local amenities our homeowners move no more apartment so our developments are clearly helping to meet a critical and growing local housing need.
We have strict criteria when purchasing land to ensure the location will suit the needs and aspirations of customers.
Examples of sites we have purchased include local authority surplus car parks We always seek to optimise the car ownership and usage amongst our homeowners means that we deliver a Community consultation We consult with local communities stakeholders on every new planning other interested parties a platform to voice their opinions many of which help to inform our designs and approach to construction. advising that they found them informative.
Construction
We are aware of the impact that the construction phase of our activities can have on the local community.
All of our sites must comply with internal policies around levels of noise cleanliness and presentation and some of our sites Minimising our impact on the environment Having a clear understanding of where waste we create during the construction and operation of our developments minimise our environmental impact.
We are committed to reducing the level with our waste management companies as with our suppliers to reduce waste further up the supply chain.
98.3% FY16 94.4% DID YOU KNOW 60 McCarthy and Stone plc Corporate Social Responsibility Report continued accordance with our regulatory electricity purchased for our own use emissions for the year ended Greenhouse gas emissions in tCO Electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for our own Electricity heat steam and cooling purchased for our own
Hierarchy.
We have also chosen to report our Greenhouse gas emissions in tCO approach approach 16382 11341 Reporting boundaries We consolidate our organisational control approach.
Emissions for all sites and developments. excluded from our disclosure.
Greenhouse gas emissions reporting Assumptions and estimations operational across all areas of reporting.
We have therefore used some assumptions in order to estimate our activity data.
For example we did not have records of vehicle fuel consumption In addition accurate records of diesel consumption at each site as well estimated using extrapolation of We monitor energy consumption on the developments we manage in detail to identify opportunities to improve energy performance.
We have now accurate data for construction sites consumption and energy use and to Total Emissions 2016 17 tCO Scope 1 Scope 2 locationbased STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Employees as at 31 August 2017
Directors of the Board percentage 71.4% 28.6% percentage 79.2% 20.8% 756 1508 2264 percentage 33.4% 66.6% 2017 Employees survey %
Stone as a place to work I feel valued for the work I do We design our developments to maximise the performance of the It prioritises the largest item of temperature occupants to operate complex We employ a range of methods across Installing insulation in walls and loft spaces openings and shades Addition of photovoltaic cells to We also listen and respond to customer improving kitchens is a good example Homes Survey was related to kitchens with storage space the most common criticism.
As a result we have improved implemented an optimised design to communities at the planning stage we also engage with them during the construction phase.
Activities include visiting local schools or organising visits to our sites to encourage children to understand the dangers of construction sites.
We recognise that attracting and if we provide the right working environment appropriate reward and recognition schemes and opportunities for personal development and training.
Employee communications We communicate with our employees through a variety of channels including strategy give employees an opportunity 1 3500 FY16 c.8200 DID YOU
Employee survey Our values are
Responsibility
Innovation
Determination
McCarthy and Stone plc employees are the standards to which communicate and the way we act.
PRIDE awards DID YOU
NHBC Pride in the Job awards We are extremely pleased that our standards are recognised externally.
Apprentices and trainees our construction sites whilst studying Apprentice Scheme partnering with various colleges.
We hope that once to alleviate national shortages in contracts in other departments such as Sales Finance and Legal.
We have an ongoing commitment to training and personal and professional development.
Performance against a tailored personal development plan.
Improvement programmes focusing on provide an opportunity for all employees Student placement scheme through a student placement scheme
As part of the scheme have the opportunity to spend a Corporate Social Responsibility Report continued
Children and teachers from Hucknall Day Nursery visit Whyburn Court Nottingham STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts many students competing for employees after they graduate.
Four new students started their placement years with us in August completed the scheme with us since it was launched with several scheme participants continuing to work for us after completing their degrees.
Some have risen to senior roles in the organisation including two who are now regional managing directors.
Employee involvement Employees are encouraged to participate in the success of the schemes which are open to all SAYE savings contracts are for either Diversity and inclusivity We are committed to promoting policies to ensure that our employees are gender sex age colour race or ethnic origin.
We give full consideration to applications for employment from people with to continue the employment of that training and career development We have recently reviewed and updated Human rights We support the United Nations and have policies and processes in place to ensure that we act in accordance with principles in relation to areas such as was adopted during the year.
In addition the Health and Safety As well as the central team who determine our health and safety regional Health and Safety advisers. their colleagues health and safety.
All work on one of our sites and all role including understanding the health and safety implications of the work they perform. statistics.
House Manager and Estate of the Year awards to recognise the in managing our developments.
Nominations for Katrina commented on how supportive she is to everyone around her how fun she is and how she has a real passion for working with people.
She commented on how coming into work was not like work at nominations for his fantastic work enthusiasm and positivity McCarthy and Stone plc actively encouraging transparency of this area. of excellence in health and safety.
Health and Safety commendations award for our pioneering work using the need for work at height.
We also All our house managers and estate assessments of minor trips and falls.
Any incident involving a homeowner on one of our developments merits a and Safety team with a view to ensuring that the incident is not repeated. seating arrangements. to tailor the courses to our needs.
We training courses for contractors.
In total Living in a McCarthy and Stone development Living Plus developments have a house any issues that our homeowners may and communal environment where the homeowners can if they wish seek companionship and make new friends. year of each new development.
We are very proud of the work that do in promoting social interaction averaging more than seven events per development per month.
Social events are organised in our homeowners lounges and range from music evenings exercise and craft classes to local interest talks and events.
Our homeowners tell us what second homeowners satisfaction survey contacting homeowners in undertook the survey to see how surveys which are undertaken at eight weeks and at nine months. management of our developments.
Helping our homeowners to of smart electricity meters across of electricity used within shared had these smart meters installed I feel safe and secure in my property I have good access to local amenities and facilities I make use of the communal areas to socialise Corporate Social Responsibility Report continued FY16 16500 for 8 months DID YOU KNOW STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts homeowners with energy savings when electricity is cheaper windows Becoming DementiaFriendly that has and sector professionals on how housing its design and supporting services can help improve and document that will inspire the housing to support people with dementia. lives of people living with dementia. architects and interior designers. support for their loved ones. for people living with dementia.
We are striving to ensure that all of and Stone guide that promotes a technology solution for the needs person to leave a development safe in the knowledge that we can track dementia the more we can do to help and understand the disease.
Appropriate training is therefore vital and we have redesigned and lengthened the dementia awareness course teams and our house managers to of dementia and the response needed to support people living with dementia in our developments. that understanding into action. life for people living with dementia.
Image
Images
South West Region Sky Dive North London Charity Walk North West Region at Haydock Races McCarthy and Stone plc Anniversary charity partnership fantastic work it does in helping in cycle rides charity walks sponsored events marathons and our fundraising challenge and have organised events across our developments during the year.
Corporate Social Responsibility Report continued We are delighted that we surpassed and money still rolling in we are tremendously proud of and grateful for the achievements and support of our employees our homeowners and our suppliers who have all DID YOU KNOW STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts CSR KPIs
79.6% na 5.6% 98.7% Smart meters in our developments 22% 14.3% Percentage of female employees 63.8% 45.9%
The reduction is due to a recalibration of the scoring criteria to provide more meaningful feedback The percentage has reduced post yearend to 25% following the appointment of John Carter Includes RIDDORs in respect of subcontractors at our sites Clive Fenton Corporate Governance McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Image captions View of Poole Harbour from Horizons Beacon Court Fife Mr and Mrs Mangell Elm Tree Court Huntingdon Board of Directors McCarthy and Stone plc in central London.
Committees
Clive Fenton within the sector.
Committees
John White Group NonExecutive Chairman McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
John Tonkiss
Rowan Baker McCarthy and Stone plc Board of Directors continued Frank Nelson Senior Independent Director
Committees
Mike Parsons Independent NonExecutive Director McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
John Carter Independent NonExecutive Director Geeta Nanda OBE Independent NonExecutive Director
I am pleased to present the Corporate Governance section of our FY17 Annual Report.
We believe that a solid corporate governance framework is essential for upholding our core business values and delivering our strategy and it is my responsibility to promote high standards of governance and business practice throughout the organisation We continue to strive to ensure that our practices and www. rc.
John White Group NonExecutive Chairman
Governance
McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Compliance with the Code of the Code.
A.
Leadership
The role of the Board A1 Matters reserved for the Board include and control The role of the Executive Leadership Team is to support implementing Group strategy and managing the daytoday operations of the business 76 McCarthy and Stone plc Division of responsibilities A2 A3 of the Group are relevant to deliver shareholder value and to NonExecutive Directors A4 shareholders.
Board composition and independence B1 Corporate Governance continued Patrick Hole Group General Counsel and Company Secretary
Director
Board
Risk and
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Number of meetings John White 99 na 33 11 Clive Fenton 99 na na 11 John Tonkiss 99 na na na Rowan Baker 77 na na na Geeta Nanda 89 33 23 11 Frank Nelson 99 33 33 11 Mike Parsons 99 33 33 11 Nick Maddock 22 na na na McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS considered the independence of the individual Directors Appointments and commitment B2 B3 B7 Induction development and support B4 B5 Board evaluation B6
Accountability
Reporting C1 In order to assist the Directors in their ongoing understanding of the Group some of the Board meetings are held at the regional for the Directors to meet local management and to visit some of the Groups developments of the Directors has committed hisher duties as evidenced by the high attendance at all the Board and relevant Committee meetings throughout the year Risk management and internal controls C2 Audit and Auditor C3
Remuneration
E.
Relations with shareholders John White Group NonExecutive Chairman McCarthy and Stone plc Corporate Governance continued The Risk and Audit Committee together with the Internal Audit risks facing the Group and has established systems for evaluating and managing those risks McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Board of Directors Chair John White Risk and Audit Committee Chair Frank Nelson Executive Leadership Team Chair Clive Fenton the Group.
Remuneration Committee Chair Mike Parsons Group Investment Committee Chair Gary Day Nomination Committee Chair John White Health and Safety Committee Chair John Tonkiss Disclosure Committee Chair Clive Fenton CSR Committee Chair Gary Day Allotment Committee Chair Clive Fenton Principal Board Committees Executive Leadership Team Principal Executive Committees Governance Structure and Delegation of Authority Maintaining the right balance of skills and knowledge is key to achieving the Groups strategic objectives.
One of the main activities during the year was the selection and appointment Membership and tenure Responsibilities and terms of reference John White Nomination Committee Chairman
Committee Report McCarthy and Stone plc Activities during FY17 Evaluation process and results Board composition and succession planning Director Role Date of appointment to the Board John White Chairman 23 September 2013 Clive Fenton 17 February 2014 John Tonkiss 5 November 2015 Rowan Baker 6 January 2017 Mike Parsons NonExecutive Director 4 November 2013 Frank Nelson NonExecutive Director 18 November 2013 Geeta Nanda NonExecutive Director 1 April 2015 John Carter NonExecutive Director 1 October 2017 successor.
Retirement and reelection of Directors
John White Nomination Committee Chairman McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Frank Nelson Risk and Audit Committee Chairman Risk and Audit Committee Report The key responsibilities of the Risk and Audit Committee are to review the integrity of the Groups annual and half that it has carried out its duties in the year under a high standard Membership and tenure Independent Director McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Responsibilities and terms of reference internal audit function site aboutuscorporategovernance Activities during FY17 the audit with Deloitte our external auditor and reviewed of the Group.
We also considered and concluded that the and the scope of the external audit in relation to the STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS External auditor external auditor its fee and the scope of the annual audit.
Auditor independence and performance McCarthy and Stone plc Risk and Audit Committee Report continued The Board of Directors recognises its overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal controls There is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and Shared equity receivables Cost capitalisation of overheads Risk management and internal controls McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Internal audit services selection process.
Whistleblowing fraud and antibribery and corruption Frank Nelson Risk and Audit Committee Chairman the process Policy on nonaudit services Mike Parsons Remuneration Committee Chairman
Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Committee Chairmans Annual Statement As Chairman of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present on behalf of the Board our Directors Remuneration
This report lays out the core elements of our policy and its implementation during FY17 McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Remuneration policy site Remuneration Committee Major remuneration events during FY17 Continued development of our Board on his departure.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Determination of the FY17 bonus payments was earned.
Remuneration approach for FY18 NonExecutive Directors fees FY18 bonus objectives McCarthy and Stone plc
Directors Remuneration Report continued
The Group continued to maintain a cash balance of 30.7m at the year end.
Strong cash generation resulted The continued focus on homeowner satisfaction has led to us in the twelfth consecutive year being awarded the Five Star rating for customer satisfaction by the HBF McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Changes to the FY18 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP resolution.
Mike Parsons Remuneration Committee Chairman
At a glance
FY17 outcomes Total Remuneration for our Executive Directors FY17 FY16 Clive Fenton  CEO 628024 John Tonkiss  COO 462231 324617 Rowan Baker  CFO na Nick Maddock  former CFO 133702 364933 Annual bonus outcomes Annual bonus outcomes for our Executive Directors FY17 FY16 Clive Fenton  CEO 143412 61750 John Tonkiss  COO 88800 36400 Rowan Baker  CFO na Nick Maddock  former CFO Equity exposure of the Board Clive Fenton John Tonkiss Rowan Baker Shareholding requirement 200% 200% 200% 564% 319% 3% Value ofgain on interests over shares i.
McCarthy and Stone plc Directors Remuneration Report continued McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Implementation of the Remuneration Policy in FY18 Base salary For FY18 the base salaries for the Executive Directors will be 1 November 2017 to recognise his strong performance and the increased responsibility following Rowan was promoted to the Board in January 2017 on a salary below the targeted policy level.
The
2017 to recognise her strong performance and development in the role and her critical role in delivering the Groups strategy.
In accordance with our remuneration policy the Committee has keep her salary under review.
Pension in lieu of pension will be 20% of gross base salary. and a car or car allowance.
Annual Bonus Plan ABP Cash and deferred shares For FY18 the maximum bonus opportunity is 150% of salary.
The performance conditions and their weightings for the FY18 annual bonus are as follows Group customer satisfaction 10% Group land exchanges 10% Onethird of any bonus earned will be in the form of deferred shares which will be deferred for three years.
The precise details of the targets themselves are deemed to be commercially sensitive it appropriate to disclose annual bonus targets during the year.
However details of the performance targets will be disclosed on a retrospective basis in next years
Remuneration Report.
The Annual Bonus Plan ABP contains clawback and malus provisions.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP The performance conditions for the FY18 LTIP awards are earnings per share EPS return on capital employed ROCE and relative total shareholder return TSR against the comparator housing group and FTSE 250 excl.
Financial Services and investment trusts.
All three measures are assessed over a threeyear performance period.
For the achievement of threshold performance 25% of the element will vest with straightline vesting in between to maximum performance.
The LTIP contains clawback and malus provisions.
Please see the full Remuneration Policy as set out on pages 63 to 74 in our FY16 Annual Report for further details.
In FY18 an LTIP award up to a maximum of 150% of salary will be awarded to the Executive
As stated in the Chairmans letter the FY18 LTIP will have a twoyear post vesting holding period during which executives cannot sell vested shares other than for tax purposes.
McCarthy and Stone plc FY18 LTIP targets The previous LTIP performance measures and targets were set in line with market practice investor expectations and the mediumterm business plan following the IPO.
In light of the current economic and political uncertainty the Remuneration Committee concluded that a review of the current structure was appropriate from a business perspective and necessary in order to maintain other senior executives over the near future.
The Remuneration Committee decided to retain the existing performance measures EPS TSR and ROCE which focus executives on maximising returns to shareholders through growth in previous awards threshold performance will result in 25% vesting against each element with 100% vesting at or above the maximum performance target.
However the Committee proposes to amend the weightings and targets for the FY18 awards.
The FY18 LTIP proposed performance measures weightings and targets are outlined in the table below alongside those operated in respect of the previous LTIP award in FY17.
Performance measures FY17 weightings and targets FY18 weightings and targets Earnings Per Share EPS Weighting 33.3% FY19 EPS Threshold 21.8p Max 27.8p Weighting 37.5% FY20 EPS Threshold 21.8p Max 27.8p Relative Total Shareholder Return TSR Weighting 33.3% Measured against housebuilder peer group Threshold equal to index Max index  7.5% p.
Weighting 25.0% Measured against two groups equally weighted housebuilder peer index and FTSE 250 constituents Threshold equal to index  median of FTSE 250 Max index  7.5% p.
Return On Capital Employed ROCE Weighting 33.3% Threshold 22.0% Max 25.0% Weighting 37.5% Threshold 20.0% Max 25.0% Changes to FY18 performance measures and rationale for change Increase EPS weighting to 37.5% the outcome The EPS targets are set based on the threeyear business plan and analyst consensus Increase ROCE weighting to 37.5% and reduce threshold target to 20% business and its business plan as set out on IPO.
Therefore it is appropriate to increase the weighting of this measure The Committee believes that the maximum target of 25% ROCE remains a suitably stretching target and that achieving this within the performance period would represent exceptional performance and hence justify full vesting of this element of the LTIP.
In order to improve alignment with the Companys business plan for FY20 the threshold target will be set at 20%.
The Committee considers this level of performance to be realistic yet challenging and representative of the Companys mediumterm business plan Directors Remuneration Report continued McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Reduce Relative TSR weighting to 25% and split comparator group into two groups Our largest shareholders have a strong preference for shareholder return measures and appropriate to retain TSR as a performance measure housebuilders performance other housebuilders have recovered largely as a result of the Governments helptobuy scheme which is not applicable to the Company.
Notwithstanding this the Committee feels that housebuilders remain an appropriate comparator group for TSR but that this should be balanced against the broader market by the introduction of a FTSE 250 comparator group.
The use of two peer groups would provide a more holistic assessment of performance against both a cyclical industry and performance against the broader market.
Constituents of our housebuilder peer group are set out on page 95.
The Committee believe that the additional two year holding period and the new weightings and targets will create the right balance between supporting a successful execution of the threeyear business plan and incentivising the Executive Directors.
NED fees The fees for FY18 for the NonExecutive Director roles are Chairman 230000 Board fee 54600 Senior Independent Directors additional fee 10000 Committee Chairman fee per Committee 10000 Executive Directors remuneration audited Name Period
Annual bonus LTIP 4
Total
Clive Fenton FY17 30257 143412 None FY16 467617 27407 61750 None 71250 628024 John Tonkiss FY17 24626 88800 None 52138 462231 FY16 229445 15782 36400 None 42990 324617 Nick Maddock FY17 8231  None 133702 FY16 288781 21156  None 54996 364933 Rowan Baker FY17 151641 6183 None Base salary Executive Director Position Period Annual salary Clive Fenton John Tonkiss Rowan Baker 6.01.17  31.08.17 225000 Nick Maddock 1.09.16  6.01.17 300000 Annual bonus audited McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report on Remuneration McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Performance conditions
Performance targets required
Actual performance Percentage of maximum performance achieved
Fenton
John
Tonkiss
Rowan
Baker
Underlying operating 70.0%
Target
Maximum
17 .5% 35.0% 70.0% 96.2m 0.0% 10.0%
Target
Maximum
2.5% 5.0% 10.0% 49.2m 82.0% 59694 36962 12334
10.0%
Target
Maximum
2.5% 5.0% 10.0% 3164 55.0% 40039 24792 8273
10.0%
Target
Maximum
91.0% 93.0% 95.0% 2.5% 5.0% 10.0% 93.4% 60.0% 43679 27046 9024 Total 100.0% 143412 88800 LTIP awards audited Measure Weighting Threshold performance Maximum performance EPS 13rd 21.8 pence 27.8 pence FY19 ROCE 13rd 22% 25% Relative TSR 13rd Equal to Index Index  7.5% p.
Executive Director
Number of shares awarded Basis of award granted % of basic salary Face value of award 2 % of award vesting at threshold
Performance period 3 Clive Fenton 22.12.16 471916 150% 726750 25% 100% 3 years John Tonkiss 22.12.16 292208 150% 450000 25% 100% 3 years Rowan Baker na 79% 25% 25% 100% 100% 3 years 3 years Performance targets Annual bonus value achieved 96 McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report on Remuneration continued Pension entitlements audited NonExecutive Directors remuneration NonExecutive Directors Period Fees Total Role John White FY17 230000 2670 232670 FY16 209083 2334 211417 Group NonExecutive Chairman Frank Nelson FY17 73000 107 73107 FY16 68360  68360 Senior Independent Director Mike Parsons FY17 63000  63000 FY16 60322  60322 Independent NonExecutive Director Geeta Nanda FY17 53000  53000 FY16 52283  52283 Independent NonExecutive Director NonExecutive Directors fees Role Fees Chairman 230000 NonExecutive Directors Board fee 53000 Senior Independent Directors additional fee 10000 Committee Chairmans additional fee per Committee 10000 Directors shareholdings and share interests audited Directors interests in share awards audited
Plan Date of grant
Vested during the year Lapsed during the year
Vesting date Expiry date Clive Fenton  CEO nil nil John Tonkiss nil nil Rowan Baker nil nil nil Nick Maddock nil lapsed lapsed lapsed lapsed McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 8tel160 Nov 2015 Feb 2016 May 2016 Aug 2016 Nov 2016 Feb 2017 May 2017 Aug 2017 Directors shareholdings audited
Shares owned
Shares not subject to performance conditions
Options
LTIPs
Options
Sharesave
Shares owned as % of salary
Executive Directors Clive Fenton John Tonkiss Rowan Baker Nick Maddock na na 564.1% 319.3% 2.8% na
Yes
No na NonExecutive Directors John White Frank Nelson Mike Parsons Geeta Nanda na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na lapsed on that date Payments to past Directors audited External directorships Comparison of overall performance and pay FTSE 250 McCarthy and Stone 98 McCarthy and Stone plc FY17 FY16 Annual bonus payment level achieved % of maximum opportunity 10.0% LTIP vesting level achieved % of maximum opportunity 0% 0% Statement of considerations of employment conditions elsewhere in the Group Base salary Annual bonus 2% 10% 132% Other Group employees 3% 14% 146% Relative importance of spend on pay FY17 FY16 % changes Overall spend on pay including Executive Directors 80.0m 69.3m 13% 24.2m 20% % change FY16 to FY17 Annual Report on Remuneration continued McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consideration by the Directors of matters relating to Directors remuneration site aboutuscorporategovernance Adviser to the Remuneration Committee McCarthy and Stone plc Shareholder engagement and statement of voting at the AGM FY17 Resolution Votes for Votes against Total votes cast excluding withheld Votes withheld Directors Remuneration Policy Number of votes cast Percentage of votes cast 92.8% 7.2% 344898593 3773564
Annual Report on Remuneration
Number of votes cast Percentage of votes cast 99.5% 0.5% 347107875 1564283 Annual Report on Remuneration continued McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Summary of remuneration policy Element of remuneration How it supports the Companys short and longterm strategic objectives Operation Maximum opportunities
Base salary Provides a base level of remuneration to support recruitment and retention of Executive Directors with the necessary experience and expertise to deliver the Groups strategy.
Set on appointment and reviewed annually or when there is a change in position or responsibility.
When determining an appropriate level of salary the Committee considers Remuneration practices within the Group The general performance of the Group Salaries within the ranges paid by the companies in the comparator group used for remuneration benchmarking Any change in scope role and responsibilities The economic environment Individuals who are recruited or promoted to the Board may on occasion have their salaries set below the targeted policy level until they become established in their role.
In such cases subsequent increases in salary may be higher than the general rises for employees until the target positioning is achieved.
The Committee ensures that maximum salary levels are set in line with companies of a similar size to McCarthy and Stone operating in a similar sector.
The companies in the comparator group are the constituents of the FTSE 250 and sector peer organisations of a similar size.
The Committee intends to review the comparator groups each year and may add or remove companies from the group as it considers appropriate.
Any changes to the comparator group will be in the section headed Implementation of Remuneration Policy in the In general salary increases for Executive Directors are in line with the increase for employees.
The Company sets out in the section headed Implementation of Remuneration Policy Executive Director salaries for that year and the following year.
None. package in line with practice relative to its comparator group to enable the Company to recruit and retain Executive Directors with the experience and expertise to deliver the Groups strategy.
Executive Directors typically receive private medical insurance life insurance and a car or car allowance.
The Committee The Committee recognises the need is able to support the objective of attracting and retaining personnel in order to deliver the Group strategy. allowances on recruitment.
The maximum is set at the cost of providing the
Pensions Provides a pension provision in line with practice relative to its comparator group to enable the Company to recruit and retain Executive Directors with the experience and expertise to deliver the Groups strategy.
Personal Pension scheme.
The
Executive Directors are entitled to receive a maximum employer contribution into the Group Personal Pension scheme or a salary supplement in lieu of pension of 20% of basic salary per annum.
The maximum contribution into the Group Personal Pension scheme or a salary supplement in lieu of pension is 20% of gross basic salary.
The Company sets out in the section headed Implementation of Remuneration Policy in the contributions for that year for each of the Executive Directors.
None.
McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report on Remuneration continued Element of remuneration How it supports the Companys short and longterm strategic objectives Operation Maximum opportunities
Annual and
Bonus
Plan ABP The ABP provides a the Executive Directors linked to achievement in delivering goals that are closely aligned with the Groups strategy and the creation of value for shareholders.
In particular the ABP supports the Companys objectives allowing the setting of annual targets based on the business strategy at the time meaning that a wider range of performance metrics can be used that are relevant and achievable.
The Committee has discretion to defer part of the bonus earned in shares under the ABP.
The advantage of deferral is Increased alignment between Executive Directors and shareholders created through deferred shares and the increased equity stake of management in the Company Vesting of deferred shares are subject to an Executive Directors continuing employment which lockin The Committee determines the bonus to be awarded following the end of the The Company will set out in the section headed Implementation of Remuneration Policy year the nature of the targets and their weighting for each year.
Details of the performance conditions targets and their level of satisfaction for the year being reported on is set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
The Committee can determine that part of the bonus earned under the ABP is delivered as an award of shares.
The maximum value of deferred shares is 50% of the bonus earned.
The portion of bonus earned to be deferred into Company shares for the year being reported on will be set out in the
Annual Report on Remuneration.
The main terms of these awards are Minimum deferral period of three years during which no performance conditions will apply The participants continued employment at the end of the deferral period unless heshe is a good leaver The Committee may award dividend equivalents on those shares to the participants to the extent that they vest.
The Committee has the discretion to apply a holding period of two years post vesting of deferred shares.
The ABP contains clawback and malus provisions.
Please refer to page 69 of the 2016 Annual Report for further details.
The maximum bonus including any part of the bonus deferred into shares deliverable under the ABP does not exceed 150% of a participants annual base salary.
Percentage of bonus maximum earned for levels of performance Threshold 25% of maximum bonus On target 50% of maximum bonus Maximum 100% of maximum bonus The annual bonus will be paid in cash and deferred shares.
An award under the ABP is and strategicoperational performancepersonal performance conditions and targets measured over A minimum of 50% of the bonus shall be based on measures.
The Committee will determine the bonus to be delivered following the end of The Committee is of the opinion that given the commercial sensitivity arising in relation to the detailed bonus disclosing precise targets for the ABP in advance would not be in shareholder interests.
Targets performance achieved and awards made will be published at the end of the performance period so shareholders can fully assess the basis for any payouts under the ABP.
In exceptional circumstances the Committee retains the discretion to Change the performance measures and targets and the weighting attached to the performance measures and targets partway through a performance year material event which causes the Committee to believe the original measures weightings and targets are no longer appropriate Make downward or upward adjustments to the amount of bonus earned resulting from the application of the performance measures if the Committee believes that the bonus outcomes are not of business performance Any adjustments or discretion applied by the Committee will be fully disclosed in the following years Annual report on Remuneration.
McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Element of remuneration How it supports the Companys short and longterm strategic objectives Operation Maximum opportunities
LTIP The purpose of the LTIP is to incentivise and reward Executive Directors in relation to longterm performance and achievement of Group strategy.
This will better align Executive Directors interests with the longterm interests of the Group and act as a retention mechanism.
The use of relative TSR measures the success of the implementation of the Groups strategy in delivering a return above our peer group.
The use of threeyear EPS and ROCE ensures Executive Directors are focused on sustainable performance.
Awards are granted annually to Executive Directors in the form of a conditional share award or a nilcost option.
Details of the performance conditions for grants made in the year and the future in the Annual Report on
Awards will vest at the end of a threeyear period subject to The Executive Directors continued employment at the date of vesting Satisfaction of the performance conditions The Committee may award dividend equivalents on awards to the extent that these vest.
The Committee has the discretion to apply a holding period of two years post vesting of LTIP awards.
The LTIP contains clawback and malus provisions.
Please refer to page 69 of the 2016 Annual Report for further details.
Normal annual maximum value of 150% of annual base salary based on the market value at the date of grant set in accordance with the rules of the LTIP.
In exceptional circumstances the Committee may grant an award with a maximum of 200% of annual base salary.
25% of the award will vest for threshold performance 100% of the award will vest for maximum performance There is straight line vesting between these points.
The performance conditions for the FY17 LTIP awards are cumulative EPS ROCE and TSR.
The weightings of which are outlined on page 95.
The Committee may change the balance of the measures for subsequent awards as appropriate.
No material change will be made to the type of performance conditions without prior shareholder consultation.
In exceptional circumstances the Committee retains the discretion to Vary substitute or waive the performance conditions applying to LTIP awards if the Committee considers it appropriate and that the new performance conditions are deemed reasonable and are not to satisfy than the original conditions Make downward or upward adjustments to the amount vesting under the LTIP resulting from the application of the performance measures if the Committee believes that the outcomes are not a fair business performance 104 McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report on Remuneration continued Element of remuneration How it supports the Companys short and longterm strategic objectives Operation Maximum opportunities
All employee share plans SIP and
The SIP and Sharesave are all employee share ownership plans which have been designed to encourage all employees to become shareholders in the Company and thereby align their interests with shareholders.
Executive Directors are eligible to participate in both the SIP and Sharesave.
The Executive Directors are entitled to participate in any other all employee arrangement implemented by the Company.
The maximum levels of participation set by legislation from time to time.
In accordance with the legislation the Company may impose objective performance conditions andor length of servicehours workedlevel of remuneration to determine the level of awards made under the SIP.
Minimum shareholding requirement The Committee has adopted formal shareholding guidelines that will encourage the Executive Directors to build Adherence to these guidelines is a condition of continued participation in the equity incentive arrangements.
This requirement ensures that the interests of Executive Directors and those of shareholders are closely aligned.
Currently the requirement is for all Executive Directors to build up a shareholding equal to 200% of salary.
The Committee retains the discretion to increase the shareholding requirements.
Executive Directors contracts and letters of appointment for Chairman and NonExecutive Directors Executive Directors
Date of service contract
Notice periods Compensation provisions for early termination From company Director Clive Fenton 30 January 2014 Rolling 12 months 12 months At the discretion of the
John Tonkiss 21 January 2014 Rolling 12 months 6 months Rowan Baker 6 January 2017 Rolling 12 months 6 months NonExecutive Directors Name Date of letter of appointment John White 24 September 2013 Frank Nelson 11 November 2013 Mike Parsons 28 October 2013 Geeta Nanda 4 March 2015 John Carter 18 September 2017 McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Illustrations of the application of the Remuneration Policy Element Description Minimum Target Maximum
Included Included Included Annual bonus Annual bonus including deferred shares Maximum opportunity of 150% of salary No annual variable 50% of maximum bonus 100% of maximum bonus LTIP Award under the LTIP Maximum annual award of 150% of salary No multiple year variable 50% of the maximum award 100% of the maximum award Mike Parsons Remuneration Committee Chairman shareholders.
Articles of Association Share capital and control and cancelled.
McCarthy and Stone plc Directors Report Corporate governance statement Crossreferences to other sections of the document Subject matter Section and page reference Employee diversity and inclusivity Strategic report page 63 Employee involvement Strategic report page 63 Greenhouse gas emissions Strategic report page 60 Likely future developments Strategic report pages 56 and 57
Directors
McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Name of notifying entitynature of holding Number of shares disclosed % interest in voting rights Anchorage Capital Master 140595070 26.17 Prudential plc group of companies indirect 7023518613.07 The Goldman Sachs Group Inc indirect 54462421 10.14 Aviva plc and its subsidiaries direct 14851688 2.76 provisions Directors insurance and indemnities the Directors.
Political donations Financial instruments Resolutions to allot issue and buy back shares Substantial shareholdings Name of notifying entitynature of holding
Anchorage Capital Master 134695393 25.07 Prudential plc group of companies indirect 55140163 10.26 The Goldman Sachs Group Inc indirect 52870054 9.84 Aviva plc and subsidiaries indirect 3024245 0.57 Aviva plc and subsidiaries direct 31165914 5.80 Canada Pension Plan Investment Board direct 29084092 5.41 Royal London Asset Management Limited direct 27045491 5.03 McCarthy and Stone plc Going concern Disclosure of information to the auditor and Annual General Meeting Patrick Hole Company Secretary Directors Report continued McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial statements and accounting records transactions other events and conditions on the Fair balanced and understandable Responsibility statement Clive Fenton Rowan Baker Statement of Directors Responsibilities 1 Financial Statements McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts
Stukeley Court Stamford Horizons Poole Mr and Mrs Page Stiperstones Court Shrewsbury STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Independent Auditors Report to the Members of McCarthy and Stone plc
Basis for opinion Summary of our audit approach McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Conclusions relating to principal risks going concern and viability statement Key audit matters Key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Key observations Cost capitalisation of overheads Refer to page 84 Report of the Risk and Audit Committee and pages 128 and 129 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty.
Independent Auditors Report
McCarthy and Stone plc Key audit matter How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter Key observations Cost capitalisation of overheads continued
Shared equity receivables Refer to page 84 Report of the Risk and Audit Committee pages 128 and 129 Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty Discount rate Presentation of Financial Statements report in the valuation of shared McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our application of materiality An overview of the scope of our audit assets 2% 2% 116 McCarthy and Stone plc
Independent Auditors Report
Other information the audit Responsibilities of the Directors due to fraud or error. www. rc.
Use of our report McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts Report on other legal and regulatory requirements Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Directors remuneration records and returns.
Other matters Auditor tenure Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the Risk and Audit Committee Gregory Culshaw ACA Senior Statutory Auditor For and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
Continuing operations
Cost of sales Other operating income Administrative expenses Other operating expenses
Exceptional administrative expenses Finance income Finance expense Income tax expense Owners of the Company Noncontrolling interest Earnings per share Basic p per share Diluted p per share Adjusted measures McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
Assets
Noncurrent assets
Intangible assets Property plant and equipment Investments in joint ventures Investment properties Trade and other receivables Total noncurrent assets 104.4 107.5 Current assets
Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total current assets 810.6 812.3 Total assets 919.8 Equity and liabilities Capital and reserves Share capital Share premium Retained earnings Equity attributable to owners of the Company 744.7 697.3 Noncontrolling interests 1.0 0.8 Total equity 745.7 698.1 Current liabilities Trade and other payables UK corporation tax Shortterm borrowings Land payables Total current liabilities 167.7 Noncurrent liabilities Longterm borrowings Deferred tax liability Total liabilities 221.7 Total equity and liabilities 919.8 Clive Fenton Rowan Baker
Director Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
Share capital
Retained earnings
Total equity Balance at 1 September 2015 381.1 56.4 104.3 541.8 0.7 542.5 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with owners of the Company Issue of ordinary shares Capital reduction of share capital and share premium Sharebased payments Share issue related costs
Balance at 31 August 2016 43.0 100.8 553.5 0.8 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with owners of the Company Sharebased payments
Share issue related costs  tax credit Balance at 31 August 2017 43.0 101.6 600.1 744.7 1.0 745.7
McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Cash Flow Statement
Investing activities Net cash used in investing activities 1.0 1.8 Financing activities Dividends paid Net decrease  increase in cash and cash equivalents 78.3 62.1 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 56.9 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 40.7 119.0 Basis of preparation Going concern Basis of consolidation
Revenue recognition McCarthy and Stone plc Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued Unit sales Other operating income Finance income Cost of sales referral fees.
Exceptional items
Taxation
Current tax Deferred tax Tangible and intangible assets Property plant and equipment Intangible assets  brand Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued Internallygenerated intangible assets  research and development expenditure costs and an appropriate portion of relevant overheads.
Impairment of tangible and intangible assets excluding goodwill Joint ventures is included within the cost of land purchased as a result of the option exercise. the value thereof.
Cash and cash equivalents Financial instruments Financial assets Financial assets at FVTPL otherwise arise Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued Shared equity receivables Loans and receivables Financial liabilities and equity Equity instruments Financial liabilities Landrelated promissory notes Sharebased payment schemes fair value.
Outlook for adoption of future standards new and amended Financial Instruments Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Leases
Leases
Statement of Cash Flows Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations.
Property Plant and Equipment Intangible Assets.
Presentation of Financial Statements.
Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements.
Sale of Contribution of Assets between an Investor and its Associate of Joint Venture.
Sharebased Payments.
2012  2014 Cycle.
Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty Critical judgements in applying the Groups accounting policies Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty continued Assumptions and other sources of estimation uncertainty Fair value of shared equity receivables Cost capitalisation of overheads Change of estimate
Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Unit sales FRI revenue Segmental analysis Operating Segments Continuing operations Year ended 31 August
Amortisation of intangibles Depreciation of property plant and equipment Operating lease rental expense Cost of inventories recognised as an expense Change in fair value of derivatives Movement in inventory provision including partexchange properties
Year ended 31 August 2017 Notes
Exceptional
Administrative costs Adjusted cost
Underlying
Finance income Finance expense Income tax expense comprehensive income 74.4  1.6 76.0 Earnings per share Basic p per share Diluted p per share Year ended 31 August 2016 Notes
Exceptional
Administrative costs Adjusted cost
Underlying
Finance income Finance expense Income tax expense comprehensive income 73.5 9.3 1.7 84.5 Earnings per share Basic p per share Diluted p per share Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS continued Auditors remuneration Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Fees payable to the Groups auditor Annual audit Transaction related audit and advisory services Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Wages and salaries Social security costs Other pension costs Sharebased payments Termination payments Continuing operations Year ended 31 August
Number
House managers 102tel2145 1968 Directors emoluments Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Wages and salaries Social security costs Sharebased payments Other pension costs Other operating income Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Net rental income Other income Noncore business revenue Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Change in fair value of shared equity receivables Interest income received Finance expense Continuing operations Year ended 31 August Loans and overdraft fees Promissory note interest and fees Fair value movement on interest rate cap
Notes
Corporation tax charges Current year Adjustments in respect of prior years Deferred tax charges Current year 20 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Tax continued Tax charge at the UK corporation tax rate of 19.58% 2016 20.00% Adjustments in respect of previous periods Other reconciling items Tax charge for the year 17.7 19.4 Earnings per share 2017 2016 Weighted average no.
Basic earnings per share p 13.8 13.9 2017 2016 Weighted average number of shares m Adjustments for Shares used to determine diluted EPS m Diluted earnings per share p
Cost
At 1 September 2015 and 31 August 2016 and 2017 41.7 Carrying amount At 1 September 2015 and 31 August 2016 and 2017 41.7 Intangible assets
Software
Total
Cost
At 1 September 2015
At 31 August 2016
At 31 August 2017 41.4 4.7 46.1
At 1 September 2015 Charge for the year At 31 August 2016 Charge for the year At 31 August 2017 17.3 1.2 18.5 Carrying amount At 31 August 2016 26.1 3.5 29.6 At 31 August 2017 24.1 3.5 27.6 Property plant and equipment
Total
Cost
At 1 September 2015
Disposals
At 31 August 2016
Disposals
At 31 August 2017 7.8 7.8 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 1 September 2015 Charge for the year Eliminated on disposals At 31 August 2016 Charge for the year Eliminated on disposals At 31 August 2017 5.4 5.4 Carrying amount At 31 August 2016 2.9 2.9 At 31 August 2017 2.4 2.4 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Impairment testing Investment in joint ventures
Land held for development Sites in the course of construction Finished stock Partexchange properties Trade and other receivables due in less than one year Trade receivables Other debtors and prepayments 7.5 continued Trade and other receivables due in greater than one year Secured mortgages Shared equity receivables their fair value.
Deferred tax Accelerated tax depreciation Other temporary
Total
At 1 September 2015 Income statement charge At 31 August 2016 Income statement charge At 31 August 2017 1.8 1.8 Trade and other payables Trade payables Other taxes and social security costs Accrued expenses Other creditors and deferred income Land payables Land payables 67.4 49.3 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Shortterm borrowings Promissory notes  11.3 Longterm borrowings
Unamortised issue costs Outstanding at 31 August
Revolving Credit Facility May 2021 10.0 55.0 Net cash
Add back unamortised issue costs Cash and cash equivalents Net cash Add back landrelated promissory notes Net cash excluding landrelated promissory notes 30.7 64.1 Share capital Allotted and issued ordinary shares 8p each fully paid 537329434 ordinary shares 2016 537314069 42985 Allotment of shares during the year Number 000 Number 000 At 1 September Issuance of new shares in relation to the Management Incentive Plan Consolidation of share capital Issuance of new shares in relation to primary proceeds from the IPO Issuance to satisfy early exercises under Sharesave plan At 31 August 537314 Issuance of new shares in relation to Sharesave SAYE plan Share premium reserve Share premium 101.6 100.8 Operating lease arrangements Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised as an expense during the year 3.2 Within one year Outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments 12.3 15.4
Adjustments for Income tax expense Amortisation of intangibles Share option charge Depreciation of property plant and equipment Interest expense Interest income Decrease in trade and other receivables Increase in inventories Increase in trade and other payables Interest received Interest paid Income taxes paid Cash used  generated by operations 3.8 18.3 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and bank balances 40.7 119.0 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc Share capital continued Dividends on equity shares McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management Financial assets Shared equity receivables Loans and receivables Cash and cash equivalents Trade and other receivables Financial liabilities Amortised cost Trade and other payables Land payables
Landrelated promissory notes Capital risk management Financial risk management continued Financial risk management continued Housing market risk management Credit risk management of the Group in respect of such sales.
Liquidity risk management prices in line with current forecast.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management continued
Contractual
Within 1 year 25 years 5 years
Financial liabilities carrying no interest
Contractual
Within 1 year 25 years 5 years
Financial liabilities carrying no interest Interest rate risk management Valuation techniques and assumptions applied for the purposes of measuring fair value Bank and other loans Interest rate swaps Financial risk management continued Fair value measurements recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position held at fair value.
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Financial assets at FVTPL Shared equity receivables   29.3 29.3 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Financial assets at FVTPL Shared equity receivables reviewed at each period end.
Assumptions 2017 2016 Discount rate New build premium Timing of receipt 3.8 to 4.4% 5% 0 to 5.75% 5 to 14 yrs 4.7 to 5.1% 5% 0 to 4.0% 5 to 12 yrs
Decrease assumptions by 1%1 year Discount rate Timing of receipt Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Financial risk management continued
Interest
Total
Opening balance
Disposals
Revaluation gains or losses recognised in the income statement Closing balance 29.3  29.3
Interest
Total
Opening balance
Disposals
Revaluation gains recognised in the income statement Closing balance Sharebased payments Equitysettled sharebased payment plans Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP LTIP Total Date of grant Options granted Fair value at measurement date Share price on date of grant Exercise price Vesting period Expected dividend yield Expected volatility Risk free interest rate Valuation model Movements in the year Options at beginning of the year Granted during the year Exercised during the year Lapsed during the year Expired in the year 21 December 2016 3 years na 0.23% p.
BlackScholes and Monte Carlo 25 November 2015 3 years na 26.07% 0.8% p.
BlackScholes and Monte Carlo Options at the end of the year 1508310 Exercisable at end of the year Sharesave plan SAYE Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Sharebased payments continued SAYE Total Weighted average exercise price Date of grant Options granted Fair value at measurement date Share price on date of grant Exercise price Vesting period Expected dividend yield Expected volatility Risk free interest rate Valuation model Movements in the year Options at beginning of the year Granted during the year Exercised during the year Lapsed during the year Expired in the year Options at the end of the year Exercisable at end of the year 10 December 2015 3 years 26.20% 26.07% 0.8% p.
BlackScholes
10 December 2015 5 years 28.16% 26.07% 1.2% p.
BlackScholes
Share Incentive Plan SIP Annual and Deferred Bonus Plan ABP deferral period.
Total Sharebased payment schemes Analysis of the income charge Equitysettled and cashsettled sharebased payments Management Incentive Plan  0.4 Equitysettled sharebased payments
LTIP
Subsidiaries
Name Principal activity
Class of shares % % McCarthy and Stone Developments Limited McCarthy and Stone Retirement Lifestyles Limited McCarthy and Stone Equity Interests Limited McCarthy and Stone Home Equity Interests Limited McCarthy and Stone Investment Properties No.23 Limited McCarthy and Stone Total Care Living Limited McCarthy and Stone Alnwick Limited McCarthy and Stone Extra Care Living Limited McCarthy and Stone Total Care Management Limited McCarthy and Stone Rental Interests No.
1 Limited McCarthy and Stone Management Services Limited McCarthy and Stone Lifestyle Services Limited McCarthy and Stone Financial Services Limited Keyworker Properties Limited McCarthy and Stone Estates Limited YourLife Management Services Limited McCarthy and Stone Properties Limited The Planning Bureau Limited Ortus Homes Limited McCarthy and Stone Resales Limited Linden Court Limited Holding Company
Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Property Investment Development management Holding Company Financial Services Property Investment Property Resale Development Management
Dormant
Dormant
Property Resale
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
Ordinary
10tel10tel10tel100 5tel10tel10tel10tel10tel100 5telna na Related party transactions Remuneration of key management personnel Related Party Disclosures.
Social security costs Sharebased payments Pension contributions Termination payment Aggregate emoluments of the highest paid Director 1.0 0.9 Events after the balance sheet date Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Parent Company Statement of Financial Position
Assets
Noncurrent assets Investments in subsidiaries 4 439.4 Total noncurrent assets 439.4 Current assets Trade and other receivables Cash and cash equivalents Total current assets 104.3 Total assets 517.3 543.7 Equity and liabilities Capital and reserves Share capital Share premium Retained earnings Total equity 6 512.0 538.1 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 7 5.3 5.6 Total current liabilities 5.3 5.6 Total liabilities 5.3 5.6 Total equity and liabilities 517.3 543.7 Clive Fenton Rowan Baker
Director Parent Company Statement of Changes in Equity
Share capital
Retained earnings
Balance at 1 September 2015 381.1 56.4 2.5 435.0 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with owners of the Company Issue of ordinary shares Capital reduction of share capital and share premium Sharebased payments Share issue related costs
Balance at 31 August 2016 43.0 100.8 538.1 Total comprehensive income for the year Transactions with owners of the Company Sharebased payments
Share issue related costs  tax credit Balance at 31 August 2017 43.0 101.6 367.4 512.0 McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Parent Company Cash Flow Statement
Investing activities Amounts owed in respect of share issuance 6  86.0 Net cash used in investing activities  86.0 Financing activities Proceeds from issue of share capital Dividends paid Net increase in cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year Cash and cash equivalents at end of year Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements Accounting policies Basis of preparation Investments in subsidiaries Cash and cash equivalents Sharebased payments fair value.
Dividend distribution Financial instruments Financial assets Loans and receivables McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Accounting policies continued Loans and receivables Financial liabilities and equity Equity instruments Financial liabilities Share capital Related parties Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty Investments in subsidiaries
1 September
At 31 August 439.4 Net book value 439.4 Trade and other receivables Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings UK corporation tax Shareholders funds Trade and other payables Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 5.3 5.6 Notes to the Parent Company Financial Statements continued McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Adjustments for Interest income Share option charge Income tax expense Decrease  increase in trade and other receivables Decrease  increase in trade and other payables Interest received Tax paid Cash generated by operations 28.5 5.4 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and bank balances Financial instruments Financial assets Loans and receivables measured at amortised cost Financial liabilities Loans and payables measured at amortised cost Related party transactions Protect yourself Get the name of the person and organisation contacting you Check the Financial Services Register at httpwww. ca.
Call the FCA Consumer Helpline ontel if there are no contact details on the Register or you are told they are out of date to avoid doing business with.
REMEMBER if it sounds too good to be true it probably is Report a scamteltel Warning to shareholders McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FY17 FY16 FY15
Legal completions 2302 2296 1923 1677 Gross average selling price 273k 264k 245k 222k Revenue 635.9m 485.7m 387.8m Shareholders funds
16% 20% 20% 17% Tangible gross asset value Tangible net asset value Basic earnings per share na Dividends for the year 5.4p 4.5p nil nil Number of shares in issue 537314069 na na Number of shareholders na
Cautionary statement regarding forwardlooking statements 4th Floor 100 Holdenhurst Road
Dorset
BH8 8AQ site site investoremail
GB00BYNVD082
MCS
General information
Legal adviser Financial adviser Financial and corporate communications
Banker
Joint corporate brokers Peel Hunt
Statutory auditor Deloitte LLPtel email McCarthy and Stone plc McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
North East East Midlands Orion House 0telNorth London Prospect Placetel00 South East
South Westtel00 West Midlands North West
Glasgow
York
Altrincham
Kettering
Coventry
Woking
Ringwood
Taunton
North East North West East Midlands West Midlands North London
South East South West Central Division
McCarthy and Stone plc
BSG
Capital turn
CIL
Company
CQC
DCLG
EPS
FRI
FTSE
Gearing
Group
IPO
Land bank includes owned sites and
MSMS
Net assets net assets is calculated as total assets Net debtcash
PRS
ROCE
Section 106
TNAV
TSR appreciation and dividends paid to show the total return to the shareholders expressed as a
YLMS assistance personal care and McCarthy and Stone plc Annual Report and Accounts STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Notes 160 McCarthy and Stone plc Notes Retirement living to the full 4th Floor 100 Holdenhurst Road
Dorset
BH8 8AQ Tel 0telWebsite site Email investoremail
Facebooksitemccarthystone
