A BRIGHT FUTURE Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Forwardlooking statements The disclosures in this Annual Report for Nanoco Group plc the Company and its subsidiaries Nanoco or the Group contain certain forwardlooking statements.
Although the Board believes that the expectations reflected in these forward looking statements are reasonable it can give no assurance that these expectations will arise.
Because the expectations are subject to risks and uncertainties actual results may vary significantly from those expressed or implied by the forward looking statements based upon a number of factors.
Such forward looking statements include the statements under Outlook prospects and the commercial success of our CFQD applications and other existing or future revenue generating sources risks related to the Groups ability or that of its sub contractors and partners to manufacture products on a large scale or at all risks related to the Groups and its marketing partners ability to market products on a large scale or expand market share in the face of changes in customer requirements competition and regulatory and technological change risks related to the ownership and use of intellectual property and risks related to the Groups ability to manage growth.
Nanoco undertakes no obligation to revise or update any forward looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date of the Annual Report.
Nanoco Group plc is a world leader in the research development and largescale manufacture of cadmium and heavymetalfree quantum dots and semiconductor nanoparticles.
Strategic report Highlights 01 At a glance 02 Chairmans statement 04
Chief Executive Officers statement 06
Our business model 10 Our markets 12 Our strategy 14 Our key performance indicators 16 Principal risks and uncertainties 18 Viability statement 20 Financial review 22 Sustainability 25 Corporate governance Board of Directors 32 Corporate governance statement 34 Nominations Committee report 37 Audit Committee report 38 Remuneration Committee report 41 Directors remuneration report 43 Directors report 60 Statement of Directors responsibilities 64 Financial statements Independent auditors report 65 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 71 Consolidated statement of changes in equity 72 Company statement of changes in equity 72 Statement of financial position 73 Cash flow statements 74 Notes to the financial statements 75 Investor information IBC A BRIGHT FUTURE THE FUTURE IS CFQD Find out more about us online at site STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
HIGHLIGHT S
Display
Hybrid commercial model in display established direct sales of own manufactured product and multiple nonexclusive licences Tenfold increase in manufacturing capacity at Runcorn and reduction in product costs First commercial sales orders received Substantial pipeline of commercial opportunities  focused on television and monitor projects with near term potential Signed development and commercialisation deal with Kyulux focused on CFQDOLED hybrid display Operating cost base reduced significantly
Decision taken to divest and process ongoing Life sciences and Lighting New grant awarded for work on pancreatic cancer and excellent progress made in research in medical applications Financial results Revenue and other operating income for the year was 1.6 million 2016 0.8 million and the loss after tax was 9.1 million 2016 10.6 million Cash and cash on deposit at 31 July 2017 was 5.7 million 2016 14.5 million Post balance sheet events Net proceeds of 8 million following a placing in November 2017 significantly strengthens cash balance and removes immediate going concern issues Successful exhibition of televisions containing Nanoco Fine Color Film
In September 2017 a Commercial Supply and License Agreement was finalised with a US corporation in the field of medical devices for the treatment of pain soft tissue injury and dermatological conditions such as acne and skin antiageing Cash and shortterm deposits Revenue Total billings is the sum of invoices raised for revenue other operating income and deferred revenue see page 23 for reconciliation to income statement.
Loss after tax Total billings 02 Strategic report WHAT WE DO
OUR TECHNOLOGY AT A GL ANCE
Direct sales of own manufactured product Specialised lighting focus
Phototherapy
We are focused on continually developing and scaling up CFQD quantum dots that are fit for purpose across large addressable markets.
Our ability to innovate keeps us at the cutting edge of technology.
SOLAR
Printable CIGS solar cell Noncore assets
LIFE SCIENCES Cancer imaging diagnostics therapy Image guided surgery Excellent proof of principle data Partnership with University College London and Cancer Research UK Grant funded Read about our markets Pages 1213
Nearterm revenue Multichannel strategy Own production Wah Hong sale and licence Dow and Merck technology licence STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 REA SONS T O INVE S T WHERE WE DO IT PIONEER AND WORLD LEADER IN THE DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION OF
QUANTUM DOTS CFQDs EXTENSIVE PATENT PORTFOLIO c.
PATENTS GRANTED
LARGE
ADDRESSABLE
MARKETS
DEVELOPING
SALES PIPELINE SCALABLE PLATFORM TECHNOLOGY WITH MULTIPLE MARKETS AND PRODUCT APPLICATIONS HYBRID IP LICENSING AND MATERIAL SUPPLY MODEL WITH MULTIPLE ROUTES TO MARKET MAIN FOCUS TO DATE IS THE DISPLAY MARKET
BALANCE SHEET We have led the development of CFQD technology with rapid improvements in quality performance and yield.
Nanoco is a global business with its headquarters in Manchester where the Groups RandD activities are based.
Nanocos team totals around 80 people most of whom are highly qualified scientists recruited from countries all around the world.
Head office Manchester UK
Runcorn UK Business development
Business development
Japan
Taiwan 04 Strategic report
It is a pleasure to introduce Nanocos results for the year to 31 July 2017.
This has been a challenging year with slower than anticipated adoption of the Companys cadmiumfree quantum dots CFQDs in the display industry.
However significant progress has been made in developing demand for our CFQDs an increasing number of manufacturers are now producing demonstration displays incorporating our technology and we are confident that sales will result as these move into commercial production.
We are also making good progress in Life sciences and Specialised lighting.
The slower than expected progress in Display and the Companys funding horizon have both had a detrimental impact on the Companys share price.
I am pleased to say that the recent announcement of an equity placing has alleviated liquidity concerns.
MAKING STRONG
CHAIRMAN S S TATEMENT I am confident about the relevance of our technology in display and other markets.
Summary
An increasing number of manufacturers are now producing demonstration displays incorporating our technology.
We now have the supply chain and the technology to support the development of the emerging market in CFQDs for the display industry.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Following the change in commercial strategy in the previous financial year substantial changes were made in the business during this year which have created the building blocks for future commercial success.
The Company has a compelling gotomarket strategy with a partnership with Taiwans Wah Hong Industrial Corporation Wah Hong alongside its two licensees The Dow Chemical Company Dow and Merck KGaA Merck.
These routes to market are supported by the Companys own manufacturing facility in Runcorn.
We now have the supply chain and the technology to support the development of the emerging market in CFQDs for the display industry.
The recent move by the European Commission to ban cadmium in displays in Europe from 31 October 2019 is helping to accelerate adoption of the technology and the demonstration by major television manufacturers of displays featuring Nanocos CFQDs is further evidence of this adoption.
While our focus in 2017 has been on the display market Nanocos technology has several important applications beyond that sector.
Important progress was made during 2017 in two of the Groups three other target markets life sciences and specialised lighting.
Of particular note the life sciences business was awarded an Innovate UK grant.
In addition after the year end a commercial supply and license agreement was won from a US medical device company for light therapy products for the treatment of pain soft tissue injury and dermatological conditions such as acne and skin antiageing.
This underlines the value being built beyond Display and highlights the future potential in these other areas.
The Board has decided that the Solar assets are noncore and has commenced a process to divest these assets.
Over the year the Board made tough decisions to reduce costs which has led to a substantial reduction in headcount the main expense of the business.
During the period average employee numbers reduced to 110 2016 129 and have fallen further to approximately 80 since the year end.
However that headcount reduction has not impacted the Groups ability to manufacture product and sell its technology or its ability to develop next generation IP and product.
Financial performance Revenues and other operating income in the year to 31 July 2017 were 1.6 million 2016 0.8 million and the loss before tax was 10.9 million 2016 loss before tax of 12.6 million.
The Group continued to exercise careful cost control during the year.
Cash cash equivalents and deposits at the year end were 5.7 million 31 July 2016 14.5 million 31 January 2017 8.3 million.
Cash balances have increased post year end as a consequence of the equity raise in November 2017 of 8.0 million net of expenses.
No dividend is proposed for the year 2016 none.
Governance and Board The Board recognises the value of meeting the highest standards of corporate governance and will continue to strive to achieve such standards for the benefit of all stakeholders.
Gordon Hall retired as a Nonexecutive Director of Nanoco on 31 January 2017 after eight years on the
Robin Williams stood down from the Board in July 2017 after three years with the Company as a Nonexecutive Director.
We would like to thank both Gordon and Robin for their contribution to the business.
In April 2017 we announced the appointment of Dr Alison Fielding as a Nonexecutive Director.
Alison brings an exceptional breadth of relevant skills to the Nanoco Board with her background in chemistry and her extensive commercial financial and international experience across the technology sector.
Employees and shareholders On behalf of the Board I would like to thank all of Nanocos employees for their achievements during the year and for their commitment to the Group.
Nanoco benefits from an exceptional multinational team and the Board is enormously appreciative of its contributions and loyalty in what has been a challenging period.
I would also like to thank our shareholders for their continuing support and look forward to meeting as many as possible at our AGM to be held on 12 January 2018.
Outlook
I am confident about the relevance of our technology in display and other markets as well as our ability to execute and deliver orders and sales and I remain positive about the prospects for the Group.
Dr Christopher Richards
16 November 2017 FOCUS ON TV AND MONITOR PROJECTS WITH NEAR TERM
Read about our business model Pages 1011 Read about our strategy Pages 1415 06 Strategic report
OUR EXPERTISE CHIEF EXE CUTIVE OFFICER S S TATEMENT We have made substantial changes in our approach to the business which underpin our confidence in future success.
Summary
We have developed a substantial pipeline of commercial opportunities in Display and in June secured the important milestone of our first commercial sales orders.
New production methods have achieved a substantial reduction in costs while increasing the productivity of installed capacity.
Overview
While the Group has not met the commercial targets we set ourselves a year ago we have made substantial changes in our approach to the business which underpin our confidence in future success.
We have implemented an enhanced gotomarket strategy invested in manufacturing capability and received our first commercial sales orders all against a backdrop of growing global interest in our technology.
The evolution in marketing strategy for the display industry initiated in 2016 has enabled the Group to accelerate the rollout of its technology.
We have moved from an exclusive licensing model with Dow to a hybrid model combining multiple nonexclusive licenses with direct sales of own manufactured product.
In August 2016 we announced that we had signed up Merck as a second licensee of our technology.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR GROWING DIRECT SALES PIPELINE NDA scope and design specifications Specification agreement and development sampling Technical approval Design win First commercial sales orders Engineering samples Contract negotiation and commercial sales As a result of promotion activities e.
NDA  this is the start of our sales pipeline.
Following detailed technical discussions to establish the customer specification and Nanoco film solution options an iterative program of work is undertaken.
This involves computer simulation modelling and multiple film samples to best fit the customers display system.
When technical approval is achieved the customers product team presents the new device in demonstrator form to their business management or customers.
If they decide to proceed to market and launch the product we are awarded a Design Win.
What follows is the kickoff of a qualification process involving validation steps and engineering samples of increasing quantity building to mass production and contracted supply  this whole process has no defined timescale can be very lengthy and is not within our control.
We also developed our own channel to market for product manufactured at our facility in Runcorn UK and sold via our Taiwanese partner Wah Hong referred to as our direct partner.
We now have a threepronged gotomarket strategy which will enable us to capitalise on the expected demand for our CFQDs.
During the year in conjunction with Wah Hong we have developed a substantial pipeline of commercial opportunities in Display and in June secured the important milestone of our first commercial sales orders.
We remain very excited about the potential for our technology both in Display and in our emerging Life sciences and Specialised lighting developments.
Display market The market in display for CFQDs continues to grow driven by the increasing appetite for enhanced colour and brightness and the penetration of ultrahighdefinition UHD TVs.
IHS Technology IHS forecasts 26 million displays will be quantum dot QD equipped by 2021 with more than 90% of the market cadmium free.
Samsung with its QLED brand is leading the field and sold more than 3 million QD displays in 2016.
Other than Samsung the market for quantum dot displays is still in its infancy although the introduction of UHD TV and mediacentric monitor products will drive growth in the markets.
While other display OEMs are embracing CFQD technology adoption continues to be slow due somewhat to protracted regulatory initiatives to restrict the use of cadmium.
However in early August 2017 the European Commission announced legislation which passed into law in October 2017 banning the use of cadmium in displays from 31 October 2019 which we expect to accelerate the shift to CFQDs.
Several major Taiwanese and Chinese display and TV manufacturers are now actively seeking CFQD solutions where Nanoco continues to have a competitive lead.
Commercialisation
Nanocos CFQDs are now being manufactured at Nanocos Runcorn facility and at Dows large manufacturing plant in Cheonan South Korea while Merck is also evaluating the establishment of a manufacturing facility.
These sites will manufacture CFQDs blend them into a resin system and supply the combined CFQD resin system to multiple display integrators located across Asia.
Samsung is the market leader in CFQD display at present and Nanoco and our licensees are all actively marketing Nanoco technology to the global display industry to compete effectively with Samsung.
Commercialisation  Runcorn Nanocos Runcorn manufacturing facility has been extensively enhanced to meet anticipated demand.
New production methods have achieved a substantial reduction in costs while increasing the productivity of installed capacity.
Runcorn now has the capacity to produce enough CFQDs to supply approximately 1 million large TVs per annum.
Further capacity can be achieved with limited capital expenditure and will be brought online as demand increases.
STRATEGIC REPORT 08 Strategic report Commercialisation continued Commercialisation  Runcorn continued We were pleased to announce in December 2016 that the Company had been awarded ISO 90012015 certification for our production and supply processes underlining the robust nature of our systems.
Commercialisation  Wah Hong Wah Hong which is quoted on the Taipei Exchange is our partner for the production and sale of our Fine Color Film
We chose to partner with Wah Hong as it is one of the worlds largest manufacturers of optical films and sheets for the display industry and has a large operational footprint across China Taiwan and Southeast Asia.
We have benefited from its industry and supply chain knowledge and customer contacts since signing the agreement in July last year.
Under the agreement Nanoco will supply resins containing CFQDs from our manufacturing facility in Runcorn and Wah Hong will incorporate the resin into a film under Nanocos CFQD
Color Film brand and sell to the display industry.
We will generate revenue from the sale of resin to Wah Hong and receive a licence fee from Wah Hong based on its sales and two further milestone payments dependent on the volume of film sold.
The Groups relationship with Wah Hong has progressed well over the period.
Product from Nanoco Wah Hong was used by three manufacturers Hisense TCL and TPV Philips at CES in January 2017 to demonstrate prototype large screen UHD wide colour gamut LCD TVs.
Feedback and lead generation from CES were encouraging and further validated the market opportunity.
As a result Wah Hong brought forward its investment in a new coating line which is now commissioned and capable of producing films to fit up to 100inch TVs.
These developments resulted in Wah Hong placing the first commercial orders for CFQDs from Nanoco in June 2017.
In September 2017 Nanocos technology was featured at Touch Taiwan 2017 a leading show for the worlds display industry where major global television manufacturers showcased stateoftheart 4K and 8K UHD products incorporating Nanocos
Fine Color Film
At the Display Innovation Conference which ran alongside Touch Taiwan 2017 Nanocos Senior Vice President of Global Sales gave a presentation on the growing demand from manufacturers and consumers for quantum dots as a method of achieving wider colour gamut and enhanced picture quality in the next generation of displays.
The trade show further validated the growing interest in stateoftheart TVs and monitors incorporating CFQDs to enhance colour performance.
Over the last year we have developed a very active pipeline of sales opportunities see sales pipeline on page 7.
The Groups key shortterm focus is on TV and monitor projects with near term potential.
Moving projects through the sales pipeline into commercial sales takes many months of intensive work.
Each customer has its own requirements and it is difficult to predict how long customers processes will take to reach mass production status.
NanocoWah Hong will continue to develop further opportunities in the future.
Commercialisation  Dow Nanoco signed an exclusive licence agreement with Dow in January 2013 for Dow to manufacture market and sell Nanocos heavymetalfree quantum dots into the display market.
Last year Dow and Nanoco agreed to amend the licensing agreement from exclusive to nonexclusive.
Dow sells product under the TREVISTA facility in South Korea.
We generate royalty revenue from Dow calculated as a percentage of Dows sales of Nanoco CFQDs.
Dow continues to see growing interest in CFQDs and is making good progress with several Display customers considering movement to quantum dot technology.
Commercialisation  Merck Merck is the leading German science and technology company focused on healthcare life sciences and performance materials and the manufacturer of approximately 60% of the worlds liquid crystals used in liquid crystal displays.
Nanoco will generate revenue from sales made by Merck from licence fees and royalties on Merck manufactured sales.
Nanoco has completed the transfer of its technology to Merck which has successfully produced pilot plant scale quantities of CFQDs at its facility in Darmstadt Germany.
Merck is carefully watching the development of the CFQD market and will continue to purchase CFQD products from Nanoco until it decides to build its own manufacturing facility.
Merck is actively engaged with its potential customers on various CFQD application projects and sells under the Livilux brand.
Commercialisation  staying ahead of the technology curve In May 2017 Nanoco signed a collaboration and joint development agreement  JDA with Kyulux Inc.
Under the agreement Nanocos CFQDs will be combined with Kyuluxs technology to create future generation hybrid OLEDQLED display technology with superior qualities to existing products in the display market.
Nanoco also strengthened its intellectual property in electroluminescence with the acquisition of a patent portfolio from Kodak Eastman.
The Group now benefits from c.
600 patents and patent applications.
These activities will ensure that Nanoco remains at the forefront of next generation products for the display industry.
MILLION CFQD TVs SOLD IN 2016 MILLION DISPLAYS WILL BE CADMIUM FREE BY 2021 Read about our markets Pages 1213 Read about our sustainability Pages 2531 CHIEF EXE CUTIVE OFFICE R  S S TATEMENT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other markets While display was the Groups primary focus during the year Nanoco continued to develop its other target markets of life sciences and specialised lighting.
The Board has decided that the solar assets are noncore and the divestment process is progressing with discussions currently ongoing with interested parties.
Other markets  life sciences Nanoco Life Sciences NLS is led by Dr Imad Nassani who joined Nanoco in 2009 and is one of the pioneers of the use of quantum dots in the sector.
Quantum dots have favourable optical and physical properties compared with organic dyes and radioisotopes but their use in medical applications has been hindered due to the presence of cadmium.
Because Nanocos quantum dots are free of cadmium they can be used in the human body in for example cancer diagnosis and surgical imaging.
The initial focus of the division is on illumination of cancerous tumours to facilitate their surgical removal and then with further development cancer diagnosis.
The NLS team has made great strides in the development of safe and clinically acceptable quantum dot nanomaterials based on the Companys heavymetalfree quantum dot technology.
The promising outcome from our efforts may be used to develop quantum dot probes for the early detection of aggressive tumours such as pancreatic and bladder cancers.
This in addition to our burgeoning relationships with commercial and research institutions at the cutting edge of the battle against cancer shows the scope of our ambition and the value of our technology.
We are now working to prepare the technology for clinical trials.
To date Nanocos life sciences efforts have been grant funded.
In early July 2017 we announced that we had been awarded an Innovate UK grant for a VIVODOTS targeting pancreatic cancer.
In September 2017 we announced that we had signed a Commercial Supply and License Agreement with a US corporation in the field of medical devices.
Nanoco will supply film product and other technologies for light therapy products for the treatment of pain soft tissue injury and dermatological conditions such as acne and skin antiageing.
Other markets  specialised lighting Nanocos CFQDs can tune the colour of light emitted by LEDs such that any particular shade of light can be produced by tailoring the wavelength.
This ability to finetune the colour of light has very broad applications such as the use of LEDs in homes and offices and in specific niche applications where a particular wavelength of light is required.
Nanocos commercial strategy in lighting is to focus on niche lighting applications which take advantage of quantum dots unique properties.
Lighting products for the horticulture and photodynamic therapy industries are being developed with partners and continue to make headway in line with managements expectations.
Restriction of Hazardous Substances RoHS In August 2017 as part of the RoHS Directive the European Commission announced its decision to prohibit cadmium in TVs and displays sold in Europe from 31 October 2019.
Cadmium in lighting products was prohibited immediately although they are not commercially available.
This was a much needed decision which will provide market certainty as to the end date for cadmium to be used in TVs and other display products such as monitors.
The RoHS Directive recognises cadmium as the most hazardous heavy metal.
We believe that this legislation should accelerate the move from cadmium to cadmiumfree QDs in TVs and displays and we are already seeing increased interest from the industry.
The lack of a decision on the future of cadmium led to stronger than anticipated competition from nonCFQD solutions.
People
This has been a challenging year for the Company and I would like to take this opportunity to thank all staff for their hard work and commitment throughout the period.
Postyear end In October 2017 we announced a placing of 19.99% of our issued share capital to raise 8.0 million net of expenses.
This fundraise significantly strengthens Nanocos balance sheet and puts it on a strong footing for the opportunities ahead.
Outlook
The Group continues to make solid progress in commercialisation of CFQDs and expects to announce further progress from its healthy pipeline of projects.
With the market developing more slowly than originally anticipated we remain focused on careful management of costs ahead of the anticipated sales rampup.
The Board remains confident that the opportunity for CFQDs both in display and in other sectors remains exciting and moreover that the Company has a competitive lead in this technology.
Dr Michael Edelman
Chief Executive Officer
16 November 2017 CONTINUED
DEVELOPMENT
OUR BUSINE S S MODEL Our employees Our people are one of our key differentiators in developing leading edge RandD and improvements in manufacturing utilising the combined skills knowledge and expertise thereby developing better products for our customers.
IP and technology IP and technology is the foundation of the Company and one of its key assets.
Our technology is heavily patented to secure its use for the Group.
New IP and technology is continually generated for future use by the Group.
Financial resources Following the recent placing the Companys strengthened balance sheet is well placed to exploit the anticipated growth in revenues while continuing to invest in RandD to support future products.
Partner licensees The licences in place with Dow Merck and Wah Hong put the Company in a strong position to have multiple routes to the display market with significant capacity capable of achieving strong growth.
Operations
Nanocos core activities are the generation and development of CFQD quantum dot products involving the application of our proven intellectual property technologies and expertise to a point where they can be turned into product manufactured costeffectively and distributed by the Group via chosen channel partners.
The Group has recently expanded its Runcorn production capacity to provide high quality CFQD quantum dot products to its customers.
Output and reinvestment The products developed by Nanoco are based on innovative approaches and technologies that maximise the benefit of the capabilities qualities and characteristics of our CFQD quantum dots.
In the display industry the use of CFQD quantum dot products enhances the colour gamut and energy efficiency of LCD TVs and other displays.
We will continue to invest in research.
Nanoco has a successful track record of innovation and is regarded as a world leader in the field of nanomaterials.
Our key resources and relationships How we generate revenue key licensees  Dow Merck and Wah Hong increase in manufacturing capacity at Runcorn Strategic report CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Development of successful CFQD quantum dot products and other nanomaterials is achieved by our highly skilled scientists applying specialist proprietary techniques and technologies to address market opportunities and customer needs.
We use our existing financial resources to fund our developments along with grant income where applicable.
The potential for our products is significantly enhanced through our licensing agreements with major multinational companies.
Expertise
We operate a comprehensive process to identify screen and prioritise potential concepts for new products and technologies.
This involves our own scientific and commercial teams in collaboration with our partner licensees and customers.
Our
We supplement our inhouse innovation where appropriate by inlicensing and potentially by targeted acquisition.
Customers
We assist customers in exploiting the full benefit of CFQD quantum dot products in their displays in order to achieve wide colour gamut energy efficiency and brightness thus significantly improving the customers product offering.
Partners
We work with our partners to enable them to fully exploit our technology thereby maximising their opportunity to generate revenues and profits in a market that is forecast to grow rapidly.
Employees
We aim to attract develop and retain the best talent recognise and reward success value the diverse contributions of our people create an environment where people feel trusted safe supported and healthy and share values that reflect what matters to our people.
Shareholders
We are strongly positioned to compete in the display market.
Our strategy in this market represents a strong growth opportunity by creating a highly scalable product offering whilst maintaining margins.
Whilst our focus is primarily on the display market at present we fully expect our platform technology to address other markets once we succeed in the display market.
Our key strengths How we create value c.
Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 12 Strategic report
GROWTH IN DISPLAY OUR MARKETS The key market for our CFQD technology at present and for the near future is the display sector.
QD TV shipments are forecast to grow from c.
4 million in 2016 to 22.5 million in 2021.
This equates to a market opportunity for QD materials of 400 million in 2021.
Sales of medium and larger displays 46 and above continue to grow.
The display market The display market includes televisions monitors notebooks tablets and smartphones Stronger demand for large ultrahighdefinition UHD and 8K panels could slow declining average selling prices Global display demand could pick up after 2016 if global economy improves Flat panel display FPD area is expected to grow as demand for large TVs rises Samsung and LG were the major brands sold in 2016 followed by Chinas Hisense and TCL CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts QD display market forecast by application volumeteltel 2021
Tablet 0.3 Notebook  0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 Millions of units QD display market forecast by type volumeteltel 2021 QD edge 0.4 1.3 0.1 QD chip    0.3 0.8 1.2 1.7 Millions of units NANOCO AWARDED GRANT FROM INNOVATE UK FOR MAJOR LIFE SCIENCES PROJECT LIFE SCIENCE S Nanoco has been awarded a major grant from Innovate UK the UKs innovation agency to support its ongoing research into the use of quantum dot nanoparticles within cancer imaging.
The research project that has received the grant entitled VIVODOTS nanodevices for detection resection and management of pancreatic cancers is a continued collaboration between Nanoco and University College London UCL the Groups long time partner in the life sciences sector and builds on the significant progress Nanocos Life Sciences team has made on invivo mapping of sentinel lymph nodes and breast cancer imaging.
The total value of the grant over the threeyear project is 1.15 million of which 807815 is attributable to Nanoco and 345439 to UCL.
Nanoco will receive 60% of its share from Innovate UK in cash over the threeyear period.
Display market opportunity As shown in the tables below independent forecasts of the growth of the application of quantum dot products in the display market show significant anticipated growth over the next five years and the majority of this growth is anticipated to be in QD surface products i. film containing quantum dots.
Source IHS.
STRATEGIC REPORT 14 Strategic report MAXIMISING OUR
OUR S TRATE GY Nanocos strategy is to focus on meeting the needs of its customers through the application of its scientific knowhow and innovative CFQD technology.
Grow revenue Revenue growth is key to the Group becoming selfsustaining financially while continuing to invest in RandD for future products.
Primarily focus on display industry The display industry is the most developed market for our products and we are tightly focused on this market.
External analysts forecast significant growth for CFQD applications in the display industry in the future.
The Group operates a hybrid strategy of technology licensing nonexclusively to Dow and Merck and own manufacture and direct supply to service the display industry.
This hybrid strategy allows the widest coverage of the Groups technology in the display field.
Continue to invest in RandD Investment in RandD to improve current products and also to develop new products remains a key part of our strategy.
Patents
Patents protect our high quality IP and we continue to create new IP and protect existing IP to maintain our competitive advantages.
Develop inhouse capability and capacity We have invested in expanding our manufacturing capacity and inhouse production remains a key part of our strategy.
Growth Investment Performance in 2017 Whilst billings fell by 0.8 million compared to last year to 1.1 million revenues grew by 179% compared to 2016 to 1.3 million.
Revenues remain modest compared to the opportunity ahead of us and the market has been slower to develop than envisaged.
Performance in 2017 RandD expenditure fell in 2017 compared to 2016 due to cost savings implemented as a result of the cash position of the Company nevertheless important progress was made during the year especially in improvements in product performance.
Future focus Focus is on converting current opportunities into revenues with emphasis on ten TV and monitor projects with five major companies.
We are exploring opportunities with many of the major players in the display industry.
Future focus We will continue to invest in RandD in order to remain at the forefront of this technology and to open up new market opportunities.
OUR S TRATE G Y CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DISPL A Y NANOCO AND KYULUX
SIGN AGREEMENT TO DEVELOP NEXT GENERATION DISPLAYS Kyulux Inc. agreement with Nanoco.
Under the agreement Nanocos heavymetalfree quantum dots will be combined with Kyuluxs hyperfluorescence thermally activated delayed fluorescence TADF technology to create future generation hybrid OLEDQLED display technology with superior qualities to existing products in the display market.
In addition to offering a high degree of brightness and pure colour the combination of technologies means the displays will be cost effective for manufacturers and highly energy efficient for consumers.
Work with licensing partners to assist them in maximising their opportunity in manufacturing Our licensing partners have the potential to bring strong benefits to the Group and provide key routes to market for our products.
Licensed partners can bring significant extra capacity and resources to address the expected growth in the market for quantum dot products.
Licensing
Performance in 2017 During the year we transferred significant knowledge to our licensing partners to assist them in exploiting their licence to our technology.
Future focus We will keep supporting our licensing partners to maximise the benefit to all parties.
WE ARE EXCITED BY THE POTENTIAL OF THIS PARTNERSHIP WHICH BRINGS TOGETHER TWO GLOBAL LEADERS IN THEIR FIELDS.
MICHAEL EDELMAN
Chief Executive Officer
STRATEGIC REPORT 16 Strategic report MEASUREMENT WHY ITS IMPORTANT RESULTS LINK TO STRATEGY Yearend cash and shortterm deposits This measures the availability of cash for corporate purposes.
Availability of sufficient liquidity is essential especially where commitments are made to carry out selffunded research and development activities.
Cash balances reduced due to losses incurred.
Postyear end a fundraising of 8 million net has been secured.
Revenue
Revenue.
Revenue is a key measure of the growth of the Groups business and the Group seeks to optimise revenue from CFQD products including joint development projects and supply activities.
Revenue increased as a result of product sales and release of deferred revenues.
14.5Mtel
OUR PERFORMANCE OUR KEY PERFORMANCE INDIC AT ORS The key performance indicators that we use to monitor our business are as follows.
GRO WTH INVE S TMENT LICENSING LINK TO STRATEGY 5.7M STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Loss after tax The amount of loss after tax as shown on the income statement.
This is key measure and gives an indication of the stage of development of the business.
Lower loss due to increased revenues and lower costs than previous year.
Total investment in research and development Total investment in research and development costs including direct and indirect overheads of all research and development activities.
The successful development of complex products and technologies is the Groups core skill and defines the Groups competitive advantage.
As anticipated investment in research and development expenditure was higher in 2016 than in 2017 due to cost reductions implemented during the current year.
Portfolio of patents and patents pending This is the total number of active patents and patents pending.
The value of the business is strongly linked to the level and length of protection of the Groups intellectual property.
Such protection is reflected in the licences that the Group is able to negotiate with partners wishing to access our knowhow.
Continued growth in the portfolio to protect the Groups intellectual property and create future value.
Total billings Total billings is the sum of invoices raised for revenue other operating income and deferred revenue.
This measure is reconciled to revenue on page 23.
This is an important measure as it shows the total level of value created regardless of when the revenue is recognised.
Cash flows are dictated by the levels of billings.
2016 included signing fees from Merck and Wah Hong as well as the first royalty income from Dow.
MEASUREMENT WHY ITS IMPORTANT RESULTS LINK TO STRATEGY Strategic report
MANAGING RISK PRINCIPAL RISK S AND UNCERTAINTIE S A UDIT COMMIT TEE R EMUNE R A TION COMMIT TEE NOMINA TIONS COMMIT TEE B OA RD OF DI R E C TO R S NONEXECUTIVE DI R E C TO R S In common with all businesses at Nanocos stage of development the Group is exposed to a range of risks some of which are not wholly within its control or capable of complete mitigation or protection through insurance.
The Group has identified actively monitors and is taking action to mitigate many different risks.
Risks are categorised as strategic financial or operational.
This section does not include them all but focuses on those risks that the Directors believe to be the most important that are currently faced by the business.
Some risks may be unknown at present.
Others currently regarded as not critical could become material risks in the future.
The Board has established a routine process for carrying out a robust risk assessment which evaluates and manages the principal risks faced by the Group.
The Board reviews the process and a detailed review of risks was undertaken by the Audit Committee during 2017.
In last years Annual Report we highlighted cash resources and production capacity at our Runcorn facility as the major risk issues.
The Group has successfully managed to reduce the inherent risk for the business by completing a fundraising in November 2017 thereby removing immediate concerns for the future financing of the business.
Improvements in capacity at the Groups production facility in Runcorn following the introduction of more efficient production processes and shift working have continued throughout the year and significantly reduced the risk of being unable to produce sufficient output from our Runcorn plant.
The Group has successfully managed to reduce the inherent risk for the business by completing a fundraising in November 2017 thereby removing immediate concerns of the future financing of the business.
Key
NEW
No change in risk Increase in risk Decrease in risk New risk identified during the year Strategic business risk was reduced by appointing two new partners in the display field in July 2016 Wah Hong for the production and sale of CFQD film and Merck for the manufacture and sale of products containing CFQD semiconductor nanoparticles.
These agreements open up multiple channels into the display industry and significantly reduce the dependency on Dow which was previously the Groups exclusive partner in the display field.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The principal risks to achieving full commercialisation and to becoming cash generative are outlined as follows
DESCRIPTION POTENTIAL CAUSES AND IMPACT MITIGATION CHANGE LINK TO
Strategic and financial investing for growth Lack of widespread adoption and lifespan of CFQD products in the display market.
Nanoco technology does not become fully accepted by the market.
High technical sales engagement with all the major display OEM brands and all parts of the display supply chain.
Drawnout qualification process by display customers.
Stronger than anticipated competition from nonCFQD solutions.
Rapid product development.
Samsung dominates the mainstream display market and remains vertically integrated.
High sales and technical sales engagement with all the major display OEM brands and all parts of the display supply chain.
NEW
Nanoco is slow to generate revenue from own product sales and royalty from licensees and suffers financially.
Active control of costs within the business.
Actively pursue alternative markets such as lighting and life sciences as substitutes for a lack of uptake of CFQD in the display market.
Cash shortfall.
Revenues from own product sales and licensee royalties do not materialise as planned.
Cost savings were implemented during the year a fundraise of 8.0 million was completed postyear end and cash will continue to be prudently managed.
The Group is unable to carry out its operations.
Prudent management of the Groups cash.
Active sales engagement with the display market to ensure sales come through cash.
Maintaining strong investor support.
The placing completed in November 2017 provides additional financial resources to strengthen the Groups balance sheet.
Rapid commoditisation of products.
Overcapacity for CFQD products leads to price erosion.
Nanoco suffers financially.
Phased capacity expansion.
Increase pace at which new generations of CFQD products are brought to market.
Strategic investing for growth property.
Competitors unlawfully infringing Nanocos IP.
Nanoco not getting value for its investment.
Nanoco constantly scans the market for signs of infringement.
Prosecute infringers.
Operational
Meeting product specifications.
Technical specifications are increasing as QD technology matures.
If Nanoco fails to meet specification then competitor products will be selected.
Continuous improvement in technology needed to ensure specifications are met.
NEW 1
Major EHS issue.
Failure to follow existing procedures or a new unforeseen risk.
Injury to staff equipment reputation and finances and potential loss of operating licences.
Extensive and ongoing EHS procedures to bolster procedures and strengthen leadership focus and engagement throughout the organisation.
Continuous training of staff in risks and how to mitigate risks.
We previously referred to risks associated with manufacturing capacity and Nanocos ability to meet demand and these risks are no longer considered as significant as the ones in the table above following the improvements made to manufacturing capacity during the year.
At present we do not believe that Brexit poses a significant risk to Nanoco.
We continue to take measures to ensure that where possible we mitigate cyber security risks so that they do not pose a significant risk to Nanoco.
Read more Page 25 20 Strategic report
VIABILITY
VIABILIT Y S TATEMENT In accordance with the provisions in the UK Corporate Governance Code C.2.2 of the 2016 revision the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group and determined that a twoyear period continues to be a suitable period to be utilised.
The Directors assessment has been made with reference to the Groups current strategy strengthened balance sheet following the placing in November 2017 and principal risks as described in this Strategic report. for 3.5 days per week.
The new processes and shift working are ready to be implemented as demand dictates.
Dow and Merck are licensed to manufacture CFQD products and they can sell their own manufactured products as well as CFQD products purchased from the Group.
Wah Hong is licensed to produce and sell film containing CFQD products purchased from Nanoco.
The key issues considered by the Directors in evaluating the business model are Is the display market a viable market for the Groups
Based on the Groups knowledge of the market and independent forecasts of the development of the display market the Directors believe that the display market will remain a viable and growing market for the Groups CFQD products for a number of years.
Are the Groups current partners likely to be able to effectively manufacture and distribute
Sample requests have increased over the past few months for Dows TREVISTA cadmiumfree quantum dots and are being fulfilled exclusively from Dows Cheonan factory.
Whilst the Directors have no reason to believe the Group will not be viable over a longer period a twoyear period is considered appropriate given the nature of forecasting in the market for CFQD products and the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
Forecasting in the CFQD market is difficult as it is currently in the very early stages of its development.
There are very strong indications that the market is likely to grow rapidly as Samsung is actively promoting its televisions containing quantum dots and industry analysts are forecasting a large market in the display field however accurate forecasting in the short term remains very difficult and the market is developing slower than anticipated.
The Groups nonexclusive business model enables the Group to sell directly to OEMs and also to appoint additional licensees to manufacture the Groups CFQD products.
The licence agreements agreed in July 2016 with Wah Hong and Merck are also still in their infancy and it is too early to make longerterm forecasts of the levels of business with these partners.
The Group is working very closely with a number of original equipment manufacturers OEMs and Wah Hong in order to get the CFQD films designed into OEM products.
The first orders for commercial sales were received from Wah Hong in June 2017.
The new processes developed during recent periods have been implemented and production capacity has been increased by developing the ability to move to a 24hour shift STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Wah Hong has placed its first commercial orders for CFQD products which will be produced in Nanocos manufacturing facility in Runcorn and delivered to Wah Hong where it will be converted into films by Wah Hong and supplied for usage in OEM TV and monitor products.
The Directors believe that Wah Hong will be able to produce good quality CFQD film and that it will be able to appoint suitable OEM customers.
Merck is carefully watching the development of the CFQD market and will continue to purchase CFQD products from Nanoco until they decide to build their own manufacturing facility.
The Directors are confident that they would be able to appoint new partners to replace any of the Groups current partners should the licences terminate for any reason.
In the event that alternative partners cannot be appointed the Directors believe that the Group would be able to significantly increase its own manufacturing capabilities in order to meet market demand.
The attractiveness of the opportunity should mean that any additional finance required to fund any additional capital expenditure required is available.
As a result of this assessment the Directors have concluded that the Groups business model is viable for the twoyear period of this viability statement.
Going concern In assessing whether the going concern basis is an appropriate basis for preparing the 2017 Annual Report the Directors have utilised their detailed forecasts for the period to 31 July 2019 which take into account the Groups current and expected business activities its cash balance of 5.7 million as shown in its balance sheet at 31 July 2017 the cash raised of 8.0 million following shareholder approval of the placing on 14 November 2017 the principal risks and uncertainties it faces and other factors impacting its future performance.
The key assumptions underpinning the assessment during the period cover the following areas commercialisation of CFQD products through existing contractual arrangements ability to manufacture and supply sufficient continued investment in research and development.
The principal plausible downside stress tests in accordance with the Groups principal risks and uncertainties are a significant reduction in projected CFQD sales volumes due to either a reduction in demand from the Groups partners or an inability to supply lower selling prices and higher manufacturing costs ability of Wah Hong to produce final products that meet our quality standards ability of Wah Hong to generate sufficient demand at attractive price levels to generate sufficient operating margins for the Group and achieve targets for future milestone payments the length of time it will take our licence partners Dow and Merck to contract new customers and supply products in volume to generate royalty income and achieve targets for milestone payments likelihood of new inventions making CFQD products obsolete and higher investment in research and development.
Various sensitivity analyses have been performed to reflect possible downside scenarios as referred to above.
Even in the worst case scenario whereby the Group achieves no cash revenues for the twelve months following the date of this Annual Report the Company and the Group have sufficient resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
At the time of approving the financial statements the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the 2017 Annual Report.
Read about our sustainability Pages 2531 INCREASE IN
CAPACITY c.
PATENTS
GRANTED
PENDING 22 Strategic report A STABLE
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Results
Revenue for the year was 1.3 million 2016 0.5 million and the loss before tax was 10.9 million 2016 12.6 million.
As has historically been the case the timing of revenue receipts in the form of milestone and joint development payments from strategic partners continued to be the major determinant of the results of the business.
Revenue and other operating income increased by 112% to 1.6 million 2016 0.8 million.
Revenue from sale of products and services rendered accounted for 53.6% 2016 67.1% with the balance of revenues being royalty and licence income.
Revenue from sale of products was 0.5 million 2016 0.2 million.
Revenue from royalties and licences and revenue from the joint development agreements which comprise payments from customers to gain preferential treatment in terms of supply or pricing do not have an associated cost of sale.
During the year revenues and other operating income increased to 1.6 million and postyear end additional cash of 8.0 million was raised thereby providing the funding to implement our strategy.
Summary
Revenue and other operating income increased by 112%.
Revenue from sale of products was 0.5 million 2016 0.2 million.
Loss before tax down 1.7 million to 10.9 million 2016 12.6 million.
STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 During the previous year two significant licences were signed which generated invoices for upfront payments of 1.2 million.
This revenue is expected to be recognised as follows Year ending 31 July  million 2016  actual 2017  actual 0.5 2018 to 2023 0.7 Total 1.2 The invoices for the upfront payments were settled in the first half of the 2017 financial year.
At 31 July 2017 the amount included in deferred revenue is 0.7 million 2016 1.2 million.
The timing of revenue recognition of upfront licence fees is dependent upon the nature of each contract.
One of the agreements signed in July 2016 is for a sevenyear period and the upfront licence fee which was settled in August 2016 is to be recognised as revenue evenly over the sevenyear duration of the agreement.
Future milestone payments received under this agreement are subject to performance conditions and at this stage the likelihood of this cannot be determined with reasonable certainty.
Thus any future milestone payments will be recognised as revenue once the milestone has been achieved.
The other upfront payment has been recognised as revenue in the year ended 31 July 2017.
The impact of this is as follows 2017 2016 million  million Value of sales invoices billings raised during the year 1.1 1.9 Release of deferred revenue 0.5 Less revenue deferred to future years  1.2 Revenue and other operating income per consolidated statement of comprehensive income 1.6 0.7 The generation of cash for the Group is important and as a result the level of billings is considered a key performance indicator.
Billings have fallen compared to 2016 as no new licence agreements have been signed during the year.
The decrease in research and development expenditure of 0.5 million to 5.5 million 2016 6.0 million comprises a decrease in RandD labour costs of 0.6 million offset by increases in material costs and utilities totalling 0.1 million.
Labour costs represent 72.8% 2016 76.6% of total RandD costs with the balance of costs comprising materials and utility costs.
Total payroll costs before the charge for sharebased payments decreased by 0.8 million to 5.7 million 2016 6.5 million.
The decrease in payroll costs is attributable to a 14.7% decrease in average staff numbers compared to 2016 largely due to a cost reduction programme implemented during the year to extend the Companys cash runway.
Staff numbers have fallen further since 31 July 2017 and currently we have c.
80 staff.
The decrease in administrative costs of 0.6 million to 6.8 million reflects decreased employee costs 0.2 million professional fees 0.1 million depreciation 0.3 million and material costs 0.2 million offset by increases in amortisation 0.2 million.
NonGAAP measures The nonGAAP measures of adjusted operating loss and LBITDA are provided to show the operating loss and loss before interest and tax before including noncash charges and large nonrecurring items in order to give a clearer understanding of the loss for the year that reflects cash outflow from the business.
The adjusted operating loss for the year ended 31 July 2017 was 10.7 million 2016 12.5 million.
Loss before interest tax amortisation and sharebased payment charges LBITDA was as shown in the table below.
The decrease of 1.7 million in LBITDA compared to 2016 is a result of the higher revenue leading to an increase in gross profit of 0.8 million and a decrease in RandD and administrative costs of 1.1 million excluding the items added back in the below table.
With interest income net of interest payments decreasing by 0.1 million the loss before tax was 10.9 million 2016 loss of 12.6 million.
The tax credit for the year is 1.8 million 2016 2.0 million.
The tax credit to be claimed in respect of RandD spend is 1.8 million 2016 2.0 million.
Overseas corporation tax was 0.1 million during the year 2016 nil.
There was no deferred tax credit or charge 2016 nil.
Cash flow and balance sheet During the year cash cash equivalents deposits and shortterm investments decreased by 8.8 million to 5.7 million 2016 14.5 million largely as a result of the cash outflow from operating activities.
Tax credits of 2.0 million 2016 1.8 million were received during the year.
The Group increased its capital spend in tangible assets in the year to a total of 0.4 million 2016 0.2 million.
Expenditure incurred in registering patents totalled 1.2 million 2016 0.9 million during the year reflecting the Groups continued focus on developing and registering intellectual property.
Capitalised patent spend is amortised over ten years in line with the established Groups accounting policy.
Read about our sustainability Pages 2531 Read about our governance Pages 34tel million  million Operating loss 10.9 12.8 Sharebased payment charge 0.2 0.3 Adjusted operating loss 10.7 12.5 Depreciation 0.7 1.0 Amortisation 0.5 0.3 LBITDA 9.5 11.2 Adjusted basic loss per share was 3.72 pence 2016 4.36 pence as shown in note 10.
Basic loss per share was 3.82 pence 2016 loss of 4.47 pence.
No dividend has been proposed 2016 nil.
Cash flow and balance sheet continued On 14 November 2017 the Companys shareholders voted in favour of a placing of 19.99% of the Companys issued share capital raising approximately 8.0 million net of costs.
This fundraise strengthens the Companys balance sheet significantly and eliminates immediate going concern issues.
Treasury activities and policies The Group manages its cash deposits prudently.
The placing proceeds and other cash balances will be invested across a number of financial institutions which have investmentgrade credit ratings.
The deposits will range from instant access to sixmonth term deposits.
Cash deposits are regularly reviewed by the Board and cash forecasts are updated monthly to ensure that there is sufficient cash available for foreseeable requirements.
More details on the Groups treasury policies are provided in note 26 to the financial statements.
Credit risk The Group only trades with recognised creditworthy third parties.
Receivable balances are monitored on an ongoing basis and any late payments are promptly investigated to ensure that the Groups exposure to bad debts is not significant.
Foreign exchange management The Group invoices most of its revenues in US Dollars and Euros.
The Group is therefore exposed to movements in those currencies relative to Sterling.
The Group uses forward currency contracts to fix the exchange rate on invoiced or confirmed foreign currency receipts.
The Group does not take out forward contracts against uncertain or forecast income.
There were no open forward contracts as at 31 July 2017 2016 none.
The Groups net profit and its equity are exposed to movements in the value of Sterling relative to the US Dollar.
The indicative impact of movements in the Sterling exchange rate on profits and equity based on the retranslation of the closing balance sheet are summarised in note 26 to the financial statements and were based on the yearend position.
Summary
Following the placing completed in November 2017 the Group is well positioned to exploit the exciting opportunities ahead.
David Blain Chief Financial Officer 16 November 2017 NANOCO RECEIVES FIRST COMMERCIAL ORDERS FOR THE SUPPLY OF CFQD RESIN Nanoco received its first commercial orders from Wah Hong Industrial Corporation one of the worlds largest manufacturers of optical films and sheets for the display industry for the supply of resins containing Nanocos cadmiumfree quantum dots.
The CFQD resin products which will be produced in Nanocos manufacturing facility in Runcorn and delivered to Wah Hong will be converted into films by Wah Hong and supplied to an original equipment manufacturer OEM for usage in TV and monitor products.
These first orders are for initial production which is expected to ramp up over the coming months.
Nanoco and Wah Hong are pleased that display of cuttingedge branded products containing Nanocos CFQD resin began at Touch Taiwan in September 2017.
Further demonstrating the Groups continued momentum Nanoco is focused on ten television and monitor projects with five companies.
DISPL A Y STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
AN IMPACT SUS T AINABILIT Y The Group recognises that although its primary responsibility under UK corporate law is to its shareholders it also has responsibilities towards its employees customers suppliers and also ultimately those consumers who benefit from its products the broader public and the environment.
Health and safety Nanoco recognises that providing a safe secure and healthy working environment is essential and contributes to productivity and improved performance.
The health safety and welfare of all of our employees contractors and visitors is taken seriously across the entire organisation with ultimate responsibility lying with the CEO.
Health and safety performance is a standing item on each Board and Executive team agenda and is also discussed within departmental meetings.
The Groups health and safety policy is reviewed annually.
In addition the Board has established an Environmental Health and Safety EHS Committee to oversee the implementation of policy and involve staff in generating improvement plans.
There are various improvement and reporting systems in place to monitor the performance of the Groups health and safety management system.
These initiatives include but are not limited to reporting all incidents including near misses with appropriate ownership and action tracking systems switched from paper forms to webbased system this year ii communication of relevant topics and incidents via weekly toolbox talks to all departments Nanoco seeks to increase shareholder value over the long term.
Each stakeholder has different interests some of which are listed below
Nanoco acknowledges its responsibilities for the health and safety of its employees for their training and development and for treating them fairly.
Further information about its employment policies is outlined below.
EMPL O YEE S Nanoco is responsible for the quality and safety of its products and for the performance of its research and development projects.
CUS T OMERS 26 Strategic report Health and safety continued iii monthly and quarterly leadership safety and observation audits with the focus on immediate action resolution by the executive or senior manager leading the audit iv monthly departmental audits with appropriate ownership and action tracking processes in place to address issues and monthly health and safety reports issued across the organisation to communicate performance against annual metrics and progress on key improvement initiatives and projects.
A risk assessment programme is in place to identify and mitigate the risks from our operations.
These assessments include but are not limited to the storage handling and processing of hazardous substances ii fire safety and emergency evacuation iii use of mechanical and electrical equipment and iv other workplace operations involving manual handling and ergonomic risks working at height and other hazards identified as part of the EHS improvement programme.
All risk assessments are documented and actions assigned and reviewed according to the defined frequency.
All research and development functions are actively encouraged to wherever possible eliminate or reduce the levels of hazardous substances used in our products and processes.
All relevant chemical legislation and regulatory frameworks are used to assess the suitability of a substance prior to use as part of the risk assessment process.
Standard operating procedures are documented and regularly reviewed.
All documents are reviewed and approved via the electronic document management system.
A health and safety induction programme is in place for all new staff and visitorscontractors performing work on our premises.
Staff are trained in standard operating procedures hazard awareness generic workplace health and safety risks and behavioural safety expectations applicable to their role within the Group.
A crossfunctional health and safety team meets on a monthly basis with representation from all areas of the Group including the Executive team.
Effective inputs and outputs from the team are designed to facilitate a greater focus on health and safety and to actively encourage discussions within respective groups.
The Group has an excellent safety record and there have been no reportable incidents to the respective UK authorities across all our operations.
Nanoco is committed to the continuous improvement of the health and safety management system and has recently completed the Health and Safety Laboratory HSL safety culture survey for the second time 18 months after the first.
The survey showed that across the eight factors in the HSL model there has been a significant improvement in how staff rate our safety performance and all our results now equal or exceed the average scores for chemical and pharmaceutical industry companies.
Based on the results we have identified specific areas for improvement which are being tracked via the health and safety management plan and reported to all staff the Executive team and the Board.
Environment
Nanoco is committed to protecting the environment in which our activities are conducted.
This commitment is directly expressed in our decision to develop our products to be free of toxic heavy metals like cadmium which is still widely used by our competitors in their quantum dot products.
Nanoco has participated actively with regulators on the use of cadmiumbased quantum dots in displays and LED light products.
The European Commission EC has now completed a lengthy review of the use of cadmiumbased quantum dots in displays and LED lighting following the rejection by the European Parliament in 2015 of its previous proposal to extend their use.
The report from their consultants OekoInstitute recommended a further threeyear extension but after concern from member states and environmental NGOs the EC decided to end their use in LED lighting and give the minimum period of two years only for use in displays.
The
EC has now placed a Delegated Act before the European Council and Parliament to put this into force which passed into law in October 2017.
On this basis cadmiumbased quantum dots in displays will be effectively banned from 31 October 2019 since the normal RoHS limit of 100ppm will apply once the exemption ends.
Nanoco expects that regulations in other key markets including China will fall in line with RoHS.
Our products are also designed to improve the energy efficiency of high performance lighting and display equipment and to generate energy from solar power.
The Groups environmental policy aims to foster a positive attitude towards the environment and to raise the awareness of employees of responsible environmental practices at all sites operated by the Group.
The Group endeavours to ensure compliance with all relevant legislation and regulatory requirements and where practical and economically viable standards are developed in excess of such requirements.
The CEO has responsibility for reporting on relevant environmental matters to the Board.
There have been no incidents to report to the authorities across all our operations.
Shareholders and other interested parties are encouraged to use the online version of the Annual Report and Accounts rather than requesting hard copies.
Interested parties are encouraged to visit the Groups website or use the regulatory news services instead of a hard copy.
Employees are also encouraged to recycle paper plastic glass cardboard and cans wherever possible.
TONNES OF WASTE RECYCLED Read our CEOs statement Pages 69 Read about our business model Pages 1011 SUS T AINABILIT Y CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Greenhouse gas GHG reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic and Directors Reports Regulations 2013 the Group is required to state the annual quantity of emissions in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent from activities for which the business is responsible including the combustion of fuel and the operation of its facilities and resulting from the purchase of electricity heat steam or cooling by the business for its own use.
As both of the Groups UK premises are in multioccupancy sites we place reliance upon its respective landlords to provide the data needed to determine emissions.
Our laboratories require continuous negative pressure environments and consequently it is not possible to set realistic reduction targets in the consumption of electricity.
Our gas consumption is used for heating premises and site costs are shared between tenants on the basis of area of occupancy.
In the absence of significant amounts of revenue from the sale of commercial products the emissions of the business primarily arise from the occupation of its research and administration facilities rather than from revenue related production operations.
Emissions in respect of the Groups US office are considered to be negligible.
Our emissions based on appropriate conversion factors published by the Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy for the current year are shown in the table opposite.
Waste
During the year the Group generated 57.7 tonnes of waste 2016 69.3 tonnes and recycled 46.8 tonnes of this 2016 62.1 tonnes.
The Group engages a specialist contractor to incinerate batches of chemicals and dispose of other materials no longer required.
All waste contractors are assessed to ensure the waste hierarchy approach is applied to all of our materials handled and that their operations and systems are compliant with the relevant legislation.
Audits are performed every three years in line with our duty of care as a waste producer.
Other environmental matters Consideration of the benefits to the environment is a significant factor in decisions regarding investments to upgrade the Groups research and development facilities in Manchester and Runcorn.
Video conferencing is used where possible instead of physical travel in order to reduce the Groups environmental footprint through fewer flights and other means of travel.
The Groups display lighting and solar technologies all sit in the energy efficiency and low environmental impact arena and as such will enable customer companies to increase the uptake of their products while reducing their impact on the environment.
2016 Change 11 11 0.0% INTENSIT Y t CO e AVERA GE NUMBER OF EMPL OYEE S Nanoco 2016 vs 2017 and industry mean score out of 5
HandS oriented behaviours HandS trust Usability of procedures
Peer group attitude Resources for
Accident and near miss reporting WHOLE PORTFOLIO C ARBON GENERATION ENERGY USE 2017 tCO
Natural gas Air travel
2016 tCO e Change 29tel1237 1426 721 604 19.4% 6.9% 51.8% 13.3% Scope 2 Scope 3 D ATA NO TE S Reporting period 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017 Baseline period 1 August 2015 to 31 July 2016 Boundary Operational control Reporting method The Greenhouse Gas GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard Emissions factor source Department for Business Energy and Industrial Strategy Standard Set 2017 Data changes and restatements None S AFET Y CULTURE SURVEY 28 Strategic report Disabled employees It is Nanocos policy that disabled people including job applicants and employees should be able to participate in all of Nanocos activities fully on an equal basis with people who are not disabled.
Nanoco has a disability discrimination policy that states the principles that Nanoco will not on the grounds of a persons disability or for a reason relating to a persons disability treat that person less favourably than it treats or would treat others to whom the same reason does not or would not apply unless genuinely justified.
If any arrangements made by or on behalf of Nanoco or any physical feature of premises occupied by Nanoco put disabled people at a substantial disadvantage compared to people who are not disabled Nanoco will take such reasonably practicable steps as it can to prevent this disadvantage.
Nanoco is particularly concerned that disabled workers are treated equally in the following areas recruitment and selection promotion transfer and training terms of employment benefits facilities and services and dismissals and redundancies.
Employee communication and involvement Nanoco is committed to a policy of engaging employees in the activities and growth of the Group.
Human resources and senior management review communication channels via the use of employee surveys and plan communication activities to ensure employees are fully informed of current business strategy and financial results or corporate news.
Communication channels include allGroup meetings senior team meetings which then cascade information down regular team meetings crossfunctional working group meetings and management onetoone updates with their team members.
Communication media used includes the Group intranet allGroup email briefings and online meeting software.
Consultations occur to allow employee opinions to be heard when making decisions affecting their interests and all employees can discuss any business or personal concerns with the human resources management team.
Nanoco promotes the achievement of a good worklife balance for employees by offering familyfriendly policies like flexible working and the operation of a childcare voucher scheme.
Nanoco also has procedures for emergency domestic leave.
Remuneration is
Gender diversity There is one female member on the Board.
Although there are no females on the Executive team there were three 2016 four female members out of 17 2016 24 on the senior management team as at 31 July 2017.
Women constituted 24% 2016 24% of the Groups employees as a whole at that date.
The Group is committed to providing flexible working arrangements for employees and to providing equal access to opportunities for employees regardless of gender.
Racial and geographical diversity The Groups employees are from many different backgrounds and represent 14 different nationalities British American Australian Chinese German Indian Irish Italian Japanese Korean Polish Portuguese Syrian and Vietnamese.
The Board itself comprises three different nationalities being British American and Irish.
In addition Group employees come from a range of business backgrounds not purely research and development.
Indeed of the Board members previous roles and responsibilities include those in the supply of chemicals and engineering electronics fastmoving consumer goods publishing and financial industries.
Nanoco has business development people in America Taiwan Korea and the UK also covering Europe and China.
Increasingly Nanoco seeks individuals with experience in the business and geographic markets in which the Group operates in order to support its strategic objectives.
Equal opportunities Nanoco is committed to a policy of treating all its employees and job applicants equally.
Nanoco will appoint train develop reward and promote on the basis of merit and ability.
Nanocos equal opportunities policy states that employees will not receive less favourable treatment or consideration on the grounds of age disability gender or gender reassignment marriage or civil partnership status pregnancy or maternity race religion or belief sex sexual orientation or parttime status nor will they be disadvantaged by any conditions of employment that cannot be justified as necessary on operational grounds relevant to the performance of the job.
The Groups equal opportunities policy is reviewed annually and is available to employees on the Group intranet.
A copy can be obtained upon request from the Company Secretary.
DIFFERENT
NATIONALITIES
Read about our Board Pages 3233 Read about our governance Pages 3436 SUS T AINABILIT Y CONTINUED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 determined on an annual basis by the Remuneration Committee and Executive Directors as appropriate.
The Group attracts and retains employees of high calibre by offering remuneration that is in line with that offered by industry competitors and local practice in the countries in which it operates.
A Group share option LTIP scheme was launched during the previous financial year.
Grants under this scheme were made in November 2016.
Some employees also hold options from the legacy Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP scheme which was operational before the main listing.
There are a significant number of employee shareholders as a result of the LTIP scheme.
Employee wellbeing Nanoco recognises that it has a duty to ensure the health safety and welfare of its employees as far as reasonably practicable.
This includes physical mental and social wellbeing.
It is also required to have in place measures to mitigate as far as practicable factors that could harm employees physical and mental wellbeing which includes work related stress.
Nanoco introduced an Employee Wellbeing Policy and Employee Assistance Programme in May 2017.
The Wellbeing Policy extends our employers duty of care by taking action to reduce stressors associated with the way work is organised at Nanoco that are under our control.
The Employee Assistance Programme offers support to help people cope and build resilience.
Telephone counselling UK based and facetoface counselling are available to all employees through the programme.
Read more about our Wellbeing Policy Page 31 Risk assessment Nanocos performance on wellbeing and stress management will be assessed in the context of the HSE Management Standards.
This will involve HR and the EHS Committee developing an institutionlevel risk assessment via an employee survey management focus groups and HSE assessment tools.
Results will be presented to the Executive team so any necessary action can be taken where required.
STRATEGIC REPORT WITH THIS RULING THE END OF CADMIUM IS TRULY IN SIGHT.
RESPONSIBLE
DISPLAY MANUFACTURERS DEVELOPING NEW PRODUCTS WILL NEED TO START PREPARING NOW FOR BAN IN 2019.
MICHAEL EDELMAN
Chief Executive Officer
NANOCO WELCOMES EUROPEAN COMMISSION DECISION TO PROHIBIT
The European Commission has subject to passing into law  decided to prohibit cadmium from TVs and displays sold in Europe from 31 October 2019 under its Restriction of Hazardous Substances directive.
Nanoco makes quantum dots  a semiconductor crystal used in applications like television displays  that are free of the heavy metal cadmium meaning the prohibition of cadmium in these products is a boon for Nanocos business.
Cadmium is one of six substances banned from use in Europe in electrical and electronic equipment by this directive and is recognised as the most hazardous heavy metal.
DISPL A Y 30 Strategic report
HR will communicateprovide training on agreed good management practice knowledge skills and behaviours framework.
HR will facilitate consultation with employees on the Wellbeing Policy via surveys and the EHS Committee meetings and feature wellbeing topics in employee communications.
HR will publish the policy in the Employee Handbook.
Monitoring and review HR will collate management information which will enable Nanoco to measure its performance in relation to stress management and employee wellbeing.
The Wellbeing Policy will be reviewed every three years by HR and the EHS Committee using management information staff survey feedback senior management team SMT and EHS Committee feedback and results of risk assessments.
The threeyear review will be reported to the Nanoco Board EHS Committee to approve any revisions or amendments to the policy.
Ethics
Nanoco aims to demonstrate and promote high standards of honest and ethical conduct throughout the Group.
Formal policies and procedures are reviewed annually and the policies listed below are available on the Group intranet or upon request from the Company Secretary.
All Group employees are required to adhere to specified codes of conduct policies and procedures including but not limited to the antibribery and corruption policy whistleblowing policy and equal opportunities policy.
Nanoco is a member of the Chemical Industries Association CIA and applies the principles of Responsible Care to all of its operations.
The community Whilst the Group does not believe that it has a mandate from shareholders for the Group to make charitable donations it does encourage its employees to support charitable causes of their choosing.
Nanoco employees hold regular charity fundraising events for their chosen charities throughout the year.
On behalf of the Board Dr Christopher Richards
Dr Michael Edelman
Chief Executive Officer
16 November 2017 SUS T AINABILIT Y CONTINUED Strategic report approval The strategic report on pages 1 to 31 incorporates
Chairmans statement
Our business model and strategy Our markets
Chief Executive Officers statement
KPIs
Financial review
Corporate social responsibility Risks which includes the viability and going concern statements Dr Michael Edelman
Chief Executive Officer
16 November 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Feel better work better live better Nanocos wellbeing policy aims to enhance organisational performance by engaging all employees at all levels to take responsibility for creating a working environment where potential work related stressors as far as practicable are avoided minimised or mitigated and to take responsibility for their own work and effectiveness and their own health and wellbeing.
It is managed by HR in conjunction with EHS and will assess Nanocos working practices against the HSE Management Standards.
The introduction of an Employee Assistance Programme as part of the wellbeing policy provides counselling support that helps to reduce absence and improve wellbeing by addressing issues headon reducing their impact.
Training
Nanoco believes in high standards.
This includes a commitment to giving our employees training and development opportunities.
We are committed to developing positive working relationships and providing support for people to do their jobs competently and efficiently.
As part of our Equal Opportunities Policy we aim to provide internal career progression where possible.
As part of the personal development planning process employees discuss future career ambitions with their manager.
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT NANOCO IS COMMITTED TO ENGAGING EMPLOYEES IN THE ACTIVITIES AND GROWTH OF THE GROUP.
HR AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT REGULARLY REVIEW COMMUNICATION CHANNELS WHICH INCLUDE EMPLOYEE SURVEYS AND ALL COMPANY MEETINGS.
THE BOARD ACTIVELY ENCOURAGES EMPLOYEE SHARE OWNERSHIP VIA THE LTIP SHARE OPTION SCHEME.
RUTH HAILW OOD Head of HR
ONETOONE
UPDATES WITH TEAM MEMBERS
NATIONALITIES
24% FEMALE EMPLOYEES
VOUCHER SCHEME AND FLEXIBLE
COMPANYWIDE
LTIP SHARE OPTION
Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 32 Corporate governance AN EXPERIENCED TEAM DR CHRISTOPHER RICHARDS Nonexecutive Chairman
Chris was appointed Chairman of Nanoco Group plc in May 2016 having joined the Board as a Nonexecutive Director in November 2015.
Skills and experience Following a successful international career in the agrochemical and life sciences industries Chris has become a highly experienced nonexecutive director and business adviser.
Chris is the former Chief Executive Officer of Arysta LifeScience a Japanbased agrochemical business which grew rapidly under his leadership.
After stepping down as CEO in 2009 he became Arysta LifeSciences Nonexecutive Chairman until the sale of the business in 2015 to Platform Specialty Products.
After gaining his DPhil from the University of Oxford in Biological Science Chris worked as a research scientist for four years.
He began his executive career in 1983 in the Plant Protection division at Imperial Chemical Industries plc which later became Syngenta.
During 20 years he has lived in various countries including Colombia and Japan and led international marketing and commercial functions.
Other roles Chris currently holds a number of executive and nonexecutive roles at quoted and private businesses.
He is the Interim CEO and Executive Chairman of Plant Health Care plc AIM PHC and a Nonexecutive Director of Origin Enterprises plc AIM OGN.
DR MICHAEL EDELMAN
Chief Executive Officer
Appointed
Nanoco is led by Dr Michael Edelman who joined the Group twelve years ago in September 2004.
Michael led the initial fundraising spun Nanoco out of the University of Manchester floated the Group on the London Stock Exchange in 2009 and grew Nanoco into the worldleading quantum dot player it is today.
Skills and experience Prior to Nanoco Michael held a number of executive roles including having responsibility for licensing the technology developed by GE Bayer joint venture Exatec LLPsite Commercial Director at Colloids Ltd and Business Manager at Brunner Mond and Co Ltd.
Michael started his career with ICI and has a PhD in Organometallic Chemistry from the University of Sussex UK and an undergraduate degree in Classics and Chemistry from Tufts University Boston MA USA.
Other roles
DR NIGEL PICKETT Chief Technology Officer
Nanocos technology team is led by Nigel who is a cofounder of Nanoco and inventor of Nanocos key quantum dot scaleup technology.
In 2000 he moved to Manchester where he cofounded Nanoco Technologies in 2001.
Skills and experience Nigel has coauthored over 70 academic papers and is an inventor on 150 patents and pending applications.
He has a passion and experience in taking research work from the academic bench through to full commercialisation.
Nigel graduated from Newcastle University in 1991 and chose to remain at Newcastle to pursue a PhD in the field of Main Group Organometallics and is a Fellow of the Royal Society of
After graduation in 1994 he undertook a postdoctoral fellowship at St Andrews University Scotland in the field of precursor design for metalorganic vapour phase epitaxy MOVPE growth and synthesis of nanoparticles using chemical vapour deposition CVD techniques.
In 1996 he won a Japan Society for the Promotion of Science JSPS fellowship and spent the following year working at Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology Japan.
In 1998 he became a Research Fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology USA working on the design and evaluation of precursors used in MOVPE.
Other roles
KEITH WIGGINS Chief Operating Officer
Keith joined Nanoco in October 2014 and is a highly experienced chemicals industry executive.
Skills and experience Keith began his career with ICI working in RandD and manufacturing before joining The Dow Chemical Company Dow in 1989 as a sales manager in its London office.
He went on to lead progressively bigger and more complex speciality chemical businesses around the world living in Germany Switzerland and the USA.
In 2006 Keith returned to the UK as Managing Director for Dow UK Ireland and Nordic.
He held this position until 2013 and from 2006 to 2011 he was concurrently CEO  Global Business Director of Haltermann a speciality chemicals subsidiary of Dow.
Keith who graduated in Chemistry at Imperial College London is an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of
He has held a number of industry offices including President of the Chemical Industries Association between 2011 and 2013.
Other roles
BO ARD OF DIRE CT ORS STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DAVID BLAIN Chief Financial Officer
David joined Nanoco in August 2015 from the role of Chief Financial Officer of Inspired Capital plc an AIMlisted finance provider.
Skills and experience David is a chartered accountant with considerable operational commercial and strategic experience gained at a number of businesses quoted on the London Stock Exchange.
After qualifying as a Chartered Accountant David joined the Newcastle office of Price Waterhouse now PwC where he worked for nine years in audit and business advisory services.
He then spent eleven years as the Finance Director of Drew Scientific Group plc a medical diagnostics company on the Main Market.
His next role was at the AIMtraded IT business eg Solutions plc after which he became Chief Financial Officer of Renovo Group plc the Manchester based biotechnology company that later became Inspired Capital plc.
Other roles
DR ALISON FIELDING Nonexecutive Director
Alison joined Nanoco in April 2017.
Skills and experience Alison holds an MBA from Manchester Business School a PhD in Organic Chemistry and a firstclass degree in Chemistry from the University of Glasgow.
Alison started her career at Zeneca PLC now Astra Zeneca followed by five years at McKinsey and Company and later cofounded Techtran Group Limited which was acquired by IP Group in 2005 where she held the role of Director and COO until 2013.
Whilst at IP Group she also sat on the board of and advised several early stage and quoted IP Groupbacked technology companies.
Other roles Alison is Director of Strategy and IP Impact at IP Group and is also currently a Nonexecutive Director of Getech Group plc.
BRENDAN CUMMINS Nonexecutive Senior Independent Director
Brendan Cummins was appointed to the Board on 28 May 2015.
Skills and experience Brendan is an experienced chemical industry executive with 40 years of industry and leadership experience.
Formerly he was Chief Executive Officer of Ciba Inc. acquired by BASF in 2009.
During his executive career he worked for many years at the CibaGeigy Group and then at Ciba Inc. interests.
He joined CibaGeigy in Ireland in the early 1970s and went on to hold many senior international positions in locations including Switzerland China Hong Kong and Singapore.
Other roles Brendan is currently a Nonexecutive Director of Ashland Inc.
Exchange where he is also a member of the Ashland audit committee and chair of the governance and nominations committee.
In addition Brendan serves as a nonexecutive board member of The Perstorp Group Sweden and member of the remuneration committee Perstorp Group is controlled by the French private equity fund PAI Partners.
Brendan is a member of the Remuneration Audit and Nominations Committees.
Audit Committee Nominations Committee Remuneration Committee
R A N R 34 Corporate governance
SECTOR EXPERIENCE Advisers 1 Chemical 5 Finance 1 05 years 5 1115 years 1 1620 years 1 suitable for Nanocos evolving strategy and growth aspirations as we progress through a new phase of our development.
Board and Committee evaluation Regular and appropriate Board and Committee evaluation is vital to improving Board effectiveness.
This year I conducted a thorough internal Board evaluation process which was discussed in detail by the Board.
Overall it was concluded that the Board and Committees functioned effectively with Directors feeling free to voice their differing opinions but that there were areas of potential improvement.
It was felt that the balance of time allocated to strategy operations and functional areas and governance was broadly correct although as last year it was decided that additional time should be spent discussing strategy.
We are addressing the strategy by allocating additional time outside of the regular Board meetings to ensure that this area is properly addressed in future.
The
Chairs of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees changed during the year as a result of resignations from the Board.
The new Chairs have settled in well to their roles and next year the performance of those Committees will be reviewed formally.
Whilst in compliance with the Code we believe that the ratio of Nonexecutive I am pleased to present the Corporate governance report for the year ended 31 July 2017 .
As I said in my letter to shareholders in last years report the Board believes that good governance is fundamental to the successful growth of our business.
The Board and its Committees play a central role in the Groups governance by providing an external and independent perspective on matters material to Nanocos stakeholders and by seeking to ensure that effective internal controls and risk management measures are in place.
The Board also promotes a culture of good governance throughout the Group by creating an environment of openness transparency accountability and responsibility.
This section of the Annual Report describes our corporate governance structures and processes and how they have been applied throughout the year ended 31 July 2017.
My role as Chairman My role is to ensure that Nanoco has an effective Board which is collectively responsible for the longterm success of the Group and that all Board Directors play an active part in all meetings in an open environment in which everyone expresses their opinions in pursuit of the best conclusions for the Group.
One of my most important jobs is to ensure that the Board and its Committees have the right balance of skills experience and knowledge Directors to Executive Directors is not ideal and we will look to appoint another Nonexecutive Director in due course.
Audit Committee The Audit Committees key work during the period was detailed work in supporting the going concern assessment the detailed disclosures that we made in our interim results and improving the risk management process.
Further details can be found on page 38.
Longerterm viability statement The Group utilised the first two years of its fiveyear forecast to assess its long term viability.
The twoyear period was chosen due to the inherent difficulty and uncertainties in preparing forecasts for the Group at its current stage of development.
Further details are provided on page 20.
Dr Christopher Richards
16 November 2017 CORPORATE GO VERNANCE S TATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JULY 2017 14 7214M 72 1414M STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This section contains the Groups reporting disclosures on corporate governance required by the Companies Act 2006 the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code of the Financial Reporting Council the Code and the UKLAs Disclosure and Transparency Rule 7 including the required statement of compliance.
A copy of the Code is publicly available at www. rc. corporategovernancecode.
The Board is committed to ensuring that high standards of corporate governance appropriate for the Groups size are maintained by Nanoco.
Statement of compliance with the Code I am pleased to confirm that the Board considers that it has been in compliance with the Code throughout the year ended 31 July 2017.
We did not comply with the requirement in E.2.4 to give 14 clear working days notice of the general meeting we held on 14 November 2017.
The reason for the noncompliance was the desire to conclude the meeting as early as possible as completion of the fundraising had a direct impact on the publication of the Companys preliminary results announcement and its report and accounts for the year ended 31 July 2017 as the proceeds of the fundraising were relevant in assessing the going concern status of the Company.
The
Directors strongly believed that it was in the best interests of the Company for the going concern status of the Company to be secured prior to the publication of the Companys preliminary results announcement and its report and accounts for the year ended 31 July 2017 which were required to be published by 30 November 2017.
Whilst in compliance with the Code we believe that the ratio of Nonexecutive Directors to Executive Directors is not ideal and we will look to appoint another Nonexecutive Director in due course.
Disclosure and Transparency Rule 7 This statement complies with subsections 2.1 2.2i 2.3i 2.5 2.7 and 2.10 of Rule 7 of the UK Listing Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
The information required to be disclosed by subsection 2.6 of Rule 7 is shown in the Statement of Directors responsibilities on page 64 and is incorporated in this section by reference.
The Board The Group is controlled through its Board of
The Boards main roles are to provide overall strategy and direction for the Group and to ensure that the necessary financial and other resources are made available to enable those objectives to be met.
It has a schedule of matters reserved for its approval including but not limited to decisions on strategy and risk management approval of budgets acquisitions and disposals major capital expenditure legal and insurance issues Board structure and the appointment of advisers.
In some areas responsibility is delegated to Committees of the Board within clearly defined terms of reference.
Once the strategic and financial objectives of the Group have been set by the Board it is the role of the Chief Executive Officer to ensure that through the daytoday management of the Groups business they are achieved.
All Directors are subject to election by the shareholders at the next general meeting following appointment to the Board and to reelection at intervals of not more than three years.
As at 31 July 2017 the Board comprised the Nonexecutive Chairman two independent Nonexecutive Directors and four Executive Directors.
The names of the current Directors together with their biographical details and any other directorships are set out on pages 32 and 33.
The contracts of the Directors are available for inspection by shareholders at the AGM.
The Board considers its independent Nonexecutive Directors to be independent in character and judgement.
No Nonexecutive Director has been an employee of the Group has had a material business relationship with the Group receives remuneration other than a Directors fee has close family ties with any of the Groups advisers Directors or senior employees or holds crossdirectorships.
The Nonexecutive Directors constructively challenge and help develop proposals on strategy and bring strong independent judgement knowledge and experience to the Boards deliberations.
The Directors are given access to independent professional advice at the Groups expense when the Directors deem it is necessary in order for them to carry out their responsibilities.
The Board meets at least eight times a year and the Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees meet at least twice a year.
Additional Board calls may be held to address specific issues as they arise.
During this year one Board meeting was cancelled and combined with another meeting so the Board met seven times in this financial year.
The Board receives appropriate and timely information prior to each meeting with a formal agenda and Board and Committee papers being distributed several days before meetings take place.
Any Director may challenge Group proposals and decisions are taken democratically after discussion.
Any Director who feels that any concern remains unresolved after discussion may ask for that concern to be noted in the minutes of the meeting.
Any specific actions arising from such meetings are agreed by the Board and then followed up by management.
The Group maintains for its Directors and officers liability insurance for any claims against them in that capacity.
There is a formal rigorous and transparent procedure for the appointment of new Directors to the Board which is led by the Nominations Committee.
The Board has carried out a thorough evaluation each year of its own performance and that of its Committees and individual
The Chairs of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees have been in place for only part of the year and their performance will be reviewed fully next year.
The Board considers that the Committees have performed effectively throughout the year.
The Board will not take significant risks to achieve its strategic objectives and indeed endeavours to limit the risks to the business in the achievement of its strategic objectives by partnering with a number of organisations in a number of areas.
The Group has effective procedures in place to deal with conflicts of interest.
The Board is aware of other commitments of its Directors and changes to these commitments are reported to the Board.
The number of Board and Committee meetings attended by each of the Directors during the year is shown on page 35.
Full Board
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Number of meetings in period Attendance Executive Directors Dr Michael Edelman 7 Dr Nigel Pickett 7 Keith Wiggins 7 David Blain 7 Nonexecutive Directors Dr Christopher Richards 7  3 Brendan Cummins Dr Alison Fielding 2 1  1 Former Directors Gordon Hall 3 3  3 Robin Williams Corporate governance The Board continued During the year the Board has maintained responsibility for the overall management of the Group which included review and development of the Groups focus and business partnerships approval of the annual operating and capital expenditure budgets and any material changes to them and approval of the halfyearly report interim management statements or trading updates the preliminary announcement of results and the Annual Report and Accounts.
Each full Board meeting considers as a matter of course the operational technological and financial performance of the Group against its strategic goals and annual budget reports from the Chairs of the Audit Remuneration and Nominations Committees if applicable important forthcoming events and reports on investor relations legal affairs the environment and health and safety.
Additionally Directors are required to confirm any potential conflicts of interest arising from the proposed business of the meeting and any changes in their commitments or other appointments.
Certain key senior management members are invited to give presentations at Board and Committee meetings where appropriate.
Other areas including the review of the Group risk register the strategic plan litigation matters contentious matters succession planning IT strategy and the need for a quality and compliance committee and strategic advisory committee are reviewed by the Board during each year at intervals commensurate with their importance.
The roles of the Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer
The division of responsibilities between the Chairman of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer is clearly defined.
The Chairman leads the Board in the determination of its strategy and in the achievement of its objectives.
The Chairman is responsible for organising the business of the Board ensuring its effectiveness and setting its agenda.
The Chairman is a Nonexecutive Director and has no involvement in the daytoday business of the Group.
The Chairman facilitates the effective contribution of Nonexecutive Directors and constructive relations between Executive and Nonexecutive Directors ensures Directors receive accurate timely and clear information and facilitates effective communication with shareholders.
The Chief Executive Officer has direct charge of the Group on a daytoday basis and is accountable to the Board for the financial and operational performance of the Group.
Commitments and performance of the Chairman The Chairman has sufficient time to devote to his duties as Chairman and this has been demonstrated by his active participation in the Groups activities.
His performance is reviewed annually by the Nonexecutive Directors and led by the Senior Nonexecutive Director Brendan Cummins.
In this regard the experiences input and recommendations of all Board Members was solicited via confidential interviews and discussions.
The evaluation for the most part focused on the Chairs leadership effectiveness in managing the Boardmanaging relationships with all stakeholders the extent to which the Chair effectively leads and develops the Board and promotes solid participation leading to sound decision making and the conducting of meaningful performance evaluation.
The Chair was evaluated on the effectiveness of the overall governance process the cohesion of our strategic management system and recommendations were given as to how we could further develop all these aspects.
Professional development On appointment each Director takes part in an induction programme in which they receive comprehensive information about the Group the role of the Board and the matters reserved for its decision the terms of reference and membership of the Board and Committees and the powers delegated to those Committees the Groups corporate governance practices and procedures including the powers reserved to the Groups most senior Executives and the Groups latest financial information.
Throughout their period in office the Directors are updated on the Groups business the competitive environment in which it operates corporate social responsibility matters and other changes affecting the Group and the industry it operates in as a whole.
Performance evaluation The Board has established a formal process for the annual evaluation of the performance of the Executive Directors.
This evaluation is based on a performance evaluation questionnaire completed by each Executive Director.
The evaluation of the Chief Executive Officer is performed by the Chairman and the evaluation of the other Executive Directors is performed
by the Chief Executive Officer.
Information
Board reports and papers are circulated to the Directors in advance of the relevant Board or Committee meeting.
The Board papers include management accounts regular management reports and information which enables the Board to scrutinise the Groups and managements performance against agreed objectives.
These papers are supplemented by information specifically requested by the Directors from time to time.
Minutes of Board and Committee meetings are circulated to all Board members.
Director dealings in Company shares In addition the Company has adopted a model code for Directors dealings in securities of the Company which is appropriate for a company quoted on the premium list of the London Stock
The Directors comply with the rules relating to Directors dealings and also take all reasonable steps to ensure compliance by the Groups applicable employees as defined in the rules.
Investor relations Meetings with analysts and institutional shareholders are held following the interim and preliminary results announcements and on an ad hoc basis.
These are usually attended by the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer.
Feedback from these meetings and regular market updates are prepared by the Companys broker and by the Companys internal and external investor relations advisers and are presented to the Board.
The Chairman and other Nonexecutive Directors are available to shareholders to discuss strategy and governance issues at a shareholders request.
There is an investors section on the Companys website site which is kept up to date.
Annual General Meeting AGM At the AGM separate resolutions will be proposed for each substantially different issue.
The outcome of the voting on AGM resolutions is disclosed by means of an announcement on the London Stock Exchange.
Relations with shareholders and other stakeholders Nanoco recognises the importance of good and timely communication.
Its
All press releases are published on the Companys website shortly after they are issued via the regulatory news service in the United Kingdom.
The majority of shareholders receive most of their information about the Company including the annual and halfyearly reports via the website.
All shareholders are encouraged to attend the Annual General Meeting and talk to the Directors there.
In addition shareholders are able to contact the Company via email at email The Board takes steps to ensure that the views of major shareholders are considered through regular contact.
As appropriate the Board takes due note of their views insofar as these are relevant to the Companys overall approach to corporate governance.
This is achieved through feedback from meetings with significant shareholders and feedback from the Companys brokers.
In addition capital market events are held to inform financial analysts shareholders and the press about the Companys activities.
Dr Christopher Richards
16 November 2017 CORPORATE GO VERNANCE S TATEMENT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Good governance and strong responsible balanced leadership are critical to creating longterm shareholder value.
MEMBERS
Dr Christopher Richards Chairman Brendan Cummins Dr Alison Fielding appointed 20 April 2017 Robin Williams resigned on 13 July 2017 Gordon Hall resigned on 31 January 2017 The Board strongly believes that good governance and strong responsible balanced leadership are critical to creating longterm shareholder value and business success.
The Committee met three times during the year.
Roles and responsibilities Under normal circumstances the Nominations Committee will meet not less than twice a year to assist the Board in discharging its responsibilities relating to the composition and makeup of the Board and any Committees of the Board.
It is also responsible for periodically reviewing the Boards structure and identifying potential candidates to be appointed as Directors or Committee members as the need may arise.
The Nominations Committee is responsible for evaluating the balance of skills knowledge and experience and the size structure and composition of the Board and Committees of the Board and retirements and appointments of additional and replacement Directors and Committee members and makes appropriate recommendations to the Board on such matters.
Committee membership In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Nominations Committee consists of Nonexecutive
It is chaired by Dr Christopher Richards since his appointment as a Nonexecutive Director in November 2015.
The Committees other members are Brendan Cummins and Dr Alison Fielding.
Gordon Hall and Robin Williams were members of the Committee prior to their resignation from the Board.
There have not been any other changes to the Committee membership during the year.
Committee activities during the year The Nominations Committee met three times during the financial year to discuss Board structure and independence its skillset and the appointment of Dr Alison Fielding as a Nonexecutive Director and Audit Committee Chair.
The recruitment firm used to assist the Committee in the selection process which led to the recruitment of Dr Alison Fielding was The Miles Partnership which is the only connection that the Miles Partnership has with the Company.
Whilst in compliance with the Code we believe that the ratio of Nonexecutive Directors to Executive Directors is not ideal and we will look to appoint another Nonexecutive Director in due course.
Diversity
The Group pursues diversity including gender diversity throughout the business.
When recruiting at Board level the Nominations Committee requires that executive search firms have signed up to their industrys voluntary code of conduct prepared in response to the Davies Review of Women on Boards.
The Group follows a policy of appointing talented people on merit at every level and does not have a specific target for numbers of female
The Board will also ensure that its own development in this area is consistent with its strategic objectives and enhances Board effectiveness.
Dr Christopher Richards Nominations Committee Chairman 16 November 2017 NOMINATIONS COMMIT TEE REPORT 38 Corporate governance The Audit Committee plays a central role in the review of the Groups financial reporting and internal control processes.
Its aim is to ensure that these processes deliver high quality and timely information.
The Audit Committee continues to be vigilant in its monitoring of internal and external risk factors and to assist the Board in its development of a risk register and the introduction of the viability report.
As a Committee it seeks not just to respond to external factors but to endeavour to support and challenge management to anticipate future risks and opportunities.
The Committee remains committed to helping the Board ensure that the Annual Report as a whole is fair balanced and understandable.
The specific duties of the Committee how it operates and the key areas of focus are detailed in the review below.
It is very conscious of increasing shareholder expectation and scrutiny of its work and would welcome feedback.
Roles and responsibilities The Audit Committee assists the Board in discharging its responsibilities with regard to financial reporting including reviewing and monitoring the integrity of the Groups annual and interim financial statements.
The Board has also requested that the Committee advise them in ensuring that the financial statements when taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
The ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the Annual Report and Accounts and the halfyearly reports remains with the Board the external auditor including reviewing and monitoring the extent of the nonaudit work undertaken by the external auditor advising on the appointment of the external auditor overseeing the Groups relationship with its external auditor and reviewing the effectiveness of the external audit process internal controls and consideration of the potential need for an internal audit function including reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups internal control review function the appropriateness of accounting policies and the critical judgements and estimates the relevance of developments in accounting and reporting requirements the effectiveness of internal controls and risk management systems the auditors plan for the yearend audit the formal engagement terms performance objectivity and independence of the auditor including the extent of nonaudit work undertaken by the auditor and the audit and nonaudit fees of the auditor.
These are set out in note 6 to the financial statements.
The Audit Committee will give due consideration to laws and regulations the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code and the requirements of the Listing Rules.
The Audit Committee continues to be vigilant in its monitoring of internal and external risk factors.
MEMBERS
Dr Alison Fielding Chair from 13 July 2017 Brendan Cummins Robin Williams Chairman until resignation on 13 July 2017 Gordon Hall resigned on 31 January 2017 A UDIT COMMIT TEE REPORT STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Committee membership The composition of the Committee currently comprises Dr Alison Fielding and Brendan Cummins.
Dr Alison Fielding became Chair of the Committee following the resignation of Robin Williams on 13 July 2017.
Gordon Hall was also a member of the Committee until his resignation.
In accordance with the provisions of the Code the Committee is made up of independent Nonexecutive Directors.
The Board considers that Dr Alison Fielding by virtue of her former executive and current nonexecutive roles has recent and relevant financial experience to act as Chair of the Committee.
Details of relevant experience of all members of the Committee are detailed on pages 32 and 33.
Other Directors and representatives of the external auditor attend by invitation.
Activities of the Audit Committee The Committee met five times during the financial year.
The meetings were held to review the results of the external audit for the previous financial year and discuss and agree the scope of the external audits and internal reviews for the year including the review of key areas of judgement and improvements to the risk management process.
The Committee discharged its obligations in response to the financial year as follows External audit During the year the Committee reviewed and approved the scope and timetable for the interim review and final audit.
The
Committee also reviews the policies to ensure ongoing compliance with the Code.
This includes the policy against which to consider the independence of the external auditor consistent with the ethical standards published by the Audit Practices Board and a policy on the engagement of the external auditor for the provision of nonaudit services.
The Committee has considered the independence requirements including that the rotation policy has been complied with.
Furthermore the only fees paid for nonaudit services related to a review of the interim results in the current year and a review of working capital forecasts required for an anticipated fundraise and therefore do not jeopardise their independence.
A separate external firm is engaged for taxation advice.
However in view of the period which has elapsed since the appointment of its current auditor in 2008 the Committee will consider the need for a retender following the finalisation of this years audit and in any case will put the audit out to tender following the 2018 audit.
Independence safeguards In accordance with best practice and professional standards the external auditor is required to adhere to a rotation policy whereby the audit engagement partner is rotated after five years.
Ernst and Young LLP has been in tenure for nine years and the current audit engagement partner was appointed in 2016.
The external auditor is also required periodically to assess whether in its professional opinion it is independent and those views are shared with the Audit
The Committee has authority to take independent advice as it deems appropriate in order to resolve issues on auditor independence.
No such advice has to date been required.
Nonaudit services provided by the external auditor During the financial year the nonaudit services provided to the Group by the auditor 52000 2016 8000 comprised a review of the interim results and in the current year only a review of working capital forecasts required for an anticipated fundraise.
Since the year end nonaudit services provided to the Group by the auditor amounted to 25000 2016 nil and comprised a further review of the working capital statement required to be given in relation to the fundraise in November 2017.
Independence assessment by the Audit Committee The Committee was satisfied that safeguards were maintained regarding the independence and objectivity of the external auditor.
Financial reporting The Committee reviewed the interim and annual financial statements.
As part of that review process the members of the Committee were provided with a draft of the full Annual Report enabling them to ensure that the numbers therein are consistent with those in the financial statements their knowledge gained from the monthly management accounts or are sourced from appropriate data.
More importantly the Committee assessed whether the words used were consistent with their understanding of the Groups business obtained through Board and Audit Committee meetings and other interaction they had with management using their experience to assess whether the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable.
This additional review by the Committee supplemented by advice received from external advisers during the drafting process assisted the Board in determining that the report is fair balanced and understandable at the time that it was approved.
The Committee considered the appropriateness of preparing the accounts on a going concern basis including consideration of forecast plans and supporting assumptions and concluded that the Groups financial position was such that it continued to be appropriate for accounts to be prepared on a going concern basis.
Emphasis was placed on the detailed going concern disclosures which were subject to detailed scrutiny as part of the preparation of the interim results.
The Committee together with the Board considered what were the significant risks and issues in relation to the financial statements and how these would be addressed.
The Committee reviewed the revenue recognition policies adopted in these accounts and determined that the treatment was appropriate as it reflects the substance of the licence agreements.
There were no new licence agreements in this year.
The Committee considered the use of the going concern basis due to the continued losses being incurred.
This involved extensive scenario planning and full disclosure in the interim results.
The Committee reviewed the need for an impairment of the carrying value of tangible and intangible fixed assets as the Group incurred losses during year and concluded that an impairment provision of 77000 should be made.
The Committee has overseen the preparation of the viability statement produced for this years Annual Report and has conducted a robust examination of the risks identified the resultant actions that may be required and the projected outcomes.
Corporate governance Internal controls and risk management The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of internal controls including reviewing the effectiveness of these controls and the processes in place for risk management.
The role of the Executive Directors is to implement the Boards policies on risk and control and provide assurance on compliance with these policies.
The processes and procedures in place are designed to manage rather than eliminate risk and can therefore only provide a reasonable and not an absolute assurance against material misstatements or losses.
Executive Directors have a close involvement with all daytoday operations and also meet with staff on a regular basis to identify and review business risks the controls needed to minimise those risks and the effectiveness of controls in place.
Business risks are monitored and updated on a regular basis.
Insurance is in place where appropriate.
Some key features of the internal control system are that annual budgets and rolling forecasts are reviewed and approved by the Board ii monthly management accounts information is compared and reconciled with budgets iii the Group has written operational accounting and employment policies in place iv the Board actively identifies and evaluates the risks inherent in the business and ensures that appropriate controls and procedures are in place to manage these risks the Group has well established financial reporting and approval systems and procedures which cover all key transactional processes and Group commitments and vi the Group has a uniform system of investment appraisal.
The Group has quality assurance processes in place by virtue of its internal quality assurance department which audits nonfinancial processes and procedures although this department does not report to the Audit Committee.
As a result of deficiencies identified last year additional procedures have been introduced by the Audit Committee to ensure that revenue recognition is correctly determined as part of the process of agreeing new licences and other technical areas of IFRSs are properly applied.
These additional procedures include review and approval of the proposed treatment by the Board.
The Committee considers that the need for an internal audit function is not currently warranted due to the size and complexity of the business but will reconsider this need not less than annually.
Internal accountability The Board has overall responsibility for the Groups system of risk management and internal control.
The Audit Committee reviews the effectiveness of the system at least annually on behalf of the Board and having carried out this review the Board continues to believe that the system is effective in safeguarding shareholders interests and the Groups assets.
Such a system can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss nor can it eliminate the risk of failure.
In accordance with the Internal Control Guidance for Directors issued by the Financial Reporting Council there is an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing the significant risks faced by the Group.
This process was introduced during 2015 and is being reviewed and improved upon.
The Group operates and attaches importance to clear principles and procedures designed to achieve the accountability and control appropriate to a sciencebased business operating internationally in the research business sector.
Nanoco has established an organisational structure with clearly drawn lines of accountability and delegation of authority.
Financial results and key operational and financial performance indicators are reported regularly throughout the year and variances from plans and budgets are investigated and reported.
The Group has a system of high level financial control procedures which are supplemented by detailed procedures at each operating entity.
Compliance with these procedures is monitored by the Audit Committee through its reviews of internal and external audit findings its reviews of exceptions and regular management and financial reporting.
Details of the technical product market and operational risks of the business are disclosed in the Strategic report.
Details of the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies are disclosed in note 26 to the financial statements.
The Directors do not consider that the business is at this time significantly exposed to credit or interest risk and as such these risks are not considered to be material for an assessment of the assets liabilities financial position and results.
The Group seeks to manage liquidity by ensuring funds are available to meet foreseeable needs and to invest cash assets safely and profitably.
The Group had cash cash equivalent and deposit balances of 5.7 million as at 31 July 2017 2016 14.5 million.
The Group manages its cash deposits prudently.
The net placing proceeds of 8.0 million and other cash balances will be invested across a number of financial institutions which have investmentgrade credit ratings.
The deposits will range from instant access to sixmonth term deposits.
Cash deposits are regularly reviewed by the Board and cash forecasts are updated monthly to ensure that there is sufficient cash available for foreseeable requirements.
Dr Alison Fielding Audit Committee Chair 16 November 2017 A UDIT COMMIT TEE REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Dear shareholder As the Chairman of Nanocos Remuneration Committee the Committee I am pleased to present our Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 July 2017.
The terms of reference of the Remuneration Committee can be found in the Investor section of the Groups website.
Our Directors remuneration policy was approved by shareholders at the AGM on 10 December 2015 and has been applied throughout the year ended 31 July 2017.
Transitioning to a commercial organisation presents many challenges to a remuneration process.
It is not always possible during such transitions to fully reward individual effort and individual performance.
The developing of a market takes time and the resulting financial achievement reflecting all the effort only comes in the future.
The Committee would like to acknowledge and thank the organisation for the excellent work over the years in driving our organisation forward.
The Committee considers that the policy remains appropriate for the Group in the coming year and it will continue to apply for the year ending 31 July 2018.
The full Directors remuneration policy as approved can be found in the Annual Report and Accounts for the year ended 31 July 2015 on the Groups website at site The Annual report on remuneration section of this report provides details of the amounts earned by Directors in respect of the year ended 31 July 2017 and how the Directors remuneration policy will be operated for the year commencing 1 August 2017.
This will be subject to an advisory vote at the AGM on 12 January 2018.
Our approach to remuneration Our remuneration policy is designed to promote the longterm success of the business by ensuring a focus on performance related pay that drives our transformation to a commercial proposition and provides a clear emphasis on longterm sustainable performance.
A key part of our remuneration policy is our incentive arrangements which are aligned to the strategic direction of the Group and our stakeholder philosophy.
Our incentive arrangements comprise a Deferred Bonus Plan DBP and a Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP.
Our remuneration policy is designed to promote the longterm success of the business by ensuring a focus on performance related pay that drives our transformation to a commercial proposition and provides a clear emphasis on longterm sustainable performance.
MEMBERS
Brendan Cummins Chairman from 1 February 2017 Dr Alison Fielding from 20 April 2017 Gordon Hall Chairman until his resignation on 31 January 2017 Robin Williams resigned on 13 July 2017
REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE REPORT
S TATEMENT FROM THE CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE 42 Corporate governance Our approach to remuneration continued The share plans are designed to be simple and transparent to participants and our shareholders engage employees and appropriately motivate and incentivise our senior leadership team to deliver the longterm strategy reflect our stakeholder philosophy by enabling employees at all levels to share in the success of the Group and by encouraging the senior leadership team to build meaningful shareholdings in the Company and provide a flexible framework which reflects the stage of the Groups development which is perceived as valuable and a fair reflection of performance and is aligned with sustainable shareholder value creation.
Remuneration decisions in respect of the year ended 31 July 2017 As referred to in the 2016 Directors remuneration report our Executive Directors salaries for the year ended 31 July 2017 were increased by 0.5% below the increases for the wider workforce.
The 2017 bonus opportunity for the Executive Directors was based on a combination of financial and corporate measures and challenging personal objectives.
Notwithstanding the commitment of the Executive Directors and the excellent performance against personal objectives the Remuneration Committee determined that the company could not justify awarding any bonuses to the Executive Directors due to affordability and the lack of achievement of financial targets.
Longterm incentive awards were granted in the year under the LTIP and further information is given on pages 53 and 54.
Remuneration in the year commencing 1 August 2017 The approved Directors remuneration policy will be applied as follows in the year commencing 1 August 2017 Executive Directors will not receive a salary increase.
Consideration is to be given to awarding the workforce below Executive and senior management a base salary increase of 1 to 2% to be applied based on individual merit and performance level.
For the year commencing 1 August 2017 employer pension contributions above the amount of any salary sacrifice and the associated employer National Insurance contributions savings will continue to be capped at 5% of salary.
Annual bonus opportunity for Executive Directors will remain at 100% of salary subject to the achievement of stretching performance conditions.
Half of any bonus earned will be delivered via an award of deferred shares under the DBP further information is given on page 57.
LTIP awards for the year commencing 1 August 2017 will be granted at the usual policy level of 100% of salary.
LTIP awards will continue to be subject to stretching share price and revenue targets with an underpin applying to both elements.
Further information is given on page 58.
In line with best practice clawback will continue to apply to any cash bonus paid and malus provisions to any unvested deferred bonus awards and awards granted under the new LTIP.
No increases to the Nonexecutive Director fee levels are proposed.
As a Committee we believe that ongoing dialogue with our major shareholders is of key importance.
Should you have any queries or feedback in relation to the Directors remuneration report please contact me through the Company Secretary.
Brendan Cummins Remuneration Committee Chairman 16 November 2017 REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE REPORT CONTINUED S TATEMENT FROM THE CHAIRMAN OF THE REMUNERATION COMMIT TEE STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 This Directors remuneration report for the year ended 31 July 2017 complies with the requirements of the Listing Rules of the UK Listing Authority Schedule 8 of the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 and the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code September 2016.
The Regulations require the auditor to report to the Companys members on certain parts of the Directors remuneration report and to state whether in its opinion those parts of the report have been properly prepared in accordance with the accounting regulations.
Items that are audited throughout this report are clearly marked as audited in the heading of the section.
Directors remuneration policy This part of the report sets out the Companys Directors remuneration policy as approved at the December 2015 AGM except that we have updated the scenario charts on page 46 to reflect the application of the policy in 201718.
The Directors remuneration policy is not audited.
The table below describes each of the elements of the remuneration package for the Executive Directors.
Element and purpose Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Base salary Core element of fixed remuneration that provides the basis to recruit and retain talent necessary to deliver the business strategy.
Normally reviewed annually any increases generally apply from 1 August but may be reviewed more frequently if required.
When determining base salary levels consideration is given to the following the role responsibility and experience of the individual corporate and individual performance market conditions including typical pay levels for comparable roles in companies of a similar size and complexity and the range of salary increases awarded across the Group.
Whilst there is no maximum salary salary increases will normally be in line with the wider workforce with the following exceptions where an Executive Director has been promoted or their role has had a change in scope or responsibility due to an individuals development or performance in their role e. of the business.
Benefits
Provide a market competitive benefits package and promote the wellbeing of employees.
Directors are entitled to receive reimbursement for outofpocket expenses incurred on Company business.
Where tax is payable in respect of expenses incurred by Directors wholly and necessarily for business purposes the Board has agreed that the relevant tax will be paid by the Company.
The Company provides benefits principally life assurance for all Directors.
Directors business expenses are reimbursed on submission of an authorised expense claim.
The benefits provided would be reviewed periodically taking individual circumstances into consideration.
Benefits provided may include for example medical expenses relocation expenses expatriate allowances and travel expenses.
Whilst the Committee has not set an absolute maximum on the level of benefits Executive Directors may receive the value of benefits is set at a level which the Committee considers to be appropriately positioned taking into account relevant market levels based on the nature and location of the role the level of benefits provided to other employees in the Group and individual circumstances.
Retirement benefits Provide market competitive post employment benefits to recruit and retain Directors of the calibre required for the business.
The Company currently operates a salary sacrifice pension arrangement under which Executive Directors may elect to sacrifice salary and the Company pays an amount equal to the amount of the salary sacrifice together with the employer National Insurance saved into a private pension scheme.
Executive Directors are also eligible to participate in the Companys defined contribution scheme or such other pension plan as may be deemed appropriate.
In appropriate circumstances such as where contributions exceed the annual or lifetime allowance Executive Directors may be permitted to take a cash supplement instead of contributions to a pension plan this would not count towards the bonus or LTIP opportunity.
For the year commencing 1 August 2017 employer pension contributions above the amount of any salary sacrifice and employer NIC saved will be capped at 5% 2016 5% of salary.
An overall contribution limit of up to 10% of base salary may be made in future years in addition to the amount of any salary sacrifice and employer NIC saved to take account of a change in the scope of the role increase in responsibility andor a change in the size andor complexity of the business.
DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT 44 Corporate governance Element and purpose Operation Maximum opportunity Performance measures Annual bonus Rewards and incentivises the achievement of annual objectives which are aligned with key financial and strategic goals and supports the enhancement of shareholder value.
Performance targets are set annually and payout levels are determined after the year end following the Committees assessment of actual performance against set targets.
At least 50% of any bonus earned is paid in cash and 50% is awarded in shares under the DBP which vest after two years.
The Committee may decide not to operate deferral if it is determined that the amount to be deferred is too small to warrant the administrative burden.
Deferred share awards may incorporate the right to receive in cash or shares the value of the dividends that would have been paid on the shares that vest.
Maximum annual bonus opportunity is 100% of salary.
The percentage of maximum bonus payable for the different levels of performance would be no greater than Below threshold 0% Ontarget 60% Maximum 100% Stretching performance targets are set each year reflecting the business priorities that underpin Group strategy.
Ordinarily up to 60% will be subject to achievement of a combination of financial and corporate measures and the balance will be based on challenging personal objectives.
The Committee retains discretion to apply different weightings in relevant circumstances.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP To reflect stakeholder philosophy provide a longerterm retention mechanism and provide alignment with shareholders.
The Committee intends to make longterm incentive awards under the 2015 LTIP scheme as approved at the 2015 AGM.
Under the LTIP awards of conditional shares restricted stock or nilcost options or similar cash equivalent can be made with vesting dependent on the achievement of performance conditions normally over a threeyear performance period.
Under the LTIP  there will be no retesting of performance following the end of the performance period.
After the end of the performance period the vested awards would normally be subject to a twoyear holding period.
LTIP awards may incorporate the right to receive in cash or shares the value of the dividends that would have been paid on the shares that vest.
The maximum value of shares over which an individual can be granted an award in respect of a financial year is normally 100% of base salary although this limit may be increased to 250% of base salary in exceptional circumstances.
25% of awards will vest for threshold levels of performance rising to 100% for maximum performance.
The vesting of LTIP awards is subject to the satisfaction of performance targets set by the Committee.
The performance measures are reviewed regularly to ensure they remain relevant but will be based on financial measures which may include but are not limited to Group revenue targets and EPS andor share price related measures.
The relevant metrics and the respective weightings may vary each year based on Company strategic priorities.
Shareholding requirement To align Directors to shareholder interests.
A requirement to build up over a fiveyear period and hold a shareholding of at least 200% of base salary for the CEO and 100% of base salary for other Executive Directors.
50% of vested shares under the DBP or LTIP posttax are to be retained until the shareholding requirement has been met.
Notes to the policy table Application of clawback and malus to variable remuneration Under the DBP during the twoyear deferral period the Committee has the right to reduce any deferred bonus awards which have not yet been released in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups financial results material misconduct on the part of the participant or a material failure of risk management by the Group i. a malus provision.
For up to two years following the payment of a cash bonus award the Committee may also require the repayment of some or all of the award in these circumstances i. a clawback provision.
Under the 2015 LTIP scheme at any time prior to the end of the holding period for LTIP awards the Committee in its discretion may reduce cancel or impose further conditions on LTIP awards which have not yet been released in the event of a material misstatement of the Groups financial results material misconduct on the part of the participant or a material failure of risk management by the Group.
Directors remuneration policy continued DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the policy table continued Explanation of performance measures chosen Selected performance measures for the annual bonus and LTIP awards reflect the Groups strategy.
Stretching performance targets are set each year by the Committee taking into account a number of different factors.
Annual bonus Up to 60% of the potential maximum annual bonus will be subject to achievement of a combination of financial and corporate measures whilst the balance will be based on challenging personal objectives.
The Committee will disclose the metrics and performance against these on a retrospective basis to the extent that these are not commercially sensitive.
LTIP
The Company has historically used commercial revenue targets as its primary measure for LTIP awards for Executive Directors.
Recognising that the Companys transition from a research and development company to a commercial productdriven organisation presents a number of challenges to defining meaningful and appropriate performance metrics and targets.
The awards granted under the LTIP will be a combination of share price growth for 50% of the award and Group revenue targets for 50% of the award.
Both of these metrics will be subject to a performance underpin to ensure that the share price and revenue metrics for the LTIP do not lead to behaviours that are divergent from the core commercialisation strategy and that appropriate developments are made in all areas of the business.
It is the Committees view these are the most appropriate performance measures for determining LTIP vesting for the awards on the basis that share price growth is a key measure of value delivered to shareholders and should reflect the achievement of commercial milestones.
This ensures that this element only vests where significant value is delivered to shareholders Group revenue is a core metric for measuring the successful growth of the Group and development of new commercial products and the performance underpin ensures that the share price and revenue metrics for the LTIP do not lead to behaviours that are divergent from the core commercialisation strategy and that appropriate development is made in all areas of the business.
The Committee intends to review the performance metrics for future awards taking into account the business priorities and strategy.
Whilst it is recognised that EPS is not an appropriate metric for the awards given the current negative earnings of the Group as the Group moves towards positive EPS it may be considered an appropriate metric once the Group has developed a history of earnings.
The Committee also retains the discretion to adjust or set different performance measures or targets where it considers it appropriate to do so for example to reflect a change in strategy a material acquisition andor a divestment of a Group business or a change in prevailing market conditions and to assess performance on a fair and consistent basis from year to year.
Operation of the LTIP and DBP The LTIP and DBP are operated by the Committee in accordance with their respective rules including the ability to adjust the number of shares subject to awards in the event of a variation of share capital demerger delisting special dividend rights issue or other event which may in the opinion of the Company affect the current or future value of shares.
Early vesting of awards As described on page 48 awards under the DBP and LTIP may vest earlier than anticipated in good leaver circumstances.
On a change of control of the Company or other relevant corporate event such as a demerger delisting special dividend or other event which may affect the value of an award the extent to which unvested awards will vest will be determined in accordance with the rules of the relevant plan.
Awards under the DBP will vest in full in the event of a takeover merger or other relevant corporate event.
Awards under the LTIP will vest early on a takeover merger or other relevant corporate event.
The Committee will determine the level of vesting taking into account the extent to which the performance conditions are satisfied.
Such vesting would ordinarily be on a time prorata basis although the Committee has discretion not to apply time prorating.
How the Executive Directors remuneration policy relates to the Group The remuneration policy summarised above provides an overview of the structure that operates for the Executive Directors.
The same broad structure also operates for the members of the senior management team although with lower levels of participation in the annual bonus DBP andor the LTIP.
For other employees the same remuneration principles are applied and the Company aims to provide a remuneration package that is competitive in an employees country of employment and which is appropriate to promote the longterm success of the Group.
Corporate governance Remuneration outcomes in different performance scenarios The charts below set out an illustration of the remuneration policy for 2018.
The charts provide an illustration of the proportion of total remuneration made up of each component of the remuneration policy and the value of each component.
Three scenarios have been illustrated for each Executive Director Below threshold performance Fixed remuneration No annual bonus payout No vesting under the LTIP Target performance Fixed remuneration 60% annual bonus payout 25% vesting under the LTIP Maximum performance Fixed remuneration 100% annual bonus payout 100% vesting under the LTIP Fixed pay currently comprises the following elements Current base salary Benefits Pension Total Chief Executive Officer  Dr Michael Edelman 400744  20037 420781 Chief Technical Officer  Dr Nigel Pickett 172559  8628 181187 Chief Operating Officer  Keith Wiggins 192860  9643 202503 Chief Financial Officer  David Blain 180900  9045 189945 No benefits are currently provided to the Executive Directors other than under the Group life assurance scheme.
Based on 5% employer pension contributioncash supplement in lieu of pension which applies for the year ended 31 July 2018.
The values illustrated do not take into account share price fluctuation or dividend equivalents that may be received under the share plans.
The ultimate amounts received by the Directors may be higher or lower than the amounts illustrated above.
100.0% 55.3% 34.4% 31.6% 32.8% 13.1% 32.8% A Fixed pay A Annual bonus A LTIP Dr Michael Edelman Below target performance
Maximum performance Total remuneration 000 100.0% 55.3% 34.4% 31.6% 32.8% 13.1% 32.8% A Fixed pay A Annual bonus A LTIP David Blain Below target performance
Maximum performance Total remuneration 000 80tel40tel0 100.0% 55.3% 34.4% 31.6% 32.8% 13.1% 32.8% A Fixed pay A Annual bonus A LTIP Keith Wiggins Below target performance
Maximum performance Total remuneration 000 80tel40tel0 100.0% 55.3% 34.4% 31.6% 32.8% 13.1% 32.8% A Fixed pay A Annual bonus A LTIP Dr Nigel Pickett Below target performance
Maximum performance Total remuneration 000 DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration policy for Nonexecutive Directors Purpose and link to strategy Operation Other items To enable the Company to attract and retain Nonexecutive Directors of the required calibre by offering market competitive rates.
The Chairmans fee is determined by the Committee and the fees of the other Nonexecutive Directors are determined by the Board.
Fees are set taking into account several factors including the size and complexity of the business fees paid to chairmen and nonexecutive directors of companies of a similar size and complexity and the expected time commitment and contribution for the role.
Overall fees paid to Nonexecutive Directors will remain within the limits set by the Companys Articles of Association.
Nonexecutive Directors are provided with directors and officers insurance and indemnity protection and may be eligible to be reimbursed any reasonable hotel and travelling expenses and other reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
The Nonexecutive Directors do not participate in the Companys annual bonus share plans or pension schemes.
Remuneration policy on recruitment When hiring a new Executive Director the Committee will seek to align the remuneration package with the above policy.
When determining appropriate remuneration arrangements the Committee may include other elements of pay which it considers are appropriate and necessary to recruit and retain the individual.
However this discretion is capped and is subject to the limits referred to below base salary will be set at a level appropriate to the role and the experience of the Director being appointed.
This may include agreement on future increases up to a market rate in line with increased experience andor responsibilities subject to good performance where it is considered appropriate benefits will only be provided in line with the above policy pension contributions will only be provided in line with the above policy the Committee will not offer nonperformance related incentive payments for example a guaranteed signon bonus or golden hello other elements may be included in the following circumstances an interim appointment being made to fill an Executive Director role on a shortterm basis if exceptional circumstances require that the Chairman or a Nonexecutive Director takes on an Executive function on a shortterm basis if an Executive Director is recruited at a time in the year when it would be inappropriate to provide a bonus or longterm incentive award for that year as there would not be sufficient time to assess performance.
Subject to the limit on variable remuneration set out below the quantum in respect of the months employed during the year may be transferred to the subsequent year so that reward is provided on a fair and appropriate basis and if the Director will be required to relocate in order to take up the position it is the Companys policy to allow reasonable relocation travel and subsistence payments.
Any such payments will be at the discretion of the Committee the Committee may also alter the performance measures performance period and vesting period of the annual bonus or LTIP if the Committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such alteration.
The rationale of any such alterations will be clearly explained in the next Directors remuneration report and the maximum level of variable remuneration which may be granted excluding buyout awards as referred to below is 350% of salary in line with the policy set out on pages 43 to 47.
The Committee may make payments or awards in respect of hiring an employee to buy out remuneration arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
In doing so the Committee will take account of relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to the forfeited arrangements and the time over which they would have vested or been paid.
The Committee will generally seek to structure buyout awards or payments on a comparable basis to the remuneration arrangements forfeited.
Any such payments or awards are excluded from the maximum level of variable remuneration referred to above.
Buyout awards will ordinarily be granted on the basis that they are subject to forfeiture or clawback in the event of departure within twelve months of joining the Company although the Committee will retain discretion not to apply forfeiture or clawback in appropriate circumstances.
Any share awards referred to in this section will be granted as far as possible under the Companys existing share plans.
If necessary and subject to the limits referred to above recruitment awards may be granted outside of these plans.
Where a position is filled internally any ongoing remuneration obligations or outstanding variable pay elements shall be allowed to continue in accordance with their terms.
Fees payable to a newly appointed Chairman or Nonexecutive Director will be in line with the policy in place at the time of appointment.
Corporate governance External appointments The Company recognises that Executive Directors may be invited to become nonexecutive directors of other companies and that this can help broaden the skills and experience of a Director.
Subject to the approval of the Board Executive Directors are normally permitted to accept external appointments and may retain fees for such appointments where no significant actual or potential conflict of interest arises and provided that the Director is able to maintain his time commitment to the Company.
None of the Executive Directors currently have an external appointment.
Payment for loss of office The principles on which the determination of payments for loss of office will be approached are set out below
Payment in lieu of notice The Company has discretion to make a payment in lieu of notice.
Such a payment would include base salary and compensation for benefits for the unexpired period of notice up to a maximum of twelve months notice.
Annual bonus This will be at the discretion of the Committee on an individual basis and the decision as to whether or not to award an annual bonus award in full or in part will be dependent on a number of factors including the circumstances of the individuals departure and their contribution to the business during the annual bonus period in question.
Any annual bonus award amounts paid will normally be prorated for time in service during the annual bonus period and will subject to performance be paid at the usual time although the Committee retains discretion to pay the annual bonus award earlier in appropriate circumstances.
Any such bonus can at the discretion of the Committee be paid wholly in cash.
DBP The extent to which any unvested award will vest will be determined in accordance with the rules of the DBP.
Unvested awards will normally lapse on cessation of employment.
However if a participant leaves due to death ill health injury disability the sale of his employer or any other reason at the discretion of the Committee the Committee shall determine whether any unvested award will vest at cessation or at the normal vesting date.
In either case the extent of vesting will be determined by the Committee taking into account unless the Committee determines otherwise the period of time elapsed from the date of grant to the date of cessation relative to the deferral period.
Awards may then be exercised during such period as the Committee determines.
Awards in the form of nilcost options which have vested but remain unexercised at the date of cessation may be exercised if a participant leaves due to death ill health injury disability the sale of his employer or any other reason at the discretion of the Committee.
Awards may then be exercised for such period as the Committee determines.
LTIP The extent to which any unvested award will vest will be determined in accordance with the rules of the LTIP.
Unvested awards will normally lapse on cessation of employment.
However if a participant leaves due to death ill health injury disability the sale of his employer or any other reason at the discretion of the Committee the Committee shall determine whether the award is released on the normal release date or the date of cessation or on some other date.
In any case the extent of vesting will be determined by the Committee taking into account the extent to which the performance condition is satisfied and unless the Committee determines otherwise the period of time elapsed from the date of grant to the date of cessation relative to the performance period.
Awards may then be exercised during such period as the Committee determines.
If a participant leaves for any reason other than summary dismissal after an award has vested but before it has been released i. date when it will be released to the extent it vested.
The Committee retains discretion to release awards when the participant leaves.
If the participant is summarily dismissed his award will lapse.
Awards in the form of nilcost options which have vested and been released but remain unexercised at the date of cessation may be exercised if a participant leaves due to death ill health injury disability the sale of his employer or any other reason at the discretion of the Committee.
Awards may then be exercised for such period as the Committee determines.
Other payments In appropriate circumstances payments may also be made in respect of accrued holiday outplacement and legal fees.
Where a buyout award is made the leaver provisions would be determined at the time of the award.
The Committee reserves the right to make additional exit payments where such payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of a Directors office or employment.
Where the Committee retains discretion it will be used to provide flexibility in certain situations taking into account the particular circumstances of the Directors departure and performance.
There is no entitlement to any compensation in the event of Nonexecutive Directors fixedterm agreements not being renewed or the agreement terminating earlier.
DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consideration of employees pay The Committee generally considers pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company when considering the Directors remuneration.
When considering base salary increases the Committee reviews overall levels of base pay increases offered to other employees.
Employees are not actively consulted on Directors remuneration.
Employee share ownership is fundamental to the Companys culture and is reflected in the wide participation in our share incentive plans.
Existing contractual arrangements The Committee retains discretion to make any remuneration payment or payment for loss of office outside the policy in this report where the terms of the payment were agreed before the policy came into effect where the terms of the payment were agreed at a time when the relevant individual was not a Director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration of the individual becoming a Director of the Company and to satisfy contractual commitments under legacy remuneration arrangements including the jointly owned EBT share scheme for senior management under which the trustee of the Groupsponsored EBT has acquired shares in the Company jointly with a number of employees the Companys Long Term Incentive Plan adopted in 2009 and any other share plan in place prior to admission.
For these purposes payments includes the satisfaction of awards of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed at the time the award is granted.
Consultation with shareholders The Committee considers shareholder feedback received on remuneration matters as well as any additional comments received during any other meetings with shareholders.
Major shareholders were consulted on the introduction of the new DBP and LTIP which shareholders approved at the 2015 AGM and the Committee intends to consult with shareholders in respect of any significant changes to the Executive Directors remuneration arrangements.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
This report sets out details of the amounts earned during 2017 and provides details as to how the Committee intends to implement the policy during 2018.
This part of the report will be subject to an advisory shareholder vote at the 2018 AGM.
This report contains unaudited information except where stated that it is audited.
Remuneration Committee The Committee comprises Brendan Cummins who is Chairman of the Committee and Dr Alison Fielding each of whom is considered to be independent.
Dr Alison Fielding and Brendan Cummins joined the Committee during the year.
Gordon Hall Chairman and Robin Williams were members of the Committee until their resignations.
The Committee may invite anyone it deems appropriate to attend and advise at meetings including the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer although no Director is present when his own remuneration is being discussed.
The Committee is responsible for establishing a formal and transparent procedure for developing policy on executive remuneration and for setting the remuneration of the Directors and certain senior management as well as reviewing the performance of the Executive Directors of the Company.
The Committee met four times during the year its meetings are minuted and its recommendations are presented to the Board.
Policy on other appointments The Board believes that Directors should be able to accept other appointments where no significant actual or potential conflicts of interest arise and provided that the Director is able to maintain his time commitment to the Company.
These other appointments enable Directors to accrue further skills and experience from which the Company benefits.
This policy is reviewed annually.
None of the Executive Directors currently have any other external appointments.
Advisers to the Committee The Chief Executive Officer is consulted on the remuneration of those who report directly to him and also of other senior executives.
No Executive Director or employee is present or takes part in discussions in respect of matters relating directly to their own remuneration.
During the year the Committee was assisted in its work by the following external consultants
Details of appointment Services provided by the adviser Fees paid by the Company for advice to the Remuneration Committee and basis of charge Other services provided to the Company in the year ended 31 July 2017 Deloitte LLP
Appointed by the
Committee in June 2015.
Various advice on executive remuneration.
The fees for advice in relation to this report provided to the Committee during the financial year were 3500 2016 8000.
Charged on a timecost basis or fixed fee dependent on nature of project.
Advice regarding employee share plans.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under its Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Remuneration Committee took into account the Code of Conduct when reviewing the appointment of Deloitte.
The Committee is satisfied that the remuneration advice provided by Deloitte is objective and independent.
Corporate governance ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Single total figure of remuneration for 2017 audited information The remuneration of the Directors who served on the Board of Nanoco Group plc during the year to 31 July 2017 is as follows Base salary and fees
Annual bonus in cash
Longterm incentives
Total 2017 Executive Directors Dr Michael Edelman Dr Nigel Pickett 173     9 182 Keith Wiggins 193     10 203 David Blain 181     9 190 Total Executive Directors 858     44 902 Nonexecutive Directors Dr Christopher Richards 75      75 Brendan Cummins 35      35 Dr Alison Fielding Total Nonexecutive Directors 117      117 Former Nonexecutive Directors Gordon Hall Robin Williams Total former Nonexecutive Directors 52      52 Total 1027     44 1071 Dr Michael Edelmans remuneration is paid in US Dollars but reported in Sterling for the purpose of this table.
The exchange rate used for this purpose varied throughout the year.
The rates used were in the range 1.2185 to 1.31096.
2 Dr Alison Fielding was appointed to the Board of Directors on 20 April 2017.
3 Gordon Hall resigned on 31 January 2017.
4 Robin Williams resigned on 13 July 2017.
The life cover provided to Executive Directors is contained within a policy covering all employees and it is not possible to identify the proportion of the premium in respect of Directors either individually or as a whole.
The remuneration of the Directors who served on the Board of Nanoco Group plc during the year to 31 July 2016 was as follows Base salary and fees
Annual bonus in cash
Longterm incentives
Total 2016 Executive Directors Dr Michael Edelman Dr Nigel Pickett 172  35 34  2 243 Keith Wiggins 192  38 39  9 278 David Blain Total Executive Directors 823  166 166  33 1188 Nonexecutive Directors Dr Christopher Richards Gordon Hall 35      35 Robin Williams 35      35 Brendan Cummins 25      25 Total Nonexecutive Directors 123      123 Former Nonexecutive Directors Anthony Clinch Dr Peter Rowley Total former Nonexecutive Directors 82      82 1028  166 166  33 1393 DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Single total figure of remuneration for 2017 audited information continued Dr Michael Edelmans remuneration is paid in US Dollars but reported in Sterling for the purpose of this table.
The exchange rate used for this purpose varied throughout the year.
The rates used were in the range 1.3222 to 1.5387.
2 David Blain was appointed to the Board on 3 August 2015.
3 Dr Christopher Richards was appointed to the Board on 11 November 2015.
Anthony Clinch resigned on 17 May 2016.
He was paid his fee up to the date of resignation and received a further payment of 25000 in respect of the sixmonth notice period under his letter of appointment.
5 Dr Peter Rowley resigned on 12 April 2016.
6 Contributions to David Blains pension fund remained unpaid at the balance sheet date.
The life cover provided to Executive Directors is contained within a policy covering all employees and it is not possible to identify the proportion of the premium in respect of either Directors individually or as a whole.
Additional disclosures in relation to single figure table audited information The figures in the single figure table above are derived from the following a Salary and fees The amount of salaryfees received in the year.
A salary sacrifice arrangement is operated under which executives may elect to sacrifice salary and the Company pays an amount equal to the amount of the salary sacrifice together with the employer National Insurance saved into a private pension scheme.
Directors salaries are shown before the salary sacrifice pension contributions. b Benefits The taxable value of benefits received in the year. of the financial year.
Further information in relation to the 2017 bonus is provided on pages 51 to 53. d Longterm incentives None. of pension contributions paid to the Executive Directors.
This does not include the amount of the salary sacrifice paid as a pension but does include the employer National Insurance saved that is paid into a private pension scheme.
Individual elements of remuneration for the year ended 31 July 2017 Base salary As referred to in the 2016 Directors remuneration report our Executive Directors salaries for the year ended 31 July 2017 were 400744 in the case of our Chief Executive Officer 172559 in the case of our Chief Technology Officer 192860 for our Chief Operating Officer and 180900 for our Chief Financial Officer.
Annual bonus For the year ended 31 July 2017 the maximum bonus for Dr Michael Edelman Dr Nigel Pickett Keith Wiggins and David Blain was 100% of salary.
The annual bonuses comprise two elements achievement of financial and corporate measures 60% of salary and achievement of personal objectives 40% of salary.
The Remuneration Committee determined that 0% of salary should be awarded as a bonus for each Director in relation to achievement of corporate objectives compared to a maximum of 60%.
The Remuneration Committee also determined that each Director should not receive a bonus regardless of performance in relation to personal objectives due to failure to achieve corporate targets and affordability.
The financial and corporate measures and their weighting as a percentage of salary for the year ended 31 July 2017 were Measure and weighting as a percentage of salary Threshold performance level Maximum performance level Performance achieved Bonus earned as a percentage of salary Revenue 35% 5 million 9.8 million 1.3 million Nil EBITDA 20% Loss of 8.4 million Loss of 5 million Loss of 9.7 million Nil Share price 5% 65p 110p 37.5p Nil 52 Corporate governance ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Individual elements of remuneration for the year ended 31 July 2017 continued Annual bonus continued The annual bonus personal objectives and bonus outturn are summarised in the tables below Specific bonus targets have not been disclosed by the Committee where they are considered to be commercially sensitive.
The current stage of the Groups development means certain retrospective information could still give competitors insight into the strategic plans of the business which is not in the interest of shareholders.
Director Measure
Payout % of salary Dr Michael Edelman Financial and corporate measures 60 Not achieved as referred to above Personal objectives 40 0 Lead team in defining Nanocos strategy for the next three to five years
Ensure licensees are supported to deliver the short and midterm targets Partially achieved Ensure Executive team has required support to deliver its objectives
Manage existing and diversify shareholder base Achieved Continue to work with the Chairman to improve the Nanoco Board process as agreed in the Board evaluation
Dr Nigel Pickett Financial and corporate measures 60 Not achieved as referred to above Personal objectives 40 0 Project 1 Achieved Project 2 Partially achieved Project 3 Achieved Project 4 Achieved Project 5 Achieved Project 6 On hold Project 7 On hold Project 8 Achieved Project 9 Achieved Keith Wiggins Financial and corporate measures 60 Not achieved as referred to above Personal objectives 40 0 Develop manufacturing options for Nanoco.
Different manufacturing scenarios for volumes and capital expenditure required
Ensure robust supply chain is in place to support Nanoco manufactured and sold product Partially achieved Ensure Nanoco display launch product fit for purpose and that the display product pipeline is robust.
This will be determined by customers choosing Nanoco products Partially achieved Ensure Merck is supported and technology is transferred as quickly as possible  by year end
Ensure continued support for Dow e.
Achieved
Deliver 0.3 million is in Lighting revenue from focused product launch Not achieved Deliver ISO certification by the year end Achieved DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Individual elements of remuneration for the year ended 31 July 2017 continued Annual bonus continued Director Measure
Payout % of salary David Blain Financial and corporate measures 60 Not achieved as referred to above Personal objectives 40 0 Ensure all management accounts are produced accurately and in a timely manner the audit and annual reports are completed on time forecasting systems are formalised and Nanoco complies with all necessary requirements of being a FTSElisted company
Implement new accounting system by year end Achieved Take lead role in developing and improving our shareholder presentations and communication strategy
Tighten up and improve Board procedures as agreed in the Board evaluation
Ensure new budget and budget systems are rolled out and are used by the organisation by January 2017
Ensure cash doesnt fall below 5.9 million on the basis that no extraordinary cash calls are required such as capital expenditure andor merger and acquisition activity Not achieved Longterm incentives vesting in respect of the year ended 31 July 2017 No longterm incentives for Directors vested during the year ended 31 July 2017.
LTIP awards granted in 2017 Awards to the Executive Directors made on 22 November 2016 were as follows Director Type of award
Number of shares Fa ce va l u e at grant Face value at grant less exercise price % of award vesting at threshold
Years
Dr Michael Edelman Share award 131 841 Dr Nigel Pickett Share award 151 505 Keith Wiggins Share award 192 717 David Blain Share award 197 690 Face value has been calculated using the share price at the date of grant of 0.5158 in accordance with the rules of the LTIP approved by shareholders at the 2015 AGM.
These awards are subject to the following share price growth and Group revenue performance conditions measured over three financial years ending 31 July 2019.
50% based on share price growth target measured over the three financial years ending 31 July 2019 % of share price element vesting Share price target To encourage maximum performance the value of the award accelerates as the share price approaches the 160 pence level.
The principle we have agreed in the Remuneration Committee is a curved line vesting.
The Companys share price will be averaged across a threemonth period unless the Committee decides to apply a different averaging period to avoid rewarding shortterm spikes in performance.
Corporate governance ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED LTIP awards granted in 2017 continued 50% based on Group revenue targets measured over the three financial years ending 31 July 2019 % of Group revenue element vesting Group revenue target 25 2019 threshold revenue target 100 2019 maximum revenue target Given the Group is entering a new stage in its development the Directors consider that the Group revenue targets are matters which are commercially sensitive they provide our competitors with insight into our business plans and expectations and should therefore remain confidential to the Group.
However in order to maintain transparency the Committee will disclose the Group revenue targets and how the Group has performed against the targets set following the end of the performance period.
A core strategy of the business is to continue the Lighting and Bioimaging developments with a longterm aim of transforming them into profitable businesses shipping commercial quantities of product.
Under the performance underpin if the Committee is not satisfied that appropriate progress has been made across the business it will have the discretion to cancel all or some of the LTIP award.
Deferred Bonus Plan awards granted in FY2017 On 22 November 2016 awards in the form of nilcost options were granted to the Executive Directors in respect of the 50% of their bonuses for the year ended 31 July 2016 which are delivered in the form of a share award under the Deferred Bonus Plan.
The awards will vest on the date on which the Company announces its preliminary results for the year ending 31 July 2018.
Face value of award Number at grant Director of shares 000 Dr Michael Edelman 108181 57 Dr Nigel Pickett 66576 34 Keith Wiggins 74408 39 David Blain 69794 36 Face value has been calculated using the average closing midmarket share price for the three days following the announcement of the preliminary results for the year ended 31 July 2016.
Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests audited information Directors interests in jointly owned Employee Benefit Trust EBT shares and in share options to acquire ordinary shares of 10 pence in the Company as at 31 July 2017 were Share options Date granted
Exercised during the year Lapsed
Dr Michael Edelman 25 Nov 2011 50.00p 500000    500000 22 Oct 2012 57.00p 1000000    1000000 23 Dec 2015 Nil 443548    443548 22 Nov 2016 Nil    841145 841145 22 Nov 2016 Nil    108181 108181 Dr Nigel Pickett 25 Nov 2011 50.00p 500000    500000 22 Oct 2012 57.00p 750000    750000 23 Dec 2015 Nil 284193    284193 22 Nov 2016 Nil    505164 505164 22 Nov 2016 Nil    66576 66576 Keith Wiggins 14 Oct 2014 10.00p 380000    380000 23 Dec 2015 Nil 317627    317627 22 Nov 2016 Nil    717896 717896 22 Nov 2016 Nil    74408 74408 David Blain 23 Dec 2015 Nil 350000    350000 22 Nov 2016 Nil 690913 690913 22 Nov 2016 Nil 69794 69794 Jointly owned EBT shares Dr Nigel Pickett 7 Apr 2008 Nil 530089 530089 1 Vested but unexercised share options.
2 Unvested share options still subject to performance conditions.
3 Unvested Deferred Bonus Plan award.
Not subject to performance conditions.
DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Statement of Directors shareholding and share interests audited information continued In order to align the interests of Executive Directors with those of shareholders and to demonstrate the Executive Directors ongoing personal financial commitment to the business Executive Directors will be expected to build up a shareholding of 100% of salary 200% of salary for the CEO.
Executive Directors are expected to retain 50% of any posttax shares that vest under any share incentive plans until this shareholding is reached.
The Committee expects Executive Directors to have met the shareholding guideline policy by the fifth anniversary of their appointment as an Executive Director.
Both Dr Michael Edelman and Dr Nigel Pickett hold shares substantially in excess of the shareholding guideline 607% and 2378% of salary respectively using the threemonth average closing share price to the end of July 2017.
Nonexecutive Directors are not subject to the shareholding requirement.
Directors interests in the shares of the Company including family and beneficial interests at 31 July 2017 were Ordinary shares of 10p each 31 July 2017
31 July 2017 % 31 July 2016
31 July 2016 % Dr Christopher Richards 118830 0.05 43421 0.02 Dr Michael Edelman 4931615 2.07 5431615 2.29 Dr Nigel Pickett 10945681 4.59 10945681 4.62 Keith Wiggins David Blain 14700 0.01 14700 0.01 Brendan Cummins Dr Alison Fielding 16010826 6.72 16435417 6.94 As at 31 July 2017 none of the Directors had any interests in shares of any other Group company.
The Directors participated in the placing announced on 4 October 2017 and approved by shareholders on 14 November 2017 as follows Placing Shareholding Shareholding shares postplacing postplacing purchased Number % Dr Christopher Richards 166666 285496 0.10 Dr Michael Edelman 42735 4974350 1.74 Dr Nigel Pickett 166666 11112347 3.89 Keith Wiggins 55555 55555 0.02 David Blain 138888 153588 0.05 Brendan Cummins 277777 277777 0.10 Dr Alison Fielding 848287 16859113 5.90 The market price for Nanoco shares as at 31 July 2017 was 37.5 pence per share the highest and lowest prices during the year were 30.25 pence and 75.25 pence respectively.
Details of share options and shares held in the EBT are set out in note 22 to the financial statements.
Dilution
The Company complies with the relevant institutional investor guidelines on employee share plans which state that in any tencalendaryear period the Company may not issue more than 10% of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company under the LTIP or any other employee share plan adopted by the Company.
Including only option grants postadmission to AIM and excluding any awards that have lapsed the current dilution is 6.85%.
Payments to past Directors and for loss of office audited No payments to past Directors for loss of office were made during the year.
Corporate governance ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Unaudited information Historical comparative TSR performance graph The performance graph below shows the Companys total shareholder return TSR against the FTSE SmallCap over the period from 1 August 2010 to 31 July 2017.
In the opinion of the Board the FTSE SmallCap is the most appropriate index against which the TSR of the Company should be measured because it represents a broad equity market index of which the Company is a constituent member.
Total shareholder return FTSE SmallCap
Value
26tel18tel 0teltel 2017 The graph shows the value at 31 July 2017 of 100 invested in the Companys shares on 1 August 2010 compared with the value of 100 notionally invested in the FTSE SmallCap index.
The other points plotted are the values at intervening financial year ends.
Chief Executive Officer remunerationteltel 2017
Total remuneration 000 17tel635 406 327 Annual bonus % of maximum vesting LTIP % of maximum vesting     100 Dr Michael Edelmans remuneration is paid in US Dollars but reported in Sterling for the purpose of this table.
The exchange rate used for this purpose varied during the year.
Percentage increase in the remuneration of the CEO The table below shows the movement in the salary benefits and annual bonus for the Chief Executive Officer between the current and previous financial years compared with the cost for the same elements for all employees in the Group.
Salary Taxable benefits Bonus
Change %
Average for all other employees 43 39 10.3     4 100 Dr Michael Edelmans remuneration is paid in US Dollars but reported in Sterling for the purpose of this table.
The exchange rate used for this purpose varied during the year.
Dr Edelmans salary increased by 0.5% from 398750 in 2016 to 400744 in 2017 but is reported in Sterling and the larger increase reflects exchange rate fluctuations.
DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Unaudited information continued Relative importance of spend on pay The following table sets out the percentage change in dividends and the overall expenditure on pay as a whole across the organisation.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 000 % change
Overall expenditure on pay 5705 6531 12.6 Implementation of policy for the year commencing 1 August 2017 Base salary Base salaries are reviewed annually with effect from 1 August.
For the year commencing 1 August 2017 Executive Directors will not receive a base salary increase which is the same as the wider workforce as follows 2018 2017 % change Chief Executive Officer  Dr Michael Edelman 400744 400744 Chief Technical Officer  Dr Nigel Pickett 172559 172559 Chief Operating Officer  Keith Wiggins 192860 192860 Chief Financial Officer  David Blain 180900 180900 Changes to Nonexecutive Directors fees The proposed Nonexecutive Directors fees are as follows 2018 2017 Chairman 75000 75000 NED base fee 25000 25000 Chair of Committee fee 10000 10000
The Company operates a salary sacrifice pension arrangement.
For the year commencing 1 August 2017 employer pension contributions above the amount of any salary sacrifice and the associated employer National Insurance contributions savings will be capped at 5% of salary.
Annual bonus For the year ending 31 July 2018 the maximum annual bonus potential will be 100% of base salary for Executive Directors.
50% of any such bonus earned will be paid in cash whilst the remainder is paid as deferred shares under the DBP vesting after two years in accordance with the policy adopted at the 2015 AGM.
This reflects our stakeholder philosophy provides a longerterm retention mechanism and provides alignment with shareholders.
Consistent with the 2017 annual bonus performance will be assessed on the basis of a balanced scorecard approach in respect of performance measures however the emphasis on achievement of corporate goals is changed compared to 2017.
Up to 80% of the potential maximum annual bonus will be subject to achievement of a combination of financial and corporate measures whilst the remaining 20% will be based on challenging personal objectives.
The financialcorporate measures for FY18 will include annual revenue and EBITDA weighted at 60% and 20% of potential maximum annual bonus respectively.
The Committee will disclose the metrics and performance against these on a retrospective basis to the extent that these are not commercially sensitive.
Clawback will apply to any cash bonus paid and malus provisions to any unvested deferred bonus award.
Corporate governance ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Unaudited information continued Implementation of policy for the year commencing 1 August 2017 continued Longterm incentive The Committee intends to approve the grant of LTIP awards for the Executive Directors for the year ended 31 July 2018.
The awards for each Director are as follows
Type of award
Dr Michael Edelman Share award 100 Dr Nigel Pickett Share award 100 Keith Wiggins Share award 100 David Blain Share award 100 The number of LTIPs awarded will be based on the threeday average share price following the announcement of the Companys results unless the Committee determines otherwise.
These awards will be subject to the following performance conditions 50% based on share price growth measured over the three financial years ending 31 July 2020 % of share price element vesting Share price target To encourage maximum performance the value of the award accelerates as the share price approaches the 160 pence level.
The principle we have agreed in the Remuneration Committee is a curved line vesting.
The Companys share price will be averaged across a threemonth period unless the Committee decides to apply a different averaging period to avoid rewarding for shortterm spikes in performance.
50% based on Group revenue targets measured over the three financial years ending 31 July 2020 % of Group revenue element vesting Group revenue target 25 2020 threshold target 100 2020 maximum target The revenue targets are considered by the Board to be market sensitive and therefore we will not disclose these measures at the current time.
We will disclose the targets in full along with actual performance against targets following the end of the performance period.
Performance underpin A core strategy of the business is to continue the development of our Lighting and Bioimaging divisions with a longterm aim of transforming them into profitable businesses shipping commercial quantities of product.
Under the performance underpin if the Committee is not satisfied that appropriate progress has been made across the business it will have the discretion to cancel all or some of the LTIP award.
A twoyear holding period will apply after the end of the performance period for Executive Directors.
DIRE CT ORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION CONTINUED Unaudited information continued Statement of voting The Company is committed to ongoing dialogue with its shareholders and takes an active interest in trying to ensure that as many shareholders as possible submit their votes in time for any shareholder meetings.
The following table sets out the actual voting in respect of the resolutions to approve the Directors remuneration report at the Companys Annual General Meeting held on 15 December 2016 and the Directors remuneration policy at the Companys Annual General Meeting held on 10 December 2015.
Resolution Votes for % for Votes against % against Votes withheld To approve the Directors remuneration report 110451079 87.1 16413876 12.9 4433702 To approve the Directors remuneration policy 109395766 99.8 181769 0.2 11681552 Directors contracts Executive Directors It is the Groups policy that Executive Directors should have contracts with an indefinite term providing for one years notice.
Date of contract Date of appointment Notice from the Company Notice from Director Dr Michael Edelman 27 June 2006 27 June 2006 12 months 12 months Dr Nigel Pickett 27 June 2006 27 June 2006 12 months 12 months Keith Wiggins 1 October 2014 1 October 2014 6 months 6 months David Blain 3 August 2015 3 August 2015 6 months 6 months All Directors offer themselves for reelection every three years at the AGM in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Service contracts are available for inspection at the registered office of the Company.
Nonexecutive Directors All Nonexecutive Directors are appointed for an initial threeyear term and then on a rolling annual term.
Nonexecutive Directors appointments may be terminated on not less than six months notice from either party.
With effect from 1 August 2017 the notice period for Nonexecutive Directors was reduced to three months.
Date of letter of appointment Date of appointment Unexpired term of contract on 31 July 2017 Dr Christopher Richards Chairman 28 October 2015 11 November 2015 1 year and 4 months Brendan Cummins 19 May 2015 28 May 2015 10 months Dr Alison Fielding 20 March 2017 20 April 2017 2 years and 9 months On behalf of the Board Brendan Cummins Remuneration Committee Chairman 16 November 2017 60 Corporate governance The Directors present their report and the audited financial statements for the Group and Parent Company for the year ended 31 July 2017.
Financial instruments Details of the Groups financial risk management objectives and policies are disclosed in note 26 to the financial statements.
Research and development The principal activity of the Group is research and development a review of which is included in the Chairmans and Chief Executive Officers statements on pages 4 and 5 and 6 to 9 respectively.
Total research and development spend was 5508000 2016 5995000.
No development expenditure was capitalised in the period 2016 nil for the reasons provided in note 3h to the accounts.
Dividends
The Directors do not recommend payment of an ordinary dividend 2016 nil.
Disclosures reported elsewhere in the Annual Report The strategic review of the business of the Company and its subsidiaries is given on pages 1 to 31.
Certain information required for disclosure in this report is provided in other appropriate sections of this Annual Report.
These include the Corporate governance report on pages 34 to 36 Operating review on pages 6 to 9 in respect of the Groups activities in the fields of research and development where the outlook section covers likely future developments in the business of the Company and its subsidiaries Finance review on pages 22 to 24 Directors remuneration report on pages 43 to 59 Disclosures on the Groups greenhouse gas emissions Director and employee gender and human rights which are included in the Sustainability report on pages 25 to 31 Going concern statement on page 21 and Disclosures on financial instruments in note 26 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The disclosures are accordingly incorporated into this report by reference.
Requirements of the Listing Rules The following table provides references to where the information required by the Listing Rule 9.8.4R is disclosed Listing Rule requirement Location A statement of the amount of interest capitalised during the period under review and details of any related tax relief Not applicable Information required in relation to the publication of unaudited financial information Not applicable Details of any longterm incentive schemes Directors remuneration report pages 43 to 59 Details of any arrangements under which a Director has waived emoluments or agreed to waive any future emoluments from the Company No such waivers Details of any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash No such share allotments Details of any nonpreemptive issues of equity for cash by any unlisted major subsidiary undertaking No such share allotments Details of UK Parent participation in a placing by a listed subsidiary No such share participations Details of any contract of significance in which a Director is or was materially interested No such contracts Details of rules regarding the appointment and replacement of Directors See Directors report Details of any contract of significance between the Company or one of its subsidiaries and a controlling shareholder No such contracts Details of a waiver of dividends by a shareholder No such waivers Board statement in respect of relationship agreement with the controlling shareholder No such agreements DIRE CT ORS REPORT STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Acquisition of the Companys own shares The Company made no purchases of its own shares in the period under review.
As at 31 July 2017 the authority given by the shareholders at the 2016 Annual General Meeting is for the Company to make market purchases of up to 2382246.60 of the nominal value of its ordinary shares at a price per share of not less than 10 pence and not more than 5% above the average of the middle market quotations for ordinary shares of the Company for the five business days immediately preceding the day of purchase.
This authority is being proposed for renewal at the 2017 Annual General Meeting.
Share capital and funding 1213750 shares were issued during the year to 31 July 2017 as a result of the exercise of options.
As at 31 July 2017 share capital comprised 238.3 million ordinary shares of 10 pence each 2016 237.1 million.
There is only one class of share and all shares are fully paid.
Full details of the Groups and Companys share capital movements during the period are given in note 21 to the financial statements.
Pursuant to the general provisions of the Articles of Association and prevailing legislation there are no specific restrictions on the size of a holding.
The Directors are not aware of any restrictions on the transfer of ordinary shares in the Company other than certain restrictions which may from time to time be imposed by law and regulations e.
Authority whereby certain employees of the Company require prior approval from the Company to deal in the Companys securities.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on voting rights and the transfer of securities.
Following shareholder approval at a general meeting held on 14 November 2017 47655821 shares were issued on 15 November 2017 as a result of a placing of shares at 18 pence each raising cash of 8.0 million net of expenses.
Details of shares under option are provided in note 22 to the financial statements.
Directors and their interests The following Directors held office throughout the year Dr Christopher Richards Dr Michael Edelman Dr Nigel Pickett Keith Wiggins David Blain Brendan Cummins Dr Alison Fielding Appointed 20 April 2017 Gordon Hall Resigned 31 January 2017 Robin Williams Resigned 13 July 2017 Biographies of the Directors at the date of this report can be found on pages 32 and 33.
Details of Directors remuneration are shown in the Directors remuneration report on pages 43 to 59.
Directors interests in the shares of the Company including family and beneficial interests at 31 July 2017 and following the placing on 15 November 2017 were Ordinary shares of 10p each 15 November 15 November 31 July 31 July 31 July 31 Julyteltel Number % Number % Number % Dr Christopher Richards 285496 0.10 118830 0.05 43421 0.02 Dr Michael Edelman 4974350 1.74 4931615 2.07 5431615 2.29 Dr Nigel Pickett 11112347 3.89 10945681 4.59 10945681 4.62 Keith Wiggins 55555 0.02 David Blain 153588 0.05 14700 0.01 14700 0.01 Brendan Cummins 277777 0.10 Dr Alison Fielding 16859113 5.90 16010826 6.72 16435417 6.93 As at 31 July 2017 none of the Directors had any interests in shares of any other Group company.
No Director had an interest in any contract that was significant in relation to the Groups business at any time during the period.
Directors are subject to reelection at intervals of not more than three years.
Corporate governance Directors indemnity insurance The Group has maintained insurance throughout the year for its Directors and officers against the consequences of actions brought against them in relation to their duties for the Group.
Such provision remains in force as at the date of approval of the Directors report.
Substantial shareholders The Company is aware that the following had an interest in 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company at 31 July 2017 and following the placing on 15 November 2017 Number of ordinary shares at 15 November 2 017  % of issued share capital Number of ordinary shares at 31 July 2017 % of issued share capital Lombard Odier 57191058 20.00 38976614 16.36 Hargreaves Lansdown plc 24973401 8.73 19310151 8.10 Baillie Gifford and Co 18051750 6.31 19078642 8.01 COGEFI 21859271 7.64 17700546 7.43 Dr Nigel Pickett 11112347 3.89 10945681 4.59 Killick Asset Management 10145590 3.55 7406813 3.11 This includes notifications of major interests in shares received by 10 November 2017.
Donations
No charitable or political donations were made in the year 2016 nil.
Additional information for shareholders With regard to the appointment and replacement of Directors the Company is governed by its Articles of Association the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 the Companies Act 2006 and related legislation.
The Articles themselves may be amended by special resolution of the shareholders.
The Articles provide that Directors may be appointed by an ordinary resolution of the Companys members or by a resolution of the Directors provided that in the latter instance a Director appointed in this way retires and stands for election at the first Annual General Meeting following his appointment.
The Articles also provide that at every Annual General Meeting at least onethird of the Directors retire by rotation and set out the circumstances in which and how they may be reelected.
The Companys members may remove a Director by passing an ordinary resolution of which special notice has been given.
The office of a Director shall be vacated in any of the following events a if but in the case of a Director holding any executive office subject to the terms of any contract of service between him and the Company notification in writing signed by the Director or otherwise authenticated in such manner as the other Directors may accept is received by the Company from the Director that he is resigning or retiring from office as a Director and such resignation or retirement has taken effect in accordance with its terms or if he shall in writing offer to resign or retire and the Directors shall resolve to accept such offer b if he becomes bankrupt or has a receiving order made against him or makes any arrangement or composition with his creditors generally in satisfaction of his debts or shall apply to the court for an interim order under section 253 of the Insolvency Act 1986 c if a registered medical practitioner who is treating the Director gives a written opinion to the Company stating that he has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Director and may remain so for more than three months d if he is absent from meetings of the Directors for six successive months without leave and his alternate Director if any shall not during such period have attended in his stead and the Directors resolve that his office be vacated e if he shall be removed from office by notice in writing served upon him signed by all his coDirectors but so that if he holds an appointment to an executive office which automatically determines as a result such removal shall be deemed an act of the Company and shall have effect without prejudice to any claim for damages for breach of any contract of service between him and the Company or f if he ceases to be a Director by virtue of any provision of the Companies Act or becomes prohibited by law from being a Director.
The powers of the Directors are determined by applicable legislation and the Companys Articles of Association.
As provided in those Articles the Directors may exercise all the Companys powers provided that the Articles or applicable legislation do not stipulate that any such powers must be exercised by the Companys members.
The Directors have been authorised to issue and allot ordinary shares pursuant to the Articles and have authority to make market purchases of shares.
These powers are referred to shareholders at each Annual General Meeting for renewal.
Any shares purchased may be cancelled or held as treasury shares.
Employment policies The Group is committed to ensuring the health and safety of its employees in the workplace.
This includes the provision of regular medical checks.
The Group supports the employment of disabled people where possible through recruitment by retention of those who become disabled and generally through training career development and promotion.
The Group is committed to keeping employees as fully informed as possible with regard to the Groups performance and prospects and seeks their views wherever possible on matters which affect them as employees.
DIRE CT ORS REPORT CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code The statements of compliance with the principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the FRC in 2016 are set out on page 35.
Foreign branches The Group has just one foreign location a subsidiary in the United States which provides management services to the UK business.
Post balance sheet events Following shareholder approval at a general meeting held on 14 November 2017 47655821 shares were issued on 15 November 2017 as a result of a placing of shares at 18 pence each raising cash of 8.0 million net of expenses.
Auditor
Ernst and Young LLP has indicated its willingness to continue in office.
Ordinary resolutions to reappoint Ernst and Young LLP as auditor and to authorise the Directors to agree its audit fee will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Annual General Meeting notice The Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held on 12 January 2018 at 11.00am at the Companys headquarters at 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT.
The notice convening the AGM together with an explanation of the resolutions to be proposed at the meeting will be sent to shareholders separately from this document.
On behalf of the Board Dr Michael Edelman
Chief Executive Officer
16 November 2017 64 Corporate governance The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group financial statements in accordance with applicable United Kingdom law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare Group financial statements under IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Group financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing the Group financial statements the Directors are required to present fairly the financial position financial performance and cash flows of the Group select suitable accounting policies in accordance with IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors and then apply them consistently present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information make judgements that are reasonable provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRS as adopted by the European Union is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the Groups financial position and financial performance and state whether the Group financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the Group financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are also responsible for preparing the Directors report the Directors remuneration report and the corporate governance statement in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and applicable regulations including the requirements of the Listing Rules and the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules.
The financial statements for the year ended 31 July 2017 are included in the 2017 Annual Report which is published by the Company in hardcopy printed form and available to download on the Groups website on the internet.
The maintenance and integrity of the Nanoco website is the responsibility of the Directors the work carried out by the auditor does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditor accepts no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors remuneration The Directors remuneration report on pages 43 to 59 sets out the remuneration policies operated by the Company and disclosures on Directors remuneration and other disclosable information relating to Directors and officers and their interests.
Internal control The Board through the Audit Committee has reviewed the assessment of risks and the internal control framework that Nanoco operates and has considered the effectiveness of the system of internal control in operation in the Group for the year covered by this report and up to the date of its approval by the Board of Directors.
The
Board has concluded that given the size of the organisation appropriate controls have been established and complied with.
The UK Corporate Governance Code The Board considers that the Company applies the principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code of the Financial Reporting Council as described under Corporate governance on pages 34 to 36 and has complied with all relevant principles and provisions of the Code.
We did not comply with the requirement in E.2.4 to give 14 clear working days notice of the general meeting we held on 14 November 2017.
The reason for the noncompliance was the desire to conclude the meeting as early as possible as completion of the fundraising had a direct impact on the publication of the Companys preliminary results announcement and its report and accounts for the year ended 31 July 2017 as the proceeds of the fundraising were relevant in assessing the going concern status of the Company.
The Directors strongly believed that it was in the best interests of the Company for the going concern status of the Company to be secured prior to the publication of the Companys preliminary results announcement and its report and accounts for the year ended 31 July 2017 which were required to be published by 30 November 2017.
As required by the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority the auditor has considered the Directors statement of compliance in relation to those points of the Code which are specified for their review.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys and the Groups performance business model and strategy.
Auditor
Each of the persons who is a Director at the date of approval of this Annual Report confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Groups auditor is unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditor is aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
Ernst and Young LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in office as auditor and a resolution to reappoint them will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
Directors responsibility statement In accordance with the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules the Directors listed on pages 32 and 33 confirm to the best of their knowledge that the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Group and Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the management report which is incorporated into the Directors report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties faced by the Group.
Annual Report The Annual Report for the year ended 31 July 2017 comprising the Strategic report the Directors remuneration report the Directors report the financial statements and additional information for investors has been approved by the Board of Directors.
By order of the Board David Blain Company Secretary 16 November 2017 S TATEMENT OF DIRE CT ORS RE SPONSIBILITIE S STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
In our opinion Nanoco Group plcs Group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 31 July 2017 and of the Groups loss for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of Nanoco Group plc which comprise Group Parent company Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended Statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the year then ended Statement of financial position as at 31 July 2017 Consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 July 2017 Cash flow statement for the year then ended Consolidated cash flow statement for the year then ended Related notes 1 to 29 to the financial statements Related notes 1 to 29 to the financial statements The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report below.
We are independent of the Group and parent company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Conclusions relating to principal risks going concern and viability statement We have nothing to report in respect of the following information in the annual report in relation to which the ISAsUK require us to report to you whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to the disclosures in the annual report set out on pages 18 and 19 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the directors confirmation set out on pages 18 and 19 in the annual report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the entity including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the directors statement set out on page 21 in the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the entitys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements whether the directors statement in relation to going concern required under the Listing Rules in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or the directors explanation set out on pages 20 and 21 in the annual report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the entity over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the entity will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
Overview of our audit approach Key audit matters Revenue recognition  occurrence of revenue under supply and licence agreements Going concern Carrying value of intellectual property tangible fixed assets and assets held for sale Audit scope The Group comprises two components based on geographical location being the UK and US.
We performed an audit of the complete financial information of the UK component and audit procedures on specific balances of the US component.
These two components accounted for 100% of operating expenses 100% of revenue 100% of loss before taxation and 100% of total assets.
Materiality
Overall Group materiality of 216000 which represents 2% of operating expenses.
INDEPENDENT A UDIT OR S REPORT T O THE MEMBERS OF NANOCO GROUP PL C 66 Financial statements Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Revenue recognition  occurrence of revenue under supply and licence agreements royalties and licence revenue 615000 and products sold 470000 2016 156000 and 204000 Refer to the Audit Committee report page 38 accounting policies page 76 and note 4 of the Consolidated financial statements page 82.
All revenue streams are susceptible to manipulation by management in order to improve reported performance or success.
Supply and licence agreements with partners can be significant in delivering the Groups revenue during its precommercialisation phase.
There is a risk of inappropriate revenue recognition if the treatment of payments received does not reflect the substance of each agreement.
Inappropriate judgements applied by management could result in material misstatement in the income statement.
In the prior year the risk relating to the occurrence of revenue did not include revenue from products sold as there had been no sales of materials under the new supply and license agreements and the amount of revenue from other sources was not material.
We understood and assessed the design and implementation of the key controls around the revenue recognition process.
We did not seek to obtain reliance on the control framework.
We agreed invoiced amounts to contract terms and receipt of payment and as applicable to evidence supporting shipment or the achievement of any performance obligations under the contracts notably the transfer of technology and sharing of intellectual property.
We focused on evaluating whether the allocation of revenues between the different components of the supply and license agreements reflected the substance of the agreement in accordance with IAS 18.
The value of revenue recognised would be different if the components were deemed to be economically linked and thus the attributed amounts per the contract would require reallocation in order to reflect appropriately the fair value consideration for services rendered or goods delivered.
We compared the terms of different contracts made inquiries of management compared to other revenues derived from similar sources pre and postyear end and evaluated the differences in licence fees royalties and prices of materials under those contracts.
Based on these procedures we concluded that royalties and the pricing of materials supplied under the agreements were not economically linked to the upfront licence fee and that the recognition of revenue in the period was appropriate.
We tested adjustments recorded in revenue such as releases of deferred licence revenue for evidence of management bias or override of controls.
There were no new licence agreements in the current year.
We read minutes of Board meetings and other committee meetings for evidence of changes in contractual terms in existing agreements.
Based on the procedures performed we did not identify any evidence of material misstatement in the revenue recognised in the year.
Going concern Refer to the Strategic report page 21 Audit Committee report page 38 Statement of financial position page 73 and accounting policies page 75.
At 31 July 2017 the Group had cash cash equivalents and shortterm investments and cash on deposit of 5.7 million 2016 14.5 million and incurred an operating loss of 10.9 million 2016 12.8 million.
The Strategic Report on pages 18 and 19 identifies the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
Judgement is required by the directors in assessing whether any material uncertainties exist which cast significant doubt as to the Groups ability to meet its liabilities and whether the mitigating actions identified by management are achievable.
Judgement is also required in assessing whether the disclosures provided in the financial statements adequately describe the risks and underlying assumptions.
This risk is consistent with the previous year.
We understood and assessed the design and implementation of the key controls around managements assessment of the going concern basis.
We did not seek to obtain reliance on the control framework.
We obtained and reviewed the going concern assessment prepared by management including financial forecasts.
We tested the financial forecasts to ensure integrity of the model that they reflected an accurate starting position and that they were consistent with the budget that had been approved by the directors.
We tested the sensitised forecasts prepared by management in which there were no revenues during the forecast period and which incorporated the proceeds of the placing which was completed prior to the approval of the financial statements.
We evaluated the headroom under these sensitised forecasts which formed the basis of managements conclusions regarding going concern and also ran further sensitivities in relation to the cost base to test the impact of changes in certain forecast costs on the going concern assumption.
We inspected the approval of the placing by the shareholders and tested the proceeds to subscription agreements or to the Companys bank statements.
We compared the costs reported in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income with those that had been budgeted by management to evaluate the accuracy of previous financial forecasts and managements ability to control the Companys cost base.
We read board minutes and the Companys risk register for inconsistencies with the risks considered in the going concern assessment.
We read the disclosures in the Annual Report and Accounts to confirm that they were consistent with our understanding of the going concern assessment that had been undertaken by the directors and that they appropriately reflected the risks and mitigating actions that had been considered.
We concluded that we concurred with managements view that it is appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
We concluded that adequate disclosure has been provided in the financial statements.
INDEPENDENT A UDIT OR S REPORT CONTINUED T O THE MEMBERS OF NANOCO GROUP PL C STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key audit matters continued Risk Our response to the risk Key observations communicated to the Audit Committee Carrying value of intellectual property 2619000 2016 2423000 tangible fixed assets 865000 2016 1260000 and assets held for sale 535000 2016 nil Refer to the accounting policies page 79 note 11 page 86 note 12 page 86 and note 13 page 87.
At 31 July 2017 the carrying value of the Groups noncurrent assets excluding assets held for sale was 3.5 million 2016 3.7 million.
The Groups operating loss for the year then ended was 10.9 million 2016 12.8 million.
There is a risk that the carrying value of the Groups noncurrent assets might not be recoverable.
In the year ended 31 July 2017 the Company recorded an impairment loss of 77000 in respect of intangible fixed assets and has presented assets with a carrying value of 535000 at 31 July 2017 as assets held for sale.
Any inappropriate judgements in measuring the recoverable amount of the noncurrent assets and assets held for sale could result in a material misstatement in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income and in the statement of financial position.
This risk area is consistent with the prior year except that it also now includes assets held for sale of 535000 2016 nil.
We understood and assessed the design and implementation of the key controls around managements assessment of the carrying value of intellectual property and tangible fixed assets.
We did not seek to obtain reliance on the control framework.
We tested the completeness of managements impairment review by reading Board minutes and minutes of other committee meetings making inquiries of management regarding the registration and protection of patents and checking for consistency with other judgements such as going concern and capitalisation of development costs and our understanding of the Companys licence agreements.
We made inquiries of management to understand the process by which patents that were of no value to the Company and which should be allowed to lapse were identified.
We obtained the financial forecasts prepared by management and tested the integrity of the forecasts consistency with the budget approved by management and those forecasts used in the going concern assessment and that the calculation of recoverable amount had been performed in accordance with the accounting framework.
We performed sensitivity analyses to evaluate the impact on the recoverable amount of delays in forecast revenues by a year and increases in the discount rate applied to forecast cash flows.
We also assessed the carrying balance if only guaranteed revenues under the licence agreements materialised.
None of the scenarios that we tested resulted in a forecast impairment loss.
We compared the carrying value of noncurrent assets with the market capitalisation of the Company and we evaluated the results of the placing that was completed prior to the approval of the financial statements.
We made inquiries of management read board minutes and made inquiries of the corporate finance specialists engaged to support the disposal of the assets that are presented as assets held for sale to evaluate the directors commitment to completing the divestment and their expectation that proceeds less cost to sell will exceed the carrying amount.
We concluded that we agreed with managements judgement that the carrying value of the noncurrent assets and assets held for sale at 31 July 2017 were not impaired.
An overview of the scope of our audit Tailoring the scope Our assessment of audit risk our evaluation of materiality and our allocation of performance materiality determine our audit scope for each entity within the Group.
Taken together this enables us to form an opinion on the consolidated financial statements.
We take into account size risk profile the organisation of the Group and effectiveness of Groupwide controls and changes in the business environment when assessing the level of work to be performed at each entity.
The Groups subsidiaries are described in note 14 to the financial statements.
We view the Group as having two components based on geographical location being the UK and US.
The Groups processes and controls are consistent across the Group and lie primarily in one location Manchester with responsibility being with Group management for the preparation of financial information and for judgemental processes and significant risk areas.
The USbased subsidiary predominantly provides management and technical expertise to the Group.
All of our audit procedures were performed by the group audit team.
In assessing the risk of material misstatement to the Group financial statements and to ensure we had adequate quantitative coverage of significant accounts in the financial statements we performed full scope audit procedures in respect of the UK component.
For the US component we performed specific scope audit procedures on specific accounts within that component that we considered had the potential for the greatest impact on the significant accounts in the financial statements either because of the size of these accounts or their risk profile.
This was consistent with the approach that we followed in the previous year.
The reporting components where we performed audit procedures accounted for 100% 2016 100% of the Groups operating expenses 100% 2016 100% of the Groups revenue 100% 2016 100% of loss before taxation and 100% 2016 100% of the Groups total assets.
For the current year the full scope component contributed 96% 2016 92% of the Groups operating expenses 100% 2016 100% of the Groups revenue and 100% 2016 100% of the Groups total assets.
The specific scope component contributed 4% 2016 8% of the Groups operating expenses 0% 2016 0% of the Groups revenue and 0% 2016 0% of the Groups total assets.
The audit scope of this component may not have included testing of all significant accounts of the component but will have contributed to the coverage of significant accounts tested for the Group.
Financial statements TOTAL ASSETS REVENUE OPERATING EXPENSES An overview of the scope of our audit continued Tailoring the scope continued The charts below illustrate the coverage obtained from the work performed by our audit teams.
Involvement with component teams All audit work performed for the purposes of the audit was undertaken by the group audit team.
Our application of materiality We apply the concept of materiality in planning and performing the audit in evaluating the effect of identified misstatements on the audit and in forming our audit opinion.
Materiality
The magnitude of an omission or misstatement that individually or in the aggregate could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of the users of the financial statements.
Materiality provides a basis for determining the nature and extent of our audit procedures.
We determined materiality for the Group to be 216000 2016 236000 which is 2% 2016 2% of operating expenses which we measured using the basis described in the table below.
It was considered inappropriate to calculate materiality using Group profit before tax due to the lossmaking position of the Group.
It was also considered inappropriate to use revenue to calculate materiality as revenue reported by the Group relates to its precommercialisation activities.
Operating expenses represent a measure of the rate at which the Group is using its cash resources in reaching its strategic objective of commercialising its technology.
We therefore considered operating expenses to be the most appropriate performance metric on which to base our materiality calculation as we considered that to be the most relevant performance measure to the stakeholders of the entity.
STARTING BASIS Research and development expenses of 5508000 2016 5995000 Administrative expenses of 6784000 2016 7367000 Totals 10827000 operating expenses 2016 11768000 Materiality of 216000 2% of operating expenses 2016 236000 2% ADJUS TMENT S Exclude noncash items Depreciation  decrease basis by 741000 2016 991000 Amortisation  decrease basis by 405000 2016 298000 Impairment expense  decrease basis by 77000 2016 nil Sharebased payments  decrease basis by 242000 2016 270000 MA TERIALIT Y Our initial materiality was based on forecast operating expenses.
We reassessed initial materiality as actual operating expenses were lower than forecast operating expenses.
Performance materiality The application of materiality at the individual account or balance level.
It is set at an amount to reduce to an appropriately low level the probability that the aggregate of uncorrected and undetected misstatements exceeds materiality.
On the basis of our risk assessments together with our assessment of the Groups overall control environment our judgement was that performance materiality was 50% 2016 75% of our planning materiality namely 108000 2016 177000.
Our objective in adopting this approach was to ensure that total uncorrected and undetected audit differences in all accounts did not exceed our materiality level.
96% full scope components 4% specific scope components 100% full scope components 0% specific scope components 100% full scope components 0% specific scope components INDEPENDENT A UDIT OR S REPORT CONTINUED T O THE MEMBERS OF NANOCO GROUP PL C STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our application of materiality continued Performance materiality continued We have reduced the performance materiality from 75% to 50% as a result of audit findings in the previous year in relation to deficiencies in the effectiveness of controls designed to prevent or correct material errors in respect of revenue recognition.
Audit work at component locations for the purpose of obtaining audit coverage over significant financial statement accounts is undertaken based on a percentage of total performance materiality.
The performance materiality set for each component is based on the relative scale and risk of the component to the Group as a whole and our assessment of the risk of misstatement at that component.
In the current year the range of performance materiality allocated to components was 22000 to 103000 2016 36000 to 168000.
Reporting threshold An amount below which identified misstatements are considered as being clearly trivial.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them all uncorrected audit differences in excess of 10800 2016 11800 which is set at 5% of planning materiality as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We evaluate any uncorrected misstatements against both the quantitative measures of materiality discussed above and in light of other relevant qualitative considerations in forming our opinion.
Other information The other information comprises the information included in the annual report set out on pages 1 to 64 including the strategic report the corporate governance statement the Remuneration Committee report the Directors remuneration report the Audit Committee report the Nomination Committee report the Directors report and the Statement of Directors responsibilities set out on page 64 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of the other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
In this context we also have nothing to report in regard to our responsibility to specifically address the following items in the other information and to report as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information where we conclude that those items meet the following conditions Fair balanced and understandable set out on page 64  the statement given by the directors that they consider the annual report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit Committee reporting set out on page 38  the section describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code set out on page 35  the parts of the directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the Strategic Report and the Directors Report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and the parent company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Financial statements Responsibilities of directors As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement set out on page 64 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Group and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
Explanation as to what extent the audit was considered capable of detecting irregularities including fraud The objectives of our audit in respect to fraud are to identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements due to fraud to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the assessed risks of material misstatement due to fraud through designing and implementing appropriate responses and to respond appropriately to fraud or suspected fraud identified during the audit.
However the primary responsibility for the prevention and detection of fraud rests with both those charged with governance of the entity and management.
Our approach was as follows We obtained an understanding of the legal and regulatory frameworks that are applicable to the Group and determined that the most significant are the UK Companies Act 2006 the UK Corporate Governance Code and the UK Listing Rules.
We understood how Nanoco Group plc is complying with those frameworks by the oversight of those charged with governance i. of the likelihood of detection and punishment.
We assessed the susceptibility of the Groups financial statements to material misstatement including how fraud might occur by misreporting of revenue managements journal entries or bias in the use of judgements and estimates.
Based on this understanding we designed our audit procedures to identify noncompliance with such laws and regulations.
Our procedures involved making enquiries of the Groups legal advisers reading the minutes of the Board of Directors and Audit Committee testing manual journal entries and testing estimates for unexpected changes in assumptions.
This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at https www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Other matters we are required to address We were appointed by management on 13 August 2008 to audit the financial statements of the company for the year ending 31 July 2008 and subsequent financial periods.
Our appointment was subsequently ratified at the annual general meeting of the company.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments is 10 years covering the years ending 2008 to 2017.
Within this time period the initial year was prior to the companys shares being listed.
The nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the parent company and we remain independent of the Group and the parent company in conducting the audit.
The audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the Audit Committee.
Jennifer Hazlehurst Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Ernst and Young LLP Statutory Auditor
16 November 2017
The maintenance and integrity of the Nanoco Group plc website is the responsibility of the directors the work carried out by the auditor does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditor accepts no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
INDEPENDENT A UDIT OR S REPORT CONTINUED T O THE MEMBERS OF NANOCO GROUP PL C STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Revenue 4 1326 474 Cost of sales 257 177 Gross profit 1069 297 Other operating income 5 281 284 Operating expenses Research and development expenses 5508 5995 Administrative expenses 6784 7367 Operating loss 6 10942 12781 before sharebased payments 10700 12511 sharebased payments 22 242 270 Finance income 8 44 193 Finance expense 8  12 Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 10898 12600 Taxation 9 1788 1993 Loss on ordinary activities after taxation for the year and total comprehensive loss for the year 9110 10607 Loss per share Basic and diluted loss for the year 10 3.82p 4.47p The loss for the current and preceding year arises from the Groups continuing operations and is attributable to the equity holders of the Parent.
The basic and diluted loss per share are the same as the effect of share options is antidilutive.
The notes on pages 75 to 96 form an integral part of these financial statements.
CONSOLID ATED S TATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JULY 2017 72 Financial statements
Issued
Sharebased payment reserve
Revenue reserve
At 31 July 2015 58057 2445 1242 30160 29100 Loss for the year and total comprehensive loss for the year    10607 10607 Sharebased payments  270   270 At 31 July 2016 58057 2715 1242 40767 18763 Loss for the year and total comprehensive loss for the year    9110 9110 Issue of share capital on exercise of options note 21 552    552 Sharebased payments  242   242 At 31 July 2017 58609 2957 1242 49877 10447
Issued
Sharebased payment reserve
Revenue reserve
At 31 July 2015 135925 2445 4402 25292 117480 Profit for the year and total comprehensive profit for the year    167 167 Sharebased payments  270   270 At 31 July 2016 135925 2715 4402 25125 117917 Profit for the year and total comprehensive profit for the year    30 30 Issue of share capital on exercise of options note 21 552    552 Sharebased payments  242   242 At 31 July 2017 136477 2957 4402 25095 118741 CONSOLID ATED S TATEMENT OF CHANGE S IN E QUIT Y FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JULY 2017 COMPANY S TATEMENT OF CHANGE S IN E QUIT Y FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JULY 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
Assets
Noncurrent assets Tangible fixed assets 11 865  1260 Intangible assets 12 2619  2423 Investment in subsidiaries 14  66564  66322 3484 66564 3683 66322 Current assets Inventories 15 188  208 Trade and other receivables 16 669 47957 2045 42988 Income tax asset 9 1837  1970 Shortterm investments and cash on deposit 17   5000 5000 Cash and cash equivalents 17 5706 4670 9511 4057 8400 52627 18734 52045 Assets held for sale 13 535 Total assets 12419 119191 22417 118367
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 1318  2443 Financial liabilities 19   32 Deferred revenue 20 102  531 1420  3006 Noncurrent liabilities Other payables 18  450  450 Deferred revenue 20 552  648 55telTotal liabilities 1972 450 3654 450 Net assets 10447 118741 18763 117917 Capital and reserves Issued equity capital 21 58609 136477 58057 135925 Sharebased payment reserve 22 2957 2957 2715 2715 Merger reserve 23 1242  1242 Capital redemption reserve 23  4402  4402 Retained earnings 24 49877 25095 40767 25125 Total equity 10447 118741 18763 117917 The Parent Companys result for the period ended 31 July 2017 was a profit of 30000 2016 167000.
There were no other recognised gains or losses in either the current or prior year.
Approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 16 November 2017.
The notes on pages 75 to 96 form an integral part of these financial statements.
Dr Michael Edelman
16 November 2017 S TATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION AT 31 JULY 2017 Registered no.
Financial statements
31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
Lossprofit before tax 10898 30 12600 167 Adjustments for Net finance income 8 44 30 181 167 Depreciation of tangible fixed assets 11 741  991 Amortisation of intangible assets 12 482  298 Sharebased payments 22 242  270 Changes in working capital Decrease in inventories 20 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 1365  1143 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 1125  503 Decreaseincrease in deferred revenue 20 525  1179 Cash outflow from operating activities 9742  10683 Research and development tax credit received 2000  1830 Overseas corporation tax paid 79  7 Net cash outflow from operating activities 7821  8860 Cash flow from investing activities Purchases of tangible fixed assets 11 374  189 Purchases of intangible fixed assets 12 1185  900 Cash advance to subsidiary 17  4980  11153 Decrease in cash placed on deposit 17 5000 5000 15000 15000 Interest received Net cash inflow from investing activities 3496 61 14135 4045 Cash flow from financing activities Proceeds from issues of ordinary share capital 552 552 Interest paid   12 Loan repayment 19 32  63 Net cash inflowoutflow from financing activities Decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 3805 613 5200 4045 Cash and cash equivalents at the start of the year 9511 4057 4311 12 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the year 5706 4670 9511 4057 Monies placed on deposit at the end of the year   5000 5000 Cash cash equivalents and deposits at the end of the year 17 5706 4670 14511 9057 The notes on pages 75 to 96 form an integral part of these financial statements.
C A SH FL O W S TATEMENT S FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 JULY 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Reporting entity Nanoco Group plc the Company a public company limited by shares is on the premium list of the London Stock Exchange.
The Company is incorporated and domiciled in England UK.
The registered number is  and the address of its registered office is 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT.
These Group financial statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group and individually as Group entities for the year ended 31 July 2017.
The financial statements of Nanoco Group plc and its subsidiaries the Group for the year ended 31 July 2017 were authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 16 November 2017 and the statements of financial position were signed on the Boards behalf by Dr Michael Edelman.
The Company has elected to take the exemption under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to present the Parent Companys income statement.
The significant accounting policies adopted by the Group are set out in note 3.
Basis of preparation a Statement of compliance The Groups and Parent Companys financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRIC interpretations as they apply to the financial statements of the Group for the year ended 31 July 2017.
The Parent Company and Group financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis.
There were no assets or liabilities that were measured at fair value at 31 July 2017.
In assessing whether the going concern basis is an appropriate basis for preparing the 2017 Annual Report the Directors have utilised their detailed forecasts for the period to 31 July 2019 which take into account the Groups current and expected business activities its cash balance of 5.7 million as shown in its balance sheet at 31 July 2017 the cash raised of 8.0 million following shareholder approval of the placing on 14 November 2017 the principal risks and uncertainties it faces and other factors impacting its future performance.
The key assumptions underpinning the assessment during the period cover the following areas commercialisation of CFQD products through existing contractual arrangements ability to manufacture and supply sufficient CFQD products to meet partner demand and continued investment in research and development.
The principal plausible downside stress tests in accordance with the Groups principal risks and uncertainties are a significant reduction in projected CFQD sales volumes due to either a reduction in demand from the Groups partners or an inability to supply lower selling prices and higher manufacturing costs can Wah Hong produce final products that meet our quality standards can Wah Hong generate sufficient demand at attractive price levels to generate sufficient operating margins for the Group and achieve targets for future milestone payments how long will it take our licence partners Dow and Merck to contract new customers and supply products in volume to generate royalty income and achieve targets for milestone payments likelihood of new inventions making CFQD products obsolete and higher investment in research and development.
Various sensitivity analyses have been performed to reflect possible downside scenarios as referred to above.
Even in the worst case scenario whereby the Group achieves no cash revenues for the twelve months following the date of this Annual Report the Company and the Group have sufficient resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
At the time of approving the financial statements the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the 2017 Annual Report.
These financial statements are presented in Pounds Sterling which is the presentational currency of the Group and the functional currency of the Company.
All financial information presented has been rounded to the nearest thousand.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS 76 Financial statements Basis of preparation continued e Use of estimates and judgements The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities as at the reporting date and the amounts reported for revenues and expenses during the year.
The nature of estimation means that actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
Estimates and judgements used in the preparation of the financial statements are continually reviewed and revised as necessary.
While every effort is made to ensure that such estimates and judgements are reasonable by their nature they are uncertain and as such changes in estimates and judgements may have a material impact on the financial statements.
In the process of applying the Groups accounting policies management has made the following judgements which have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the consolidated financial statements.
Equitysettled sharebased payments The determination of sharebased payment costs requires the selection of an appropriate valuation method consideration as to the inputs necessary for the valuation model chosen and judgement regarding when and if performance conditions will be met.
Inputs required for this arise from judgements relating to the future volatility of the share price of Nanoco and comparable companies the Companys expected dividend yields riskfree interest rates and expected lives of the options.
The Directors draw on a variety of sources to aid in the determination of the appropriate data to use in such calculations.
The sharebased payment expense is most sensitive to vesting assumptions below and to the future volatility of the future share price factor.
Further information is included in note 3.
Outlook
The key assumptions concerning the future and other key sources of estimation uncertainty at the reporting date which have a significant risk of causing a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are those relating to the estimation of the number of share options that will ultimately vest note 22.
The Group based its assumptions and estimates on parameters available when the consolidated financial statements were prepared.
Existing circumstances and assumptions about future developments however may change due to market changes or circumstances arising that are beyond the control of the
Such changes are reflected in the assumptions when they occur.
Impairment of intellectual property and tangible fixed assets Management judgement is required to determine the carrying value of these assets.
As the Group has not to date made a profit the carrying value of these assets may need to be impaired.
During the year an extensive review was undertaken to identify which patents are of no further value to Nanoco and should be allowed to lapse.
As a consequence patents with a value of 77000 2016 nil have been fully impaired in these financial statements.
Judgements are based on the information available at each reporting date which includes the progress with testing and certification and progress on for example establishment of commercial arrangements with third parties.
Management has adopted the prudent approach of amortising patent registration costs over a tenyear period which is substantially shorter than the life of the patent.
For external patents acquired the same rule is adopted unless the remaining life of the patent is shorter in which event the cost of acquisition is amortised over the remaining life of the patent.
Taxation
Management judgement is required to determine the amount of tax assets that can be recognised based upon the likely timing and level of future taxable profits together with an assessment of the effect of future tax planning strategies.
Further information is included in note 9.
Research and development Careful judgement by the Directors is applied when deciding whether the recognition requirements for development costs have been met.
This is necessary as the economic success of any product development is uncertain until such time as technical viability has been proven and commercial supply agreements are likely to be achieved.
Judgements are based on the information available at each reporting date which includes the progress with testing and certification and progress on for example establishment of commercial arrangements with third parties.
In addition all internal activities related to research and development of new products are continuously monitored by the Directors.
Further information is included in note 3.
Revenue recognition Judgements are required as to whether and when contractual milestones have been achieved and in turn the period over which development revenue should be recognised.
Management judgements are similarly required to determine whether services or rights under licence agreements have been delivered so as to enable licence revenue to be recognised.
Further information is included in note 3.
Significant accounting policies The accounting policies set out below are consistent with those of the previous financial year and are applied consistently by Group entities.
The Group financial statements consolidate the financial statements of Nanoco Group plc and the entities it controls its subsidiaries drawn up to 31 July each year.
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Group has the power over the investee i. use its power over the investee to affect its returns.
All Nanoco Group plcs subsidiaries are 100% owned.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date control passes.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued a Basis of consolidation continued The acquisition method of accounting is used to account for the acquisition of subsidiaries by the Group.
The costs of an acquisition are measured as the fair value of the assets given equity instruments issued and liabilities incurred or assumed at the date of exchange plus costs directly attributable to the acquisition.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are initially measured at fair value at acquisition date irrespective of the extent of any minority interest.
The difference between the cost of acquisition of shares in subsidiaries and the fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired is capitalised as goodwill and reviewed annually for impairment.
Any deficiency in the cost of acquisition below the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired i. discount on acquisition is recognised directly in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
In the consolidated financial statements income and cash flow statement items for Group entities with a functional currency other than Sterling are translated into Sterling at monthly average exchange rates which approximate to the actual rates for the relevant accounting periods.
All intragroup transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation.
Subsidiaries accounting policies are amended where necessary to ensure consistency with the policies adopted by the Group.
Transactions in foreign currencies are initially recorded in the functional currency by applying the spot rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies including those of the Groups US subsidiary are retranslated at the functional currency rate of exchange ruling at the reporting date.
All differences are taken to the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates as at the dates of the initial transactions.
Nonmonetary items measured at fair value in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rates at the date when the fair value was determined.
An operating segment is a component of an entity that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses whose operating results are regularly reviewed by the entitys chief operating decision maker to make decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment and assess its performance and for which discrete financial information is available.
As at the reporting date the Company operated with only a single segment being the research development and manufacture of products and services based on high performance nanoparticles.
Revenue is recognised to the extent that it is probable that economic benefits will flow to the Group and the revenue can be reliably measured.
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the sale of goods or services excluding discounts rebates VAT and other sales taxes or duties.
The Groups revenues to date comprise amounts earned under joint development agreements individual project development programmes and material supply and licence agreements and revenue from the sale of quantum dot products.
Revenues received in advance of work performed from development programmes are recognised on a straightline basis over the period that the development work is being performed as measured by contractual milestones.
Revenue is not recognised where there is uncertainty regarding the achievement of such milestones and where the customer has the right to recoup advance payments.
Contractual payments received from licence agreements are recognised as revenue when goods services or rights and entitlements are supplied.
Upfront licence fees where control over the intellectual property has been retained by the Group are taken to income on a straightline basis over the initial period of the contract in accordance with the continuing obligations under the contract.
Revenue from the sale of products is recognised at the point of transfer of risks and rewards of ownership which is generally on shipment of product.
Government grants are recognised when it is reasonable to expect that the grants will be received and that all related conditions are met usually on submission of a valid claim for payment.
Government grants of a revenue nature are recognised as other operating income in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Government grants relating to capital expenditure are deducted in arriving at the carrying amount of the asset.
Cost of sales comprises the labour materials and power costs incurred in the generation of revenue from products sold.
Revenue from royalties and licences and revenue from the rendering of services which comprise payments from customers to gain preferential treatment in terms of supply or pricing do not have an associated cost of sale.
Operating losses are stated after research and development and administration expenses but before finance charges and taxation.
Financial statements Significant accounting policies continued h Research and development Research costs are charged in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income as they are incurred.
Development costs will be capitalised as intangible assets when it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the Group.
Such intangible assets will be amortised on a straightline basis from the point at which the assets are ready for use over the period of the expected benefit and will be reviewed for impairment at each reporting date based on the circumstances at the reporting date.
The criteria for recognising expenditure as an asset are it is technically feasible to complete the product management intends to complete the product and use or sell it there is an ability to use or sell the product it can be demonstrated how the product will generate probable future economic benefits adequate technical financial and other resources are available to complete the development use and sale of the product and expenditure attributable to the product can be reliably measured.
Development costs are currently charged against income as incurred since the criteria for their recognition as an asset are not met the exception being the costs of filing and maintenance of intellectual property as these are considered to generate probable future economic benefits and are capitalised as intangible assets see note 12.
Rentals payable under operating leases which are leases where the lessor retains a significant proportion of the risks and rewards of the underlying asset are charged in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income on a straightline basis over the expected lease term.
Lease incentives received are recognised as an integral part of the total lease expense over the term of the lease.
Finance income comprises interest income on funds invested and changes in the fair value of financial assets at fair value through the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Interest income is recognised as interest accrues using the effective interest rate method.
Finance expense comprises interest expense on borrowings.
All borrowing costs are recognised using the effective interest method.
Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax.
Income tax expense is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity or in other comprehensive income.
Current income tax assets including research and development income tax credit and liabilities for the current and prior periods are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to the tax authorities.
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred income tax is recognised on all temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the financial statements with the following exceptions where the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or of an asset or liability in a transaction that is not a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss and in respect of taxable temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences can be controlled and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured on an undiscounted basis using the tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date and which are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which differences can be utilised.
An asset is not recognised to the extent that the transfer of economic benefits in the future is uncertain.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset only if a legally enforceable right exists to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities the deferred income taxes relate to the same taxation authority and that authority permits the Group to make a single payment.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued l Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment assets are recognised initially at cost.
After initial recognition these assets are carried at cost less any accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Cost comprises the aggregate amount paid and the fair value of any other consideration given to acquire the asset and includes costs directly attributable to making the asset capable of operating as intended.
Depreciation is computed by allocating the depreciable amount of an asset on a systematic basis over its useful life and is applied separately to each identifiable component.
The following bases and rates are used to depreciate classes of assets Laboratory infrastructure  straight line over remainder of lease period two to ten years Fixtures and fittings  straight line over five years Office equipment  straight line over three years Plant and machinery  straight line over five years The carrying values of tangible fixed assets are reviewed for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable and are written down immediately to their recoverable amount.
Useful lives and residual values are reviewed annually and where adjustments are required these are made prospectively.
A tangible fixed asset item is derecognised on disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
Any gain or loss arising on the derecognition of the asset is included in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in the period of derecognition.
Intangible assets acquired either as part of a business combination or from contractual or other legal rights are recognised separately from goodwill provided they are separable and their fair value can be measured reliably.
This includes the costs associated with acquiring and registering patents in respect of intellectual property rights.
Where consideration for the purchase of an intangible asset includes contingent consideration the fair value of the contingent consideration is included in the cost of the asset.
Where intangible assets recognised have finite lives after initial recognition their carrying value is amortised on a straightline basis over those lives.
The nature of those intangibles recognised and their estimated useful lives are as follows
At each reporting date the Group reviews the carrying value of its plant equipment and intangible assets to determine whether there is an indication that these assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If any such indication exists or when annual impairment testing for an asset is required the Company makes an assessment of the assets recoverable amount.
An assets recoverable amount is the higher of an assets or cashgenerating units fair value less costs to sell and its value in use and is determined for an individual asset unless the asset does not generate cash inflows that are largely independent of those from other assets or groups of assets.
Where the carrying value of an asset exceeds its recoverable amount the asset is considered impaired and is written down to its recoverable amount.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
In determining fair value less costs of disposal an appropriate valuation model is used and these calculations are corroborated by valuation multiples or other available fair value indicators.
Impairment losses on continuing operations are recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income in those expense categories consistent with the function of the impaired asset.
An assessment is made at each reporting date as to whether there is any indication that previously recognised impairment losses may no longer exist or may have decreased.
If such indication exists the recoverable amount is estimated.
A previously recognised impairment loss is reversed only if there has been a change in the assumptions used to determine the assets recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised.
If that is the case the carrying amount of the asset is increased to its recoverable amount.
That increased amount cannot exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of depreciation had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
Such reversal is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income unless the asset is carried at a revalued amount in which case the reversal is treated as a valuation increase.
After such a reversal the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to allocate the assets revised carrying amount less any residual value on a systematic basis over its remaining useful life.
The carrying values of plant and equipment as at the reporting date have not been subjected to impairment charges.
An impairment loss in the year in respect of intangible fixed assets is described in note 12.
Financial statements Significant accounting policies continued o Assets held for sale Noncurrent assets are classified as held for sale if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
They are measured at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell which are incremental costs directly attributable to the disposal of the asset.
The carrying value is assessed at each reporting period.
Property plant and equipment and intangible assets are not amortised once classified as held for sale.
Assets classified as held for sale are presented separately as current assets in the statement of financial position.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated in the Company statement of financial position at cost less provision for any impairment.
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost based on latest contractual prices includes all costs incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less any further costs expected to be incurred to disposal.
Provision is made for slowmoving or obsolete items.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised when the Group becomes party to the contractual provisions of the relevant instrument and derecognised when it ceases to be party to such provisions.
Such assets and liabilities are classified as current if they are expected to be realised or settled within twelve months after the balance sheet date.
Financial assets and liabilities are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at either fair value or amortised cost including directly attributable transaction costs.
The Group has the following categories of financial assets and liabilities Loans and receivables i Trade and other receivables Trade receivables which generally have 30 to 60day terms are recognised and carried at the lower of their original invoiced value and recoverable amount.
The time value of money is not material.
Provision is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to recover balances in full.
Significant financial difficulties faced by the customer probability that the customer will enter bankruptcy or financial reorganisation and default in payments are considered indicators that the trade receivable is impaired.
The amount of the provision is the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the original effective interest rate.
The carrying value of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income within administrative expenses.
When a trade receivable is uncollectable it is written off against the allowance account for trade receivables.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at hand and deposits with maturities of three months or less.
Shortterm investments comprise deposits with maturities of more than three months but no greater than twelve months.
Financial liabilities at amortised cost i Trade and other payables Trade and other payables are noninterest bearing and are initially recognised at fair value.
They are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Obligations for loans and borrowings are measured initially at fair value and subsequently interestbearing loans are measured at fair value.
Proceeds on issue of shares are included in shareholders equity net of transaction costs.
The carrying amount is not remeasured in subsequent years.
Following the exercise on 2 August 2016 upon which jointly owned shares were transferred to the sole beneficiary there are no further shares held in the EBT.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant accounting policies continued u Sharebased payments Equitysettled sharebased payment transactions are measured with reference to the fair value at the date of grant recognised on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Companys estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Fair value is measured using a suitable option pricing model.
At each reporting date before vesting the cumulative expense is calculated representing the extent to which the vesting period has expired and managements best estimate of the achievement or otherwise of nonmarket conditions and the number of equity instruments that will ultimately vest.
The movement in cumulative expense since the previous reporting date is recognised in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income with a corresponding entry in equity.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified or a new award is designated as replacing a cancelled or settled award the cost based on the original award terms continues to be recognised over the original vesting period.
In addition an expense is recognised over the remainder of the new vesting period for the incremental fair value of any modification based on the difference between the fair value of the original award and the fair value of the modified award both as measured on the date of the modification.
No reduction is recognised if this difference is negative.
Where awards are granted to the employees of the subsidiary company the fair value of the awards at grant date is recorded in the Companys financial statements as an increase in the value of the investment with a corresponding increase in equity via the sharebased payment reserve.
The Group operates a defined contribution pension scheme.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Company in an independently administered fund.
The amounts charged against profits represent the contributions payable to the scheme in respect of the accounting period.
The following amendments to IFRS became mandatory in this reporting period.
The Group has applied the following standards and amendments for the first time for the reporting period commencing 1 August 2016 Disclosure initiative  amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements Clarification of acceptable methods of depreciation and amortisation  amendments to IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets Accounting for acquisitions of interests in joint operations  amendments to IFRS 11 and Annual improvements to IFRS 20122014 cycle.
The adoption of these amendments did not have an impact on the current period or any prior period.
New standards not yet adopted The IASB has published three new accounting standards relevant to the Group that will be mandatory in future periods.
These standards have not been early adopted in these consolidated financial statements.
The Groups initial assessment of the future impact of these new standards is as follows IFRS 9 Financial Instruments effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 The new financial instruments standard introduces changing to accounting for credit losses including related disclosures.
The new standard also introduces changes to how financial assets are measured on an ongoing basis to align with the assets cash flow characteristics and the business model in which the asset is held.
In addition the Company will be required to measure expected losses in respect of balances due from other Group companies.
As the Group does not have any complex financial instruments this is not expected to impact on reported performance.
Financial statements Significant accounting policies continued w New accounting standards and interpretations continued New standards not yet adopted continued IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 The new revenue standard provides a clearer and more detailed fivestep model for revenue recognition and disclosure in a framework that is designed to improve comparability of revenue amounts over a range of industries companies and geographical boundaries.
The standard can significantly change an issuers timing of recognition of revenue among other changes.
Revenue is often not only a key performance measure in its own right but also a starting point for other performance measures such as operating income net income and earnings per share key analytical ratios such as margins return on equity and return on assets and valuation metrics such as revenue multiples and pricetoearnings ratios.
The standard is effective for Nanoco in the year ending 31 July 2019.
The new standard provides enhanced detail and a fivestep revenue recognition approach to reflect the transfer of goods and services to customers.
IFRS 15 requires the identification of deliverables in contracts with customers that qualify as performance obligations.
The transaction price receivable from customers must be allocated between the Companys performance obligations under contracts on a relative standalone basis.
Where goods or services sold together are concluded to be distinct performance obligations revenue allocated to such goods or services is recognised when the control of goods passes to the customer or as the service is delivered.
Detailed reviews of revenue arrangements are under way and will continue into 201718 as we finalise our assessment of the impact of the new standard.
Key matters arising from the assessment relate to the identification of performance obligations and determining when they are satisfied.
Based on work to date we expect that one contract will be impacted by IFRS 15 in that an upfront licence fee currently recognised over the life of the agreement seven and a half years under IAS 18 will be recognised over time based on the number of units of product sold under IFRS 15 thereby deferring revenues and profits recognised under IAS 18 in the early years of the agreement.
We continue to work on other agreements but we do not expect them to be significantly impacted by the implementation of IFRS 15.
When IFRS 15 is adopted it can be applied either on a fully retrospective basis requiring the restatement of the comparative periods presented in the financial statements or with the cumulative retrospective impact of IFRS 15 applied as an adjustment to equity on the date of adoption.
When the latter approach is applied it is necessary to disclose the impact of IFRS 15 on each line item in the financial statements in the reporting period.
A cumulative retrospective approach as modified in accordance with the standard is expected to be taken.
IFRS 16 Leases effective for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 The new leases standard changes the previous lease accounting model so a lessee will now reflect more assets and liabilities arising from leases on its balance sheet.
This can substantially affect key financial ratios including ratios related to debt covenants or debttoequity ratios.
The Group expects to recognise certain assets and liabilities as outlined in note 25 on initial recognition of this standard although it is not expected to have a major impact on the consolidated income statement as the Group only has a limited number of offbalance sheet leases classified as operating leases under current lease accounting requirements per IAS 17 Leases.
Segmental information Operating segments At 31 July 2017 the Group operated as one segment being the research development and manufacture of products and services based on high performance nanoparticles.
This is the level at which operating results are reviewed by the chief operating decision maker i. the Chief Executive Officer to make decisions about resources and for which financial information is available.
All revenues have been generated from continuing operations and are from external customers.
31 July 31 July Analysis of revenue Products sold 470 204 Rendering of services 241 114 Royalties and licences 615 156 1326 474 There were two material customers who generated revenue of 832000 and 150000 2016 one material customer amounting to 114000.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Segmental information continued Operating segments continued The Group operates in four main geographic areas although all are managed in the UK.
The Groups revenue per geographical segment based on the customers location is as follows 31 July 31 July
Europe excluding UK 843 42 Asia 163 135 1326 474 All the Groups assets are held in the UK and all of its capital expenditure arises in the UK.
The loss on ordinary activities before taxation and attributable to the single segment was 10898000 2016 12600000.
Other operating income 31 July 31 July Government grants 213 284 Other income  insurance proceeds 68 Operating loss 31 July 31 July Operating loss is stated after charging Depreciation of tangible fixed assets see note 11 741 991 Amortisation of intangible assets see note 12 405 298 Impairment of intangible assets see note 12 77 Staff costs see note 7 5947 6801 Foreign exchange losses 43 4 Research and development expense 5508 5995 Sharebased payments 242 270 Operating lease rentals see note 25 Land and buildings 733 723 Included within research and development expense are staff costs totalling 4011000 2016 4590000 also included in note 7.
Auditors remuneration Audit services Fees payable to Company auditor for the audit of the Parent and the consolidated accounts 60 20 Auditing the accounts of subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 30 23 Fees payable to Company auditor for other services Assurance services in connection with the review of interim results 22 8 Services relating to corporate finance transactions not covered above 30 Total auditors remuneration 142 51 84 Financial statements Staff costs 31 July 31 July Wages and salaries 4947 5622 Social security costs 453 567 Pension contributions 305 342 Sharebased payments 242 270 5947 6801 Directors remuneration including benefits in kind included in the aggregate remuneration above comprised Emoluments for qualifying services 1071 1227 Directors emoluments excluding social security costs and longterm incentives but including benefits in kind disclosed above include 327000 paid to the highest paid Director 2016 349000.
Pension contributions into money purchase pension schemes were made for four Directors 2016 four.
Aggregate gains made by Directors during the year following the exercise of share options and jointly owned EBT shares were nil 2016 nil.
Not included in the costs reported above are share awards to be made to Directors under the Deferred Bonus Plan amounting to nil 2016 166000 which are included in the Directors remuneration report.
The awards are recognised in the income statement by way of a sharebased payment charge over the deferral period as required by IFRS 2.
An analysis of the highest paid Directors remuneration is included in the Directors remuneration report.
The average number of employees during the year including Directors was as follows
31 July
31 July
Directors 8 9 Laboratory and administrative staff 10tel8.
Finance income and expense
31 July 31 July Finance income Bank interest receivable 44 193 Finance expense Loan interest payable  12 Bank interest receivable includes nil 2016 12000 which is receivable after the year end.
Taxation
The tax credit is made up as follows
31 July 31 July Current income tax Research and development income tax credit receivable 1837 1970 Adjustment in respect of prior years 30 30 Overseas corporation tax 79 7 1788 1993 Deferred tax Charge for the year Total income tax credit 1788 1993 The adjustments in respect of prior years relate to research and development income tax credits.
The research and development income tax for the year ended 31 July 2016 was submitted in May 2017 and the repayment was received in June 2017.
The income tax receivable shown in the statement of financial position is the RandD tax credit receivable reported above.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Taxation continued The tax assessed for the year varies from the standard rate of corporation tax as explained below
31 July 31 July Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 10898 12600 Tax at standard rate of 19.67% 2016 20% 2143 2520 Effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 78 243 Additional reduction for research and development expenditure 1405 1556 Surrender of research and development relief for repayable tax credit 2492 2758 Research and development tax credit receivable 1837 1970 Share options exercised CTA 2009 Pt 12 deduction 17 Overseas corporation tax 79 7 Losses and sharebased payment charges carried forward not recognised in deferred tax 995 1075 Adjustment in respect of prior years 30 30 Tax credit in income statement 1788 1993 The Group has accumulated losses available to carry forward against future trading profits of 29.1 million 2016 24.3 million.
Deferred tax liabilitiesassets providedrecognised at a standard rate of 17% 2016 20% are as follows 31 July 31 July Accelerated capital allowances 83 189 Sharebased payments  189 Tax losses 83 The Group also has deferred tax assets measured at a standard rate of 17% 2016 20% in respect of sharebased payments of 369000 2016 455000 and tax losses of 4951000 2016 4850000 which have not been recognised as an asset as it is not yet probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the assets can be utilised.
Earnings per share
31 July 31 July Loss for the financial year attributable to equity shareholders 9110 10607 Sharebased payments 242 270 Loss for the financial year before sharebased payments 8868 10337 Weighted average number of shares Ordinary shares in issue 238180510 237077578 Adjusted loss per share before sharebased payments pence 3.72 4.36 Basic loss per share pence 3.82 4.47 Diluted loss per share has not been presented above as the effect of share options issued is antidilutive.
Financial statements Property plant and equipment
Laboratory infrastructure
Plant and machinery
Cost
At 1 August 2015 2578 230 4652 7460 Additions At 31 July 2016 2645 256 4748 7649 Additions 1telReclassified as assets held for sale note 13   203 203 At 31 July 2017 2655 395 4770 7820
At 1 August 2015 2007 161 3230 5398 Provided during the year At 31 July 2016 2401 208 3780 6389 Provided during the year Reclassified as assets held for sale note 13   175 175 At 31 July 2017 2614 263 4078 6955 Net book value At 31 July 2017 4telAt 31 July 260 The aggregate original cost of tangible assets now fully depreciated but considered to be still in use is 5081000 2016 3301000.
Intangible assets
Patents
Cost
At 1 August 2015 2803 Additions 900 At 31 July 2016 3703 Additions 1185 Reclassified as assets held for sale note 13 597 At 31 July 2017 4291
At 1 August 2015 982 Provided during the year 298 At 31 July 2016 1280 Provided during the year 405 Impairment charge 77 Reclassified as assets held for sale note 13 90 At 31 July 2017 1672 Net book value At 31 July 2017 2619 At 31 July 2016 2423 Contingent consideration of 150000 is payable in respect of a purchase of patents made during the year.
The amount is payable if the Group reaches a revenue target in a future reporting period.
The addition is recorded above at the Directors estimate of fair value of the consideration payable.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intangible assets continued Intangible assets are amortised on a straightline basis over ten years.
Amortisation provided during the period is recognised in administrative expenses.
The Group does not believe that any of its patents in isolation are material to the business.
The aggregate original cost of intangible assets now fully depreciated but considered to be still in use is 161000 2016 154000.
During the year an extensive review was undertaken to identify which patents are of no further value to Nanoco and should be allowed to lapse.
As a consequence patents with a value of 77000 2016 nil have been fully impaired in these financial statements.
This impairment charge is recognised within administrative expenses.
Assets held for sale Plant and machinery
Total
At 1 August 2016 Reclassified during the period 28 507 535 At 31 July These assets represent those held for sale following the Boards decision to dispose of the equipment and intellectual property arising from the Groups studies on solar power generation using CIGS copper indium gallium selenide materials.
The Directors consider that these assets will be disposed of within twelve months through a sale transaction.
Upon reclassification no remeasurement was necessary and therefore there have been no gains or losses recognised.
All of the assets are held by the one operating segment.
Investment in subsidiaries
Shares
Loans
Loan impairment
At 1 August 2015 63235 23103 20286 66052 Increase in respect of sharebased payments  270  270 At 31 July 2016 63235 23373 20286 66322 Increase in respect of sharebased payments  242  242 At 31 July 2017 63235 23615 20286 66564 By subsidiary Nanoco Tech Limited 63235   63235 Nanoco Life Sciences Limited  20286 20286 Nanoco Technologies Limited  3329  3329 At 31 July 2017 63235 23615 20286 66564 Loans to subsidiary undertakings carry no interest and are repayable on demand.
Further information in relation to these loans is given in note 27.
Share of issued ordinary share capital Subsidiary undertakings Country of incorporation Principal activity 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Nanoco Life Sciences Limited England and Wales Research and development 100% 100% Nanoco Tech Limited England and Wales Holding company 100% 100% Nanoco Technologies Limited England and Wales Manufacture and development of nanoparticles 100% 100% Nanoco 2D Materials Limited England and Wales Research and development 100% Nanoco US Inc.
USA Management services 100% 100% All subsidiaries incorporated in England and Wales are registered at 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT.
Nanoco US Inc. registered at 33 Bradford Street Concord MA 01742.
With the exception of the two companies footnoted below all other shareholdings are owned by Nanoco Group plc.
Share capital is owned by Nanoco Tech Limited.
Nanoco US Inc. is a wholly owned subsidiary of Nanoco Tech Limited.
It was formed in July 2013 primarily in order to provide the services of USlocated staff to the rest of the Group.
Nanoco 2D Materials Limited was incorporated on 6 February 2017.
Financial statements
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
Raw materials finished goods and consumables 188  208 A total of 80000 2016 85000 was included in cost of sales with respect to inventory during the year.
Trade and other receivables 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
Trade receivables 111  1455 Prepayments and accrued income 329  422 12 Intercompany shortterm loan to subsidiary  47957  42976 Other receivables 229  168 669 47957 2045 42988 Trade receivables are noninterest bearing and are generally due and paid within 30 to 60 days.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair value and that no impairment is required at the reporting date.
Therefore there is no provision for impairment at the balance sheet date 2016 nil.
Trade receivables are denominated in the following currency 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
US Dollars 15  1032 Euros 53  423 Sterling 43 111  1455 At 31 July the analysis of trade receivables that were past due but not impaired was as follows Not yet due
Past due but not impaired 90 days Past due but not impaired 120 to 150 days
2016 1455 Cash cash equivalents and deposits 31 July
31 July
31 July
31 July
Shortterm investments and cash on deposit   5000 5000 Cash and cash equivalents 5706 4670 9511 4057 5706 4670 14511 9057 Under IAS 7 cash held on longterm deposits being deposits with maturity of greater than three months and no more than twelve months that cannot readily be converted into cash has been classified as a shortterm investment.
The maturity on this investment was less than twelve months at the reporting date.
Cash and cash equivalents at 31 July 2017 include deposits with original maturity of three months or less of nil 2016 5000000.
An analysis of cash cash equivalents and deposits by denominated currency is given in note 26.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Trade and other payables 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
Current
Trade payables 814  1093 Other payables 136  185 Accruals 368  1165 1318  2443
Longterm loan from subsidiary  450  450 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Interest is not charged on intercompany loans 2016 no interest.
The average credit period taken is 37 days 2016 45 days.
Financial liabilities 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
Other loan Current   32 The loan was unsecured bore interest at 2% above base rate was repayable in quarterly instalments and was fully repaid in 2017.
Deferred revenue 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
Current 102  531 Noncurrent 552  648 654  1179 Deferred revenue arises under IFRS where upfront licence fees are accounted for on a straightline basis over the initial term of the contract or where performance criteria have not been satisfied in the accounting period.
Issued equity capital Group Number
Share premium
Total
Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 10p At 31 July 2015 and 31 July 2016 237077578 23708 112217 77868 58057 Shares issued on exercise of options 1213750 121 431  552 At 31 July 2017 238291328 23829 112648 77868 58609 The balances classified as share capital and share premium include the total net proceeds nominal value and share premium respectively on issue of the Companys equity share capital comprising ordinary shares.
The retained loss and other equity balances recognised in the Group financial statements reflect the consolidated retained loss and other equity balances of Nanoco Tech Limited immediately before the business combination which was reported in the year ended 31 July 2009.
The consolidated results for the period from 1 August 2008 to the date of the acquisition by the Company are those of Nanoco Tech Limited.
However the equity structure appearing in the Group financial statements reflects the equity structure of the legal parent including the equity instruments issued under the shareforshare exchange to effect the transaction.
The effect of using the equity structure of the legal parent gives rise to an adjustment to the Groups issued equity capital in the form of a reverse acquisition reserve.
Financial statements Issued equity capital continued Shares issued on exercise of options 1213750 options were exercised this year 2016 nil with an average exercise price of 45.5 pence.
Company Number
Share premium
Allotted called up and fully paid ordinary shares of 10p At 31 July 2015 and 31 July 2016 237077578 23708 112217 135925 Shares issued on exercise of options 121375telAt 31 July 2017 238291328 23829 112648 136477 Sharebased payment reserve Group and Company 000 At 31 July 2015 2445 Sharebased payments 270 At 31 July 2016 2715 Sharebased payments 242 At 31 July 2017 2957 The sharebased payment reserve accumulates the corresponding credit entry in respect of sharebased payment charges.
Movements in the reserve are disclosed in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
A charge of 242000 has been recognised in the statement of comprehensive income for the year 2016 270000.
Share option schemes The Group operates the following share option schemes all of which are operated as Enterprise Management Incentive EMI schemes insofar as the share options being issued meet the EMI criteria as defined by HM Revenue and Customs.
Share options issued that do not meet EMI criteria are issued as unapproved share options but are subject to the same exercise performance conditions.
Nanoco Group plc Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Grant in November 2011 Share options were granted to staff and Executive Directors on 25 November 2011.
The options granted to Executive Directors were subject to commercial targets being achieved.
The exercise price was set at 50 pence being the average closing share price on the day preceding the issue of the share options.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
Share options issued to staff vest over a threeyear period from the date of grant and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award but are not subject to performance conditions.
Grant in October 2012 Share options were granted to staff and Executive Directors on 22 October 2012.
The options granted to Executive Directors were subject to commercial targets being achieved.
The exercise price was set at 57 pence being the average closing share price on the day preceding the issue of the share options.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
Share options issued to staff vest over a threeyear period from the date of grant and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award but are not subject to performance conditions.
Grant in May 2014 Share options were granted to certain staff on 23 May 2014.
The exercise price was set at 89 pence being the average closing share price on the day preceding the issue of the share options.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
The options vest at the end of three years from the date of grant and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
The awards are not subject to performance conditions.
Vesting of the award is subject to the employee remaining a fulltime member of staff at the point of vesting.
No options were granted to Executive Directors.
Grant in October 2014 Share options were granted to an Executive Director on 14 October 2014.
The exercise price was set at 10 pence being the nominal value of the share.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
The options vest at the end of three years from the date of grant and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
The awards are subject to performance conditions which were amended during the year so as to be in line with the 2015 LTIP scheme.
As a result of the modification the fair value of the award was reduced.
However in accordance with IFRS 2 no change was made to the charge in the financial statements.
Vesting of the award is subject to the employee remaining a fulltime member of staff at the point of vesting.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Sharebased payment reserve continued Share option schemes continued Nanoco Group plc 2015 Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Grant in December 2015 Following approval of the new scheme at the 2015 AGM share options were granted to four Executive Directors at nil cost.
The fair value benefit is measured using a stochastic model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
The options vest at the end of the threeyear performance period subject to meeting the performance criteria as detailed in the Directors remuneration report on page 53 and are exercisable after a twoyear holding period until the tenth anniversary of the award.
Grant in April 2016 Share options were granted to an employee on 12 April 2016 at nil cost.
The fair value benefit is measured using a stochastic model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
The options vest at the end of a threeyear performance period subject to meeting performance criteria and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
Grant in November 2016 Options were granted to the Executive Directors and all eligible staff on 22 November 2016 at nil cost.
The fair value benefit is measured using a stochastic model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued and are subject to a twoyear holding period.
The options vest at the end of a threeyear performance period subject to meeting performance criteria and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
Other awards Share options are awarded to management and key staff as a mechanism for attracting and retaining key members of staff.
The options are issued at either market price on the day preceding grant or in the event of abnormal price movements at an average market price for the week preceding grant date.
On 14 October 2015 unapproved options were granted to a member of staff with an exercise price of 56.5 pence.
These options vest over a threeyear period from the date of grant with performance conditions and are exercisable until the tenth anniversary of the award.
Vesting of the award is subject to the employee remaining a fulltime member of staff at the point of vesting.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the share options were issued.
Shares held in the Employee Benefit Trust EBT The Group operates a jointly owned EBT share scheme for senior management under which the trustee of the Groupsponsored EBT acquired shares in the Company jointly with a number of employees.
The shares were acquired pursuant to certain conditions set out in jointly owned agreements  JOA.
Subject to meeting the performance criteria conditions set out in the JOA the employees are able to exercise an option to acquire the trustees interests in the jointly owned EBT shares at the option price.
The jointly owned EBT shares issued on 1 September 2006 had met the option conditions on 1 August 2010 and the option to gain sole ownership was exercised by the option holder on 2 August 2016.
The fair value benefit is measured using a binomial valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the jointly owned shares were issued.
The following tables illustrate the number and weighted average exercise prices of and movements in share options and jointly owned EBT shares during the year.
Group and Company
Number
EBT
Number
2017 total
2016 total
Outstanding at 1 August 13477933 530089 14008022 12534322 Granted during the year 4158821  4158821 1695368 Exercised during the year 1213750 530089 1743839 Forfeitedcancelled 286688  286688 221668 Outstanding at 31 July 16136316  16136316 14008022 Exercisable at 31 July 9784814  9784814 11528654 Weighted average exercise price of options Group and Company
Pence
Outstanding at 1 August 48.9 51.9 Granted during the year  5.0 Exercised during the year 31.7 Forfeitedcancelled 22.6 61.7 Outstanding at 31 July 38.6 48.9 The weighted average exercise price of options granted during the year to 31 July 2017 was nil 2016 5 pence.
The range of exercise prices for options outstanding at the end of the year was nil110 pence 2016 nil110 pence.
For the share options outstanding as at 31 July 2017 the weighted average remaining contractual life is 6.4 years 2016 6.1 years.
Financial statements Sharebased payment reserve continued Weighted average exercise price of options continued The following table lists the inputs to the models used for the years ended 31 July 2017 and 31 July 2016.
Market performance linked grants Nonmarket performance linked grants Group and Companytel 2016 Expected volatility 59% 54% na na Riskfree interest rate 0.26% 0.85% na na Expected life of options years average 3 3 3 na Weighted average exercise price nil 5.0p nil na Weighted average share price at date of grant 49p 56.5p 49p na Model used Stochastic Stochastic Binomial Binomial The expected life of the options is based on historical data and is not necessarily indicative of exercise patterns that may occur.
The expected volatility reflects the assumption that the historical volatility is indicative of future trends which may also not necessarily be the actual outcome.
Certain awards are subject to a holding period after vesting.
A Finnerty model has been used to determine a discount for the lack of marketability of the shares.
Merger reserve and capital redemption reserve Merger reserve Group 000 At 31 July 2015 31 July 2016 and 31 July 2017 1242 The merger reserve arises under section 612 of the Companies Act 2006 on the shares issued by Nanoco Tech Limited to acquire Nanoco Technologies Limited as part of a simple Group reorganisation on 27 June 2007.
Capital redemption reserve Company 000 At 31 July 2015 31 July 2016 and 31 July 2017 4402 The capital redemption reserve arises from the offmarket purchase of deferred shares on 4 May 2005 and their subsequent cancellation.
Movement in revenue reserve and treasury shares
Retained deficit
Total revenue reserve At 31 July 2015 30063 97 30160 Loss for the year 10607  10607 At 31 July 2016 40670 97 40767 Loss for the year 9110  9110 Exercise of options 77 77 At 31 July 2017 49857 20 49877 During the year the option to convert jointly owned EBT shares into sole ownership was exercised 2016 nil for an aggregate consideration of 1 2016 nil.
Retained deficit represents the cumulative loss attributable to the equity holders of the Parent Company.
Treasury shares include the value of Nanoco Group plc shares issued as jointly owned equity shares and held by the Nanoco Groupsponsored EBT jointly with a number of the Groups employees.
At 31 July 2017 no shares in the Company were held by the EBT 2016 530089.
In addition there are 12222 2016 12222 treasury shares not held by the EBT.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Movement in revenue reserve and treasury shares continued
Retained deficit
Total revenue reserve At 31 July 2015 25195 97 25292 Profit for the year 167  167 At 31 July 2016 25028 97 25125 Profit for the year 30  30 Exercise of options 77 77 At 31 July 2017 25075 20 25095
Operating lease commitments The Group leases premises under noncancellable operating lease agreements.
The future aggregate minimum lease and service charge payments under noncancellable operating leases are as follows 31 July 2017
31 July 2016
Land and buildings Not later than one year 779 594 After one year but not more than five years 2039 1551 After five years  226 2818 2371 Financial risk management
This note presents information about the Groups exposure to various kinds of financial risks the Groups objectives policies and processes for measuring and managing risk and the Groups management of capital.
The Board of Directors has overall responsibility for the establishment and oversight of the Groups risk management framework.
The Executive Directors report regularly to the Board on Group risk management.
Capital risk management The Company reviews its forecast capital requirements on a halfyearly basis to ensure that entities in the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders.
The capital structure of the Group consists of equity attributable to equity holders of the Parent comprising issued share capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in notes 21 to 24 and in the Group statement of changes in equity.
At 31 July 2017 total equity was 10447000 2016 18763000.
The Company is not subject to externally imposed capital requirements.
Liquidity risk The Groups approach to managing liquidity is to ensure that as far as possible it will always have sufficient liquidity to meet its liabilities when due under both normal and stressed conditions without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Groups reputation.
The Group manages all of its external bank relationships centrally in accordance with defined treasury policies.
The policies include the minimum acceptable credit rating of relationship banks and financial transaction authority limits.
Any material change to the Groups principal banking facility requires Board approval.
The Group seeks to mitigate the risk of bank failure by ensuring that it maintains relationships with a number of investmentgrade banks.
At the reporting date the Group was cash positive with no outstanding borrowings apart from a longterm loan which is being repaid on a quarterly basis in line with the terms of the loan agreement.
Financial statements Financial risk management continued Categorisation of financial instruments Financial assetsliabilities Loans and receivables
Group
Loans and receivables
31 July 2017 Trade receivables 111  111 Intercompany shortterm loan to subsidiary    47957 Trade and other payables  1318 1318 Intercompany longterm loan from subsidiary    450 111 1318 1207 47507 Financial assetsliabilities Loans and receivables
Group
Loans and receivables
31 July 2016 Trade receivables 1455  1455 Intercompany shortterm loan to subsidiary    42976 Shortterm investments and cash on deposit 5000  5000 5000 Trade and other payables  2443 2443 Intercompany longterm loan from subsidiary    450 Financial liabilities  32 32 6455 2475 3980 47526 The values disclosed in the above table are carrying values.
The Board considers that the carrying amount of financial assets and liabilities approximates to their fair value.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are credit risk and foreign currency risk.
The Board of Directors reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks which are summarised below.
Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are cash cash equivalents and deposits.
The Group seeks to limit the level of credit risk on the cash balances by only depositing surplus liquid funds with multiple counterparty banks that have investmentgrade credit ratings.
The Group trades only with recognised creditworthy third parties.
Receivable balances are monitored on an ongoing basis with the result that the Groups exposure to bad debts is not significant.
The Groups maximum exposure is the carrying amount as disclosed in note 16 which was neither past due nor impaired.
All trade receivables are ultimately overseen by the Chief Financial Officer and are managed on a daytoday basis by the UK credit control team.
Credit limits are set as deemed appropriate for the customer.
The maximum exposure to credit risk in relation to cash cash equivalents and deposits is the carrying value at the balance sheet date.
Foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to currency risk on sales and purchases that are denominated in a currency other than the respective functional currency of the Company.
These are primarily US Dollars USD and Euros.
Transactions outside of these currencies are limited.
Almost all of the Companys revenue is denominated in USD.
The Group purchases some raw materials certain services and some assets in USD which partly offsets its USD revenue thereby reducing net foreign exchange exposure.
The Group may use forward exchange contracts as an economic hedge against currency risk where cash flow can be judged with reasonable certainty.
Foreign exchange swaps and options may be used to hedge foreign currency receipts in the event that the timing of the receipt is less certain.
There were no open forward contracts as at 31 July 2017 or at 31 July 2016.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Nanoco Group plc  Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial risk management continued Foreign currency risk continued The split of Group assets between Sterling and other currencies at the year end is analysed as follows 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
GBP
EUR
USD
Total
GBP
EUR
USD
Total
Cash cash equivalents and deposits 5659 7 40 5706 14477 5 29 14511 Trade receivables  423 1032 1455 Trade payables 503 5 306 814 546 49 498 1093 5199 55 251 5003 13931 379 563 14873 Sensitivity analysis to movement in exchange rates The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a reasonably possible change in the Sterling rate against other currencies used within the business with all other variables held constant of the Groups loss before tax due to foreign exchange translation of monetary assets and liabilities and the Groups equity.
Increasedecrease
Impact
Impact
10% 32 83 5% 16 39 5% 18 35 10% 39 68 Interest rate risk As the Group has no significant borrowings the risk is limited to the reduction of interest received on cash surpluses held at bank which receive a floating rate of interest.
The principal impact to the Group is to interestbearing cash and cash equivalent balances held which are as set out below 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
Fixed rate
Total
Fixed rate
Total
Cash cash equivalents and deposits  5706 5706 5000 9511 14511
Cash cash equivalents and deposits  4670 4670 5000 4057 9057 The exposure to interest rate movements is immaterial.
Maturity profile Set out below is the maturity profile of the Groups financial liabilities at 31 July 2017 based on contractual undiscounted payments including contractual interest.
Less than one year One to five years Greater than five years
Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 1318   1318 1318   1318 Less than one year One to five years Greater than five years
Financial liabilities Trade and other payables 2443   2443 Other loans including contractual interest 32   32 2475   2475 Trade and other payables are due within three months.
Financial statements Financial risk management continued Maturity profile continued The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the financial liabilities approximates to their fair value.
As all financial assets are expected to mature within the next twelve months an aged analysis of financial assets has not been presented.
The Companys financial liability a longterm loan from a subsidiary undertaking is due after more than five years.
Related party transactions The Group There were no sales to purchases from or at the year end balances with any related party.
The Company The following table summarises intercompany balances at the year end between Nanoco Group plc and subsidiary entities
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Longterm loans owed to Nanoco Group plc by Nanoco Life Sciences Limited 20286 20286 Nanoco Technologies Limited 3329 3087 14 23615 23373 Less provision against debt owed by Nanoco Life Sciences Limited 14 20286 20286 3329 3087 Shortterm loan owed to Nanoco Group plc by Nanoco Technologies Limited 16 47957 42976 Longterm loan owed by Nanoco Group plc to Nanoco Tech Limited 18 450 450 The movement in the longterm loan due from Nanoco Technologies Limited relates to the recharge in respect of the expense for sharebased payments for staff working for Nanoco Technologies Limited and is included in investments.
The movement in the shortterm loan due from Nanoco Technologies Limited relates to transfers of cash balances between the entities for the purposes of investing shortterm funds and the funding of trading losses.
There are no formal terms of repayment in place for these loans and it has been confirmed by the Directors that the longterm loans will not be recalled within the next twelve months.
None of the loans are interest bearing.
Compensation of key management personnel including Directors Shortterm employee benefits 1218 1370 Pension costs 73 60 Benefits in kind 32 Sharebased payments 188 190 1511 1620 The key management team comprises the Directors and two members of staff 2016 two who are not Directors of the Company.
The staff members of the team are the supply chain and compliance director and the applications development director.
Post balance sheet events Following shareholder approval at a general meeting held on 14 November 2017 47655821 shares were issued on 15 November 2017 as a result of a placing of shares at 18 pence each raising cash of 8.0 million net of expenses.
NO TE S T O THE FINANCIAL S TATEMENTS CONTINUED Printed by Park Communications on FSC certified paper.
Park is an EMAS certified company and its Environmental Management System is certified to ISO 14001.
100% of the inks used are vegetable oil based 95% of press chemicals are recycled for further use and on average 99% of any waste associated with this production will be recycled.
This document is printed on Galerie Satin a paper containing 15% recycled fibre and 85% virgin fibre sourced from well managed responsible FSC certified forests.
The pulp used in this product is bleached using an elemental chlorine free ECF process.
Directors
Dr Christopher Richards Non executive Chairman Dr Michael Edelman Chief Executive Officer Dr Nigel Pickett Chief Technology Officer Keith Wiggins Chief Operating Officer David Blain Chief Financial Officer Dr Alison Fielding Non executive Director Brendan Cummins Senior Independent Non executive Director
David Blain Registered office 46 Grafton Street Manchester M13 9NT
Auditor
Ernst and Young LLP 2 St Peters Square Manchester M2 3EY Legal adviser Reed Smith LLP The Broadgate Tower 20 Primrose Street London EC2A 2RS Investor relations MHP Communications 6 Agar Street London WC2N 4HN
800 Third Avenue th
New York 10022
Peel Hunt LLP 120 London Wall London EC2Y 5ET PR consultants Tier One Partners LLC 80 Burlington Street
MA 02420
Neville Registrars Neville House 18 Laurel Lane Halesowen B63 3DA INVE S T OR INFORMATION Nanoco Group plc 46 Grafton Street
M13 9NT
