Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 A D V A NC I NG T EC H N O L O G Y Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 W H A TS IN S ID E O UR R E P O R T C O NTE NT S STRATEGIC REPORT G O V ER N A N C E F I NA N C IA L S Chief Executive Andy Reynolds Smith talks about our strategy.
Smiths at a glance 04 Our divisions 06 Chairmans statement 10 Chief Executives review 14
Chief Financial Officers review 18
Smiths business model 22 Our strategy 24 Our markets 28 Operational review 32 Financial review 52
Risk management
Our approach to responsible business 68 Board of directors Corporate governance statement Directors remuneration report Directors report Statement of directors responsibilities 128 Independent auditors report to the members of Smiths Group plc Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated balance sheet Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated cashflow statement Accounting policies 141 Notes to the accounts Unaudited Group financial record 20132017 Unaudited US dollar primary statements Unaudited Group US dollar financial record 20132017 Smiths Group plc company accounts Financial calendar The purpose of this document is to provide information to the members of the Company.
This document contains certain statements that are forwardlooking statements.
They appear in a number of places throughout this document and include statements regarding our intentions beliefs or current expectations and those of our officers directors and employees concerning amongst other things our results of operations financial condition liquidity prospects growth strategies and the business we operate.
By their nature these statements involve uncertainty since future events and circumstances can cause results and developments to differ materially from those anticipated.
The forwardlooking statements reflect knowledge and information available at the date of preparation of this document and unless otherwise required by applicable law the Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise these forwardlooking statements.
Nothing in this document should be construed as a profit forecast.
The Company and its directors accept no liability to third parties in respect of this document save as would arise under English law.
This report contains brands that are trademarks and are registered andor otherwise protected in accordance with applicable law.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
REPORT
H I G H LI G HTS W E A R E P R O U D T O B E S MI T H S P U S HIN G B O U ND A R IE S T O D E L I V E R INN O VAT I V E S O LU T I O N S F O R T HE W O R L DS C H A L L E N G E S.
O U R A MB I T I O N I S T O E S TA B L IS H S MI T H S A S O NE O F T HE W O R L DS L E A D IN G T EC HN O L O G Y C O MPA NIE S.
R E V E NUE 3280M 2016 2949M HEADLINE EARNINGS PER SHARE 2016 85.2P CONTINUING STATUTORY EARNINGS PER SHARE 2016 65.6P FREE CASHFLOW 2016 243M HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT 2016 510M
KEY HIGHLIGHTS
Group underlying revenue broadly in line with prior year up 11% on a reported basis
Margin expansion in all divisions combined with increased investment Total RandD increased to 4.6% of sales 2016 4.0% Operational excellence supporting strong cash conversion of 118% Significant portfolio upgrading c.
75% of the Group now wellpositioned in growth markets increased investment in all divisions to drive future growth up 60bps to 4.6% of sales four noncore businesses sold Morpho Detection acquisition integration on track Balance sheet remains strong with further investment capacity for sustainable growth ROCE up 90bps with increases in all divisions Headline basic EPS up 15% at 97.6p per share Proposed final dividend of 29.70p per share.
Full year dividend growth of 3% Statutory operating profit of 674m This is our Annual Report for the financial year ended 31 July 2017.
Underlying excludes the impact of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested businesses for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts prior financial year comparators as if the divested businesses were owned for the same period in those financial years to aid comparability statements 2 In addition to statutory reporting Smiths Group reports its continuing operations on a headline basis.
Definitions of headline metrics and information about the adjustments to statutory measures are provided in the notes to the financial statements Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 E NAB L I N G With one of the largest global service footprints in the mechanical seal industry John Cranes expert engineers and technicians work closely with customers to provide rapid onsite support  analysing rootcause failures identifying areas for improvement and applying performancebased solutions to reduce equipment outages.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
REPORT
IND U S T R Y Our technologies and services help to increase reliability improving equipment performance and maximising uptime for mission critical components across process industries including chemical power generation water and wastewater  and pulp and paper .
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Aftermarket consumables 55% REVENUE MIX S M ITH S AT A G L A N CE W E A P P LY L E A D IN G  E D G E T EC HN O L O G Y T O D E S I G N M A N U FA C T U R E A ND D E L I V E R M A R K E TL E A DING INNO VAT I V E S OLU T I ON S T H AT ME E T O U R C U S T O ME R S E V O LV IN G NE E D S.
O U R P R O D U C T S A ND S E R V I C E S T O U C H T HE L I V E S O F MIL L I O NS O F P EO P L E E V E R Y D AY Our strategy Our ambition is to establish Smiths as one of the worlds leading technology companies.
We will achieve this by outperforming our chosen markets and delivering worldclass competitiveness and innovation underpinned by our strong financial framework.
Our solutions Our products and services are often critical to our customers operations while our proprietary technology and high service levels help create competitive advantage.
Our solutions make a real impact on the world  from enabling industry improving healthcare and enhancing security to advancing connectivity and supporting new homes.
Our end markets and businesses Today we serve seven end markets through our divisions John Crane Smiths Medical Smiths Detection Smiths Interconnect and FlexTek.
We are focusing our portfolio on the most attractive end markets where we can sustain abovemarket growth.
R E V E NUE 3280M I N V E S TM E NT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T H E A D L INE OPERATING PROFIT F R E E C A S HF L O W 370M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Americas 53% Europe 23% Asia Pacific APAC 15% Rest of World 9% REVENUE BY DESTINATION Americas 57% Europe 34% APAC 6% Rest of World 3% LOCATION OF ASSETS STRA TEGIC
Where we operate We have operations in more than 50 countries and our products and services reach around 200 countries and territories.
Around 16% of revenue comes from highergrowth regions.
Our people We employ around 22000 people globally and are building a learning organisation that enables them to be the best that they can be.
Our values We are united by our shared values which guide our actions and behaviour every day no matter our role.
I NTE G R IT Y O W NE R S HIP RE S P E CT CUSTOMER FOCUS PA S S I O N REVENUE FROM HIGHERGROWTH REGIONS 16% COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES OUR SOLUTIONS REACH c.
E MP L OY E E S W OR L D W I DE c.
22000 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 John Crane 27% Smiths Medical 29% Smiths Detection 21% Smiths Interconnect 13% FlexTek 10% DIVISIONAL REVENUE John Crane 32% Smiths Medical 33% Smiths Detection 16% Smiths Interconnect 9% FlexTek 10% DIVISIONAL HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT S M ITH S O UR DI V I S I O N S O U R D I V I S I O N S A R E E X P E R T S IN T HE IR M A R K E T S W O R K IN G C L O S E LY W I T H C U S T O ME R S T O D E L I V E R INN O VAT I V E S O LU T I O N S T O ME E T T HE IR E V O LV IN G NE E D S.
R E V E NUE COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A category leader in our chosen markets Highly recognised and respected brands Category breadth and depth including capital consumable and software products Reputation for quality and safety Extensive global sales network COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A market leader in mechanical seals Strong proprietary technology and expertise in applied engineering Strong aftermarket service offering with around twothirds of sales in aftermarket One of the largest global service networks in the mechanical seal industry with c.
200 sales and service centres R E V E NUE HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN 22.0% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN 23.0% SMITHS MEDICAL Highquality costeffective medical devices and consumables that are vital to patient care JOHN CRANE Missioncritical solutions for global energy and process industries Includes the results of Morpho Detection for the approximately fourmonth period since becoming part of the Group Excludes central costs Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A market leader with a strengthened global position following the Morpho Detection acquisition Technologies leveraged across many markets and applications Operates in several regulated markets requiring product certification Growing aftermarket revenues 39% of total COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS Innovative and technically differentiated offerings Ultrahigh reliability solutions used in demanding applications Customer intimacy responsiveness and product customisation Global presence reach and support COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A marketleading performance in residential gas tubing Highperformance flexible tubing products for aerospace Leading capability in the design and manufacture of heating solutions for bespoke applications Strong customer relationships R E V E NUE R E V E NUE R E V E NUE HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN 15.0% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN 13.4% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT MARGIN 1 9.3% SMITHS DETECTION A leader in the detection and identification of security threats and contraband SMITHS INTERCONNECT Solutions for highspeed secure connectivity in demanding applications
Innovative components to heat and move fluids and gases Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 E NH A N C IN G Our ViaValve Safety IV Catheters are easy to use onehanded and incorporate an innovative valve in the catheter hub that prevents backflow of blood from a patients vein on insertion  this bloodflow control protects clinicians and patients from the risk of infection and crosscontamination caused by blood exposure during IV starts.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
H E A L T HC A RE Our catheters are raising the standard for safety in a device used in around 90% of hospital inpatient treatments.
They are supported by our dedicated team of nurses who train customers to use and maintain the devices safely and effectively.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C H AI R MANS S T A T EM EN T W E A R E CR E AT IN G A NE W F U T UR E F O R S MI T H S  O NE W HI CH CR E AT E S MO R E VA LUE F O R O UR S H A R E H O L D E R S A ND MO R E O P P O R T UNI T IE S F O R O UR EMP L O Y EE S.
SIR GEORGE BUCKLEY CHAIRMAN Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
As individuals or as companies we can either create the future or we can be visited by it  and who is to say that if we just wait for it whether well like that future visit when it arrives Its clear from the challenging experiences of many great companies in recent years that unless we prepare properly for the future the one we want probably wont be there when we need it.
It reminds me of the old saying the best time to replace the roof is when the sun is shining.
Choosing our future There are in fact many possible futures that can be created for a company.
So its far better that its one we intentionally design ourselves rather than an accidental one we may not like when it arrives.
Thats the fundamental job we have to do as a leadership team and as a Board ie to create a new sustainable and viable future for Smiths one which creates more value for our shareholders and more opportunities for our employees.
By design it will be one which is much better than if we had simply waited at the busstop of opportunity for something serendipitous  or not  to come along.
A fact which is rarely acknowledged by observers is that the core of every company is slowly dying.
This includes even the most modern companies such as those focusing on software social media and the internet.
The core of every company is being constantly attacked by competition by endoflife technology product substitution regulation and cannibalisation and also by changing customer preferences and performance expectations.
The core of every company is trickling away like a melting ice cube in the hot sun.
The rate at which this decay or attrition happens can be surprisingly high depending on the type of end market being served.
So clearly there is no way to succeed in the competitive game by simply standing still.
The only way to overcome this natural attrition problem is by continually replacing the core business with new products new customers new technologies and new markets.
If a company wants to grow faster than the market it has to make this replacement at a rate which well exceeds the natural rate of core attrition.
While this may seem to be an obvious statement youd be surprised by how few companies recognise this problem and address it head on.
We will not make that mistake at Smiths.
So what do we want our company future to look like First we can observe that all great companies are innovative companies.
A company cannot beat entrenched competition and certainly cannot beat aggressive new market entrants unless its innovative.
Operational excellence clearly has a big part to play in a companys competitiveness although there is no amount of process excellence that can ever adequately substitute for a healthy dose of innovation.
Nor is there an adequate substitute offered in productivity initiatives alone.
As the saying goes you cant save your way into prosperity.
We can see this most clearly in electronics and software companies where the market product and technology changes are easily the fastest.
But exactly the same gradual attrition phenomena happens to industrial companies consumer packaged goods companies healthcare transportation energy and food.
So while the rates of decline may be a little slower than in electronics markets they are nevertheless there.
Second great companies grow faster than the markets they serve and as a result they steadily build market share each year.
It also implies that their new product vitality index is high.
High performance companies also have strong levels of employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction they have bestinclass margins and attractive and stable returns on capital investment.
They are also inclusive of allcomers creative talent needs to come from everywhere  and they are places with a good employer brand where able people want to work.
These companies also have good Environmental Social and Governance scores.
In broad brush strokes this is the kind of company and new future we are determined to build.
We have not changed or deviated from this mission one bit since I became the Chairman of Smiths though Im proud to say that under the dynamic leadership of our Chief Executive Andy Reynolds Smith and his team we are now executing against this mission much faster.
Creating new value In terms of new financial value creation companies have only five levers they can pull to improve shareholder value creation.
Higher sales growth margin expansion improved working capital turns lower taxation rates and an improving PE multiple.
For most mature industrial companies with their typical underlying characteristics of high margin and lower sales growth the best method of creating new value for all stakeholders in the company is to drive higher levels of profitable organic growth.
Achieving a point of sales growth usually exceeds the value creation of a point of margin improvement by several multiples.
Plus there are natural limits to profit margin that the laboratory of life teaches us are possible.
If margins go too high customers complain and even greater competition is enticed into your market.
A strategy of only improving margin eventually runs out of runway.
Growth never does.
We have scope for higher levels of growth at Smiths Group  along with huge opportunities for improving our working capital efficiency.
Here and there we also have opportunities for margin expansion in some of our businesses  particularly in Smiths Medical.
So this essentially NO MAT TER WHAT THE COMPANY DOES IT WILL ALWAYS BE WORLDCL A SS TALENT WHICH IS THE GRE ATEST NEED.
NOTHING IN THE COMPANY E VER GE TS DONE E XCEPT THROUGH PEOPLE.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES c.
INVESTMENT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T C HAI R MANS S TAT E M E N T C O N T I N U E D B O A R D C HAN G E S We were delighted to welcome Noel Tata to the Board in January 2017 as an additional nonexecutive director and member of our Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
We welcome Noels extensive experience and expertise in highergrowth economies such as Asia and Africa.
As I have said on previous occasions the ability to manage change is a good indicator of a business resilience.
Following
Chris OShea stepping down from his role as Chief Financial Officer in May we were pleased that my Board colleague and Audit Committee Chairman Bill Seeger agreed to step into the Chief Financial Officer role on an interim basis while we seek a permanent replacement.
We were also delighted that nonexecutive director Mark Seligman agreed to take on the Chair of the Audit Committee. is the nub of the Groups strategic plan.
A balanced combination of operational excellence and high levels of organic growth driven mostly by innovation.
Here and there we may yet trim the portfolio in those places where we feel we cant create the kind of valuecreating growth profile and company we want.
An everybody wins strategy Yes we will certainly continue to use acquisitions as an accelerant to growth but in todays market of high purchase prices for companies we will be selective and thoughtful about how to do this.
We still have a mission of achieving sensible returns on investment well above our cost of capital.
Acquisitions can bring many positive things and some negative ones if a company isnt careful but done properly one thing acquisitions always do is to bring speed of execution of the strategic plan.
The wonderful thing we can observe about growth and innovation is that its an everybody wins strategy.
Investors win with better returns employees win with greater career opportunities suppliers win with higher volume and customers win with better products.
We have lots of opportunity too for improvements in working capital turns and again like growth this is already on the docket of things being done to substantially improve the Group.
Adapting for change What might that new future look like for Smiths If we think carefully much of the general direction of technology and customer preferences can be forecast.
The details no but the generalities yes.
So another element of a companys profile is that it must be a learning company and be agile and adaptable to changing circumstances.
For change these circumstances certainly will.
For example theres no reason to believe that border crossing and airport security challenges will become easier in the future than they are today.
So executed properly this will be a great business to be in long term.
But more and more advanced detection technologies will need to be developed expanding from sophisticated explosives detection to all forms of contraband detection at border crossings and inspection points.
The same opportunities apply to medical businesses.
People are living longer and that part of the world we refer to as highergrowth markets are demanding better healthcare better education and communications cleaner air and water higher levels of food safety better cars and better housing among others.
The three large disease states of cancer heart disease and diabetes can and will be improved by medical science and we will play our part in that.
Energy needs petrochemicalsourced feedstocks and electronicsoriented products will continue to be huge features of our daily life in fact ever more so.
So this puts our John Crane and Interconnect businesses front and central in this new world.
THE WONDERFUL THING ABOUT GROW TH AND INNOVATION IS THAT ITS AN E VERYBODY WINS STR ATEGY.
INVESTORS WIN WITH BE T TER RE TURNS EMPLOYEES WIN WITH GRE ATER CAREER O P P O R T U NI T IE S SUPPLIERS WIN WITH HIGHER VOLUME AND CUSTOMERS WIN WITH BE T TER PRODUCTS.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
Higher growth market focus We have decided to build a much stronger focus on growing in these higher growth regions.
Arithmetically if our portfolio had the same percentage of sales in these regions as do our peers our organic growth rate would be about 100 basis points higher than it is today.
Thats a missed value creation opportunity lingering from the past.
To help address this weve assigned a top Smiths leader Roland Carter to that task with operational control of Asia Pacific.
When I moved to live in the United States in 1978 one of the first projects I worked on was electric vehicles and the fundamental architecture of the drive system was more or less identical then to what we see in electric vehicles today.
Yet it is only in recent times that they had become commercially viable.
There is no question that electric vehicles autonomous driving artificial intelligence robotics advanced materials and nanotechnologies will all have their increasing place in this new world.
Energy storage devices electrostatic as well as galvanic will see big changes.
However sometimes we have to temper our enthusiasm about the rate at which these things will be adopted but gradually adopted they will be.
I have no doubt.
Possibly the greatest impact inside the Group will come from that fastest moving area of technology ie electronics and the internet with its underlying sensing algorithmic computational and software elements.
Those will have tremendous effects on virtually every product we make over the next 10 years.
Embracing the digital future Smiths is making significant upfront investments in digital including in centres of excellence in the US and Europe to make sure we are properly prepared to respond to this emerging opportunity.
These technological ideas are altering the way people think about the products they buy about marketing communications healthy eating entertainment transportation etc.
In a nottoodistant future virtually all products and their components will be tracked and traced and automation robotics linked intelligent selfdiagnosing and selfcorrecting devices will be features of our daily lives.
All companies need to be better prepared for the challenges of cyber security since many of these devices are going to be connected to the Internet and communicate with us and with each other.
We can either prepare for this future or be run over by it.
The solution to all creative problems requires a blend of optimism curiosity imagination and relentless execution.
The optimism is needed to believe that something can be done imagination is required to create it and curiosity is required to identify it when its finished and lastly relentless execution is needed to achieve it.
These factors will increasingly become features of our company culture.
No matter what the company does it will always be worldclass talent which is the greatest need.
Nothing in the company ever gets done except through people.
Repositioning our portfolio In terms of progress along this pathway the past year has seen steady execution towards building a vibrant and faster growing Smiths reminiscent of the highgrowth innovative company which existed around a half a century or more ago.
To this end in FY2017 weve made one major acquisition in the detection business Morpho Detection and trimmed the companys portfolio by selling four other noncore pieces of the portfolio where the chance to drive strong growth seemed less obvious.
This has resulted in the Group being about the same size as it was a year ago but with much better growth prospects.
We are investing in new product platforms everywhere and as these products are released to market they will accelerate our growth and competitiveness.
Weve also made improvements in our use of working capital with a 85m reduction this past year.
Much more has yet to be done here.
We made excellent progress in our pension plan and in getting the kind of leadership we need in key places around the Group.
As far as innovation is concerned theres always a longer lead time than wed like before we see the green shoots.
I know from past experience that if we continue down this innovation pathway the growth will come additional value will be created and a much happier and better Group.
Id like to thank all of our investors for believing in us.
It will work Im sure of it  and ultimately all of us will be the beneficiaries.
SIR GEORGE BUCKLEY
IF WE CONTINUE DOWN THIS INNOVATION PATHWAY THE GROW TH WILL COME ADDITIONAL VALUE WILL BE C R E AT E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 CHIE F E X EC U T I V ES R E V IE W S U S TA IN A BLE G R O W TH A ND AT TR A C TI V E R E T UR N S A R E W H AT W ER E A B O U T.
W EV E MO V E D F O R WA R D O N R E P O S I T I O NING T HE P O R TF O LI O A ND E S TA BLI S HIN G THE O R G A NI S AT I O N A L B U IL DING BL O CK S T O D E L I V E R O N O UR A MBI T I O N.
ANDY REYNOLDS SMITH CHIEF EXECUTIVE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
Smiths has seen a year of good progress amidst a world of uncertainty and an unprecedented pace of technology development.
I set out my ambition of establishing Smiths as one of the worlds leading technology companies in September 2016 and weve spent the past 12 months doing what we said we were going to do.
FY2017 performance We delivered a good performance in FY2017 with underlying revenue broadly in line with the prior year.
We saw growth across the portfolio offset by John Cranes oil and gas business and in Smiths Medical due to market challenges in John Crane and a delay in some new product launches in Smiths Medical.
Group revenue grew 11% on a reported basis benefiting from foreign exchange and in particular the strength of the US dollar partially offset by the impact of four divestitures and the acquisition of Morpho Detection.
The underlying quality of our businesses and the increasing impact of the Smiths Excellence System supported a strong headline operating profit performance of 589m up 3% on an underlying basis and up 16% on a reported basis.
The
Groups headline operating profit margin increased 70 basis points on a reported basis with margin expansion in all divisions reflecting our focus on operational efficiency and the upgrading of the portfolio.
Strategy update Weve made good progress against our strategic objectives of outperforming our chosen markets and delivering world class competitiveness supported by our strong financial framework.
Sustainable growth and attractive returns are what were about and weve moved forward on repositioning the portfolio and establishing the organisational building blocks to deliver on our ambition.
This is helping to establish Smiths as a highperforming diversified Group with highquality businesses that are wellpositioned in growing markets with active portfolio management a clear operating model and a culture of relentless execution and continuous improvement.
Outperforming our chosen markets The repositioning of the business for growth through organic and inorganic investment is well underway and we have made excellent progress.
With the sale of four noncore assets and the completion of the Morpho Detection acquisition  creating a true world leader in this market  around 75% of our portfolio is now well positioned by market and competitiveness up from 60% eighteen months ago and we expect further progress in the coming year.
Our goal is a portfolio of businesses that hold sustainable top three positions in attractive markets and demonstrates the key characteristics of a Smiths business assetlight and competitive operations technology differentiation a high proportion of aftermarket revenues and increasing digitisation.
Organic growth will always be my top priority but we expect to run a carefully considered parallel path of acquisition and divestiture to accelerate our repositioning globally.
An example of our work to reposition the portfolio is the focusing and restructuring of Smiths Interconnect.
R E V E NUE DOWN 1% 3280M FREE CASHFLOW AROUND 75% OF OUR PORTFOLIO IS NOW W E LL P O S ITI O N E D BY MARKE T AND COMPE TITIVENESS UP FROM 60% EIGHTEEN MONTHS AGO Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 D I V ID E ND CONTINUING STATUTORY EARNINGS PER SHARE C HIE F E X E C U T I V ES R E V IE W C O N T I N U E D DE VELOPING A CULTURE OF INNOVATION WITH AN ECOSYSTEM TO DRIVE FA STER DE VELOPMENT AND COMMERCIALISATION OF NE W PRODUCTS IS CRUCIAL TO OUR SUCCESS TODAY AND TOMORROW We sold noncore assets representing around 40% of revenue and the remaining core is now positioned as a fastergrowing leader in highspeed secure connectivity for demanding markets such as space defence and commercial aerospace and ready to develop further.
There are similar examples elsewhere in the portfolio.
We have also increased our focus on key highergrowth regions including relocating one of our Executive Committee members Roland Carter to Asia as Smiths Group President of Asia Pacific to head up our growth drive in the region.
Driving worldclass competitiveness As we increasingly focus the Group on the most attractive end markets with good longterm profitable growth prospects it is critical that we establish the capabilities to ensure relentless execution.
This has been a priority during the last year and we have been driving three areas operational excellence innovation and people.
Many years in the hardfought automotive world have taught me that all customers whatever their industry value speed and efficiency and thats the essence of the Smiths Excellence System SES.
SES gives us a shared operating model that will help us to apply best practice to drive speed efficiency and a culture of continuous improvement right across the Group.
Results are already starting to come with around 40m in procurement savings and an 85m reduction in working capital of which 52m is reduction in total stock over the past year helping us to fund investment in growth.
And Im convinced there is more to follow over the next 12 months and beyond.
WE HAVE INCRE A SED OUR RandD SPEND TO 4.6% OF RE VENUE AND CRE ATED A CENTR AL INNOVATION FUND TO BUILD DIGITAL C A P A B I LIT Y Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC towards the second half.
Growth in John Cranes nonoil and gas markets as well as an increase in aftermarket activities is expected to more than offset the challenging market conditions in oil and gas.
We expect the introduction of new products during the year to support a gradual improvement in Smiths Medical.
In Smiths Detection we anticipate a strong second halfdriven by the transportation market which will generate good growth for the year as a whole.
In Smiths Interconnect our focus on fewer highergrowth end markets will support further good progress in this division while FlexTek is expected to deliver continued steady growth.
We are increasingly confident that were establishing the operating model for excellence and leadership capability to deliver longterm sustainable growth and attractive returns.
Dividend
The Board is recommending a final dividend per share of 29.70p giving a total dividend for the year of 43.25p an increase of 3% yearonyear.
The final dividend will be paid on 17 November to shareholders registered at close of business on 20 October.
The ex dividend date is 19 October.
Weve made good progress on our journey to establishing Smiths as one of the worlds leading technology companies over the past year and Id like to sincerely thank my 22000 colleagues around the world for their dedication contribution and absolute professionalism. progress in the coming months.
ANDY REYNOLDS SMITH CHIEF EXECUTIVE Technology is moving faster than ever before and were committed to being at the cutting edge.
Its essential that were technology leaders defining new ways to bring value to our customers and developing new business models for the future.
Developing a culture of innovation with an ecosystem to drive faster development and commercialisation of new products is crucial to our success today and tomorrow.
Our Groupwide innovation framework i will consistently drive increased smarter investment in RandD and convert it into sales more quickly. and make us sustainable.
We have already increased our RandD spend to 4.6% of revenue and created a central Innovation Fund to build digital and other disruptive technology capabilities  such as 3D printing and nano technology  and create critical mass where individual divisional efforts would be subscale.
We have announced two digital forges with one in Silicon Valley and another planned in London to help accelerate our digital transformation.
These forges are global centres of excellence helping us define new digital business models and build Groupwide capability in areas of focus including artificial intelligence analytics and data security.
This is not just about planning for the future  we are already generating meaningful revenue from digital.
Nor is it just digital technology to complement existing businesses  its about defining new business models for the future and ensuring we are ahead on the capabilities they will require.
I was also pleased to announce our strategic partnership with Microsoft to further accelerate our market leading artificial intelligence based detection capability in the ports and borders market.
The final critical area of focus for us is people  our one true source of sustainable competitive advantage.
Our people plan is aimed at building a learning organisation that attracts retains develops engages and inspires the very best people around the world to deliver our ambition.
Weve made good progress during the year including launching a new leadership development programme in partnership with UCLA Anderson Executive Education a new approach to measuring employee engagement a Groupwide communication plan to help everyone understand the part they play and the adoption of our new Smiths Way of working including shared values and approaches to how we do things across the world.
Those shared values of integrity respect ownership customer focus and passion underpin our commitment to doing the right thing every time no matter our role.
Keeping our people safe is our top priority and Im particularly proud of our performance this year with our lowest ever Recordable Incident Rate.
That said I truly believe that any injury is one too many and we will continue to strive for our goal of zero harm.
Looking ahead The progress delivered in executing our strategy through portfolio repositioning and disciplined organic and inorganic investment has ensured that were well positioned for the Group to return to growth in FY2018.
As in previous years we expect Group WEVE MADE GOOD PROGRESS ON OUR JOURNE Y TO ESTABLISH SMITHS A S ONE OF THE WORLDS LE ADING TECHNOLOGY C O MP A NIE S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 CHIE F F INAN CIAL O F F I CE RS R E V IE W O U R F IN A N C I A L S T R AT EG Y I S D E S I G NE D T O S U P P O R T T HE D E L I V E R Y O F T HE W ID E R C O R P O R AT E S T R AT EG Y.
T HI S F R A ME W O R K A IM S T O O P T IMI S E C A S H G E NE R AT I O N A ND A L L OC AT E C A P I TA L T O S U S TAINAB L E G R O W T H O P P O R T U NI T IE S E NA B L IN G U S T O G E NE R AT E S U P E RIO R RE T U RN S.
At the core of our financial strategy is a financial framework to generate cashflow operate an assetlight profile with targeted investments and efficient working capital deliver sustainable operating margins across our businesses and demonstrate strong financial discipline maintaining a stable investmentgrade credit rating.
With the cash we generate we aim to create superior returns by ensuring capital is invested in value enhancing opportunities invest for growth in new technologies and products in our existing businesses execute value creative acquisitions and dispose of our non core assets operate a progressive dividend policy with the aim of increasing dividends in line with the longterm underlying growth in earnings and cashflow and maintain a net debtheadline EBITDA ratio at two times or less.
FY2017 performance overview As a global business with a diversified portfolio we are well placed to manage exposure to any specific sector or industry trend.
This is reflected in our 2017 results with a strong operating profit performance in four of our five divisions offsetting the continued impact of the oil and gas market on John Crane.
The Group headline operating profit margin increased 70 basis points to 18.0%.
Revenue
Reported revenue increased by 331m 11% to 3280m including the positive effects of foreign currency translation 421m and the net impact of acquisitions and disposals 65m.
On an underlying basis revenue declined 1% as growth in Smiths Detection 22m 4% Smiths Interconnect 4m 1% and FlexTek 11m 3% was offset by declines in John Crane 33m 4% and Smiths Medical 29m 3%.
Assetlight
Strong cash generation Investment and returns Investment for growth Value creative MandA Progressive dividend Strong balance sheet Sustainable margins Financial discipline STRONG FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK BIL L SEEGER CHIEF F INANCIAL O FFI C E R Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 John Crane 27% Smiths Medical 29% Smiths Detection 21% Smiths Interconnect 13% FlexTek 10% DIVISIONAL REVENUE John Crane 32% Smiths Medical 33% Smiths Detection 16% Smiths Interconnect 9% FlexTek 10% DIVISIONAL HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT 1 Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability.
STRA TEGIC
Operating profit Headline operating profit of 589m was 79m higher than prior year 2016 510m including the positive effects of foreign currency translation 71m and the net impact of acquisitions and disposals 10m.
On an underlying basis operating profit increased 3% with improvements in all divisions except John Crane.
Headline operating margin increased by 70 basis points to 18.0% 2016 17.3% with improvements in all divisions reflecting operational efficiencies.
John Crane margin improved by 110 basis points to 23.0% 2016 21.9% benefiting from the disposal of the Artificial Lift business favourable mix and operational efficiencies.
Smiths
Medical increased 60 basis points to 22.0% 2016 21.4% as the benefits of cost control efficiencies and a medical device tax refund offset lower revenue and pricing pressures.
Smiths Detection delivered a 200 basis points improvement to 15.0% 2016 13.0% reflecting sales growth increased focus on aftermarket and favourable mix.
Morpho contributed 8m of operating profit in the period post acquisition.
Smiths Interconnect improved operating margin by 30 basis points to 13.4% 2016 13.1% due to increased revenue coupled with benefits from restructuring and a range of productivity and efficiency initiatives.
Operating margins in FlexTek improved by 130 basis points to 19.3% 2016 18.0% reflecting the impact of increased revenue and efficiencies.
Central costs increased by 13m including investment in corporate development activities resources to support the Smiths Excellence System and investment in people development to build capabilities to support sustainable growth.
Operating profit on a statutory basis after taking account of the items excluded from the headline figures was 674m 2016 387m  see note 3 to the accounts for information on the excluded items.
The increase was driven by the 175m profit on disposal of businesses during the year coupled with a decrease in charges for legacy liabilities and no impairment charges being recorded in the current year.
Finance costs Headline finance costs during the year totalled 61m 2m higher than the previous year.
This was principally due to adverse foreign exchange movements partly offset by lower interest payable due to the repayment of the higher rate 150m 7.25% Eurobond which matured in June 2016.
Statutory finance costs totalled 73m 2016 41m.
Cashflow and net debt Operating cash generation remained strong with headline operating cashflow of 695m 2016 520m representing 118% 2016 102% of headline operating profit see note 29 to the accounts for a reconciliation of headline operating cash and free cash flow to statutory cashflow measures.
Net debt reduced from 978m to 967m.
We delivered a good financial performance in the year and our strong financial framework supports the optimisation of cash generation and capital allocation to focus on sustainable growth and superior returns.
Further information on our financial performance is set out in the Financial Review on pages 52 to 57.
BILL SEEGER CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER Includes the results of Morpho Detection for the approximately fourmonth period since becoming part of the Group Excludes central costs Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 P I O NE E R IN G Our advanced Checkpoint. integrated and intelligent solution.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
S EC U R I T Y Our software streamlines security processes to increase passenger throughput optimise resources reduce operational costs and improve security.
It enables remote screening and directed search as well as delivering valuable management data.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 S M ITH S B U S INE S S M O D E L O UR O U R S H A R E D VA L U E S O F I N T E G R I T Y R E S P E C T G U I D E O U R B E H AV I O U R A C T I O N S A N D OUR AMBITION OUR DIVISIONS OU R A MB I T IO N I S T O E S TA B L IS H S MI T H S A S O NE O F T HE W O R L DS L E A D I N G T E C H N O L O G Y C O MP A N I E S.
We will achieve our ambition by outperforming our chosen markets and delivering worldclass competitiveness and innovation to deliver sustainable growth and attractive returns.
We actively manage our portfolio of businesses to ensure we are competitively positioned in attractive markets globally with strong long term profitable growth prospects where we can sustainably achieve a top three leadership position.
We will drive outperformance and competitiveness through innovation our shared operating model that drives speed and efficiency across our value chain and by building a learning organisation where our people can be the best they can be.
We are experts in our markets with a strong understanding of customer needs.
Our divisions serve specialist technology markets worldwide and are unified by four common characteristics sustainably competitive and assetlight technology differentiation increasing digitisation a high proportion of aftermarket services JOHN CR A NE Missioncritical engineered solutions for global energy and process industries SMITHS MEDICA L Highquality costeffective medical devices and consumables that are vital to patient care SMITHS DE TECTION A leader in the detection and identification of security threats and contraband SMITHS INTERCONNECT Solutions for highspeed secure connectivity in demanding applications F L E X T E K Innovative components to heat and move fluids and gases
OUR STRATEGY O U R B U S INE S S M O D E L E N A B L E S U S T O D E L I V E R VA LU E T O O U R S TA K E H O L D E R S O N A S U S TA IN A B L E B A S I S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
VALUES
O W NE R S HIP C U S T O ME R F O C U S A ND PA S S I O N D E C I S I O N S E V E R Y D AY.
OUR OPERATING MODEL FINANCIAL FRAMEWORK THE RESULT Our strong financial framework provides the flexibility to enable us to create superior returns and invest in growth.
It helps us manage our business efficiently to optimise cash generation and allocate capital to the best organic and inorganic opportunities to create value.
We have a strong governance framework and robust approach to risk management and financial control.
The Smiths Excellence System is our shared operating model.
It helps us apply best practice across the Group to drive speed and efficiency on a sustainable basis as we work to ensure consistent execution and a culture of continuous improvement.
CU S T O M E R We partner with our customers to steer our product innovation and technology development PE O PL E We work to attract retain engage develop and inspire the best people to help us deliver results T E C H NOL O G Y We aim to bring innovative differentiated solutions to market quickly P R OD U C T I ON Our production processes drive efficiency enhance safety and improve quality P R O G R A MME We work to drive consistent and flawless execution across programmes S U PPL Y We are building strong strategic supplier relationships to ensure quality efficiency and flexibility As a globally aligned organisation that is committed to doing business responsibly we generate value for a wide range of stakeholders around the world.
FIN A NCI A L VA LUE We generate superior shareholder returns on a sustainable basis as well as delivering economic value where we operate around the world SOCI A L VA LUE Our solutions meet customers evolving needs and have a positive impact on the world enhancing security improving healthcare advancing connectivity driving efficiency and reliability and reducing environmental impact.
We source components and materials from approximately 12000 suppliers globally and expect our partners to meet our own high ethical standards.
We also support the communities in which we operate around the world VA LUE TO EMPLOY EES We employ around 22000 people in more than 50 countries and give them the opportunity to be the best that they can be Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
M% growthtel 00.0tel 3280 1% 2% 2% REVENUE m% growth O UR S TR A TE G Y O U R A M BI T I O N I S T O E S TA B L I S H S M I T H S A S O N E O F T H E W O R L DS L E A D I N G T E C H N O L O G Y C O M PA N I E S.
W E W I L L D O T H I S B Y D E L I V E R I N G A B O V E  M A R K E T S U S TA I N A B L E G R O W T H I N O U R C H O S E N M A R K E T S A N D W ORL D  CL A S S C OMP E T I T I V E NE S S A ND INNO VAT ION S UP P OR T E D B Y OUR S T R ONG F IN A NCI A L F R A ME W ORK.
DURING 2 017 W E M A DE S IGNIF IC A N T P R O G R E S S A G A I N S T O U R O B J E C T I V E S.
FY2017 PROGRESS FOCUS Reposition the portfolio for growth through organic investment and a highly disciplined approach to acquisitions and disposals OUTPERFORMING OUR TARGET MARKETS Focus the portfolio on our most attractive markets globally where we can sustainably maintain a scalable top three leadership position.
Invested more and smarter in RandD and innovation Continued the realignment of the portfolio into profitable highergrowth markets.
Divestments included four noncore businesses  John Cranes Artificial Lift Smiths Medicals Wallace product line and Smiths Interconnects Power and Microwave Telecoms Completed the acquisition of Morpho Detection with integration on track significantly enhancing our marketleading position and capabilities without increasing net debt Increase our focus on highergrowth regions Appointed a new Group President of Asia Pacific to accelerate our growth in the region Prioritised plans for growth with a new operating model and leadership team for the region DELIVERING WORLD CLASS COMPETITIVENESS Drive worldclass competitiveness through a shared operating model SES that drives speed and efficiency on a sustainable basis investing in innovation for technological differentiation and building a learning organisation that enables our people to be the best that they can be.
We call this our Smiths Way of working.
Deliver the Smiths Excellence System SES  a shared operating model focused on continuous improvement speed and efficiency Started the implementation of SES with a focus on building capability to do what we do faster and better whether it is designing new solutions manufacturing or getting products to our customers when they want it at the best levels of quality Good progress is being made on our key priorities across our six Excellence pillars of Customer People Technology Production Programme and Supply Reduced working capital freeing up cash to invest in growth Continued to drive focus on safety achieving our lowest annual Recordable Incident Rate RIR to date as we work towards a zeroharm workplace STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FY2018 PRIORITIES Drive market share growth in the c.
75% of businesses that are wellpositioned Continue to improve or sell the remaining 25% of businesses Move forward with the integration of the former Morpho Detection business Maintain a disciplined approach to acquisitions that can materially enhance our capabilities and position PORTFOLIO POSITIONING 75% Around 75% of revenue now comes from wellpositioned businesses in our attractive target markets 2016 60% Continue to develop embed and execute our new operating model and strategy for APAC APAC REVENUE GROWTH AHEAD OF GROUP 0.9% Incremental underlying growth in APAC less total underlying Group growth Implement our top priority processes across each pillar Continue to develop the next set of priorities across the pillars Further enhance our safety culture and performance as we work towards a zeroharm culture COST OF POOR QUALITY COPQ 2.1 % COPQ includes the cost of waste corrective work warranty claims returns and penalties measured as a % of annual revenue.
We are treating FY2017 as our baseline year for measuring COPQ using a common methodology across the Group PROCUREMENT SAVINGS M% 42M3.4% Procurement savings measure the % saving achieved on potential spend during the year including the cost impact of external market trends negotiation with suppliers changes in sourcing value added value engineering and rebates W E U S E A R A N G E O F P E R F O R M A N C E M E T R I C S I N O R D E R T O P R O V I D E A C L E A R A N D C O N S I S T E N T M E A S U R E O F O U R U N D E R LY I N G P E R F O R M A N C E.
W E FA C E A N U M B E R O F R I S K S T O D E L I V E R I N G O U R S T R AT E G Y A N D O U R P R I O R I T I E S S H O U L D B E R E V I E W E D I N R E L AT I O N T O T H E S E.
O U R P R I N C I PA L R I S K S A N D M I T I G AT I N G A C T I O N S A R E S E T O U T O N PA G E S 6 2 T O 67.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 FY2017 PROGRESS FOCUS STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES Create a culture of innovation  i our Groupwide innovation framework is fully operational and driving our innovation agenda First projects approved under our central Innovation Fund to accelerate key projects to build technological capabilities that can be leveraged across Smiths Completed 20year horizon scans and roadmaps developed key external partnership and introduced a standardised New Product Introduction process across the Group Appointed a new Group Head of Innovation and Chief Digital Officer Build a learning organisation  Launched the Smiths Way to help embed a common way of working across Smiths Launched a new leadership development programme in partnership with UCLA Anderson Executive Education to further enhance our leadership capabilities Revised our incentive programmes to better align with our strategic priorities Introduced a new approach to measuring employee engagement Deliver profitable growth with sustainable margins Achieved operating profit margin increases in all divisions The divestment of four noncore businesses and acquisition of Morpho Detection exchanged similar revenue that was declining for growing revenue with a higher margin Drove operational excellence to protect margins and fund investment for growth Focus the portfolio on sustainably competitive and assetlight businesses Focus on cash generation and conversion enabled investment and value creation Invested in value creation opportunities Managed the balance sheet effectively reducing working capital Maintained an investmentgrade credit rating Morpho Detection acquisition was selffunded and will be accretive to growth returns and EPS Apply strong financial discipline to the way we manage the business and invest DELIVERING WORLD CLASS COMPETITIVENESS
STRONG FINANCIAL
Our strong financial framework underpins the delivery of our strategy and value creation by optimising cash generation and allocating capital to the best value creation opportunities.
Our governance framework is supported by robust risk management and strong financial control to help maintain our investmentgrade credit rating.
O U R S TR A TE G Y C O N T I NUE D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017teltel INVESTMENT IN RandD AS A PERCENTAGE OF REVENUE %tel HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN %tel RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED %tel 3280 1% 2% 2% REVENUE M% growthtel REDUCTION IN WORKING CAPITAL Mtel 118% 102% 95% CASH CONVERSION % STRA TEGIC
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS FY2018 PRIORITIES Continue to embed our values strategy and operating model across Smiths so that everyone understands their role Continue to progress on our people plan and improve attraction retention and engagement through enhanced communication development opportunities and employer branding Increase our focus on diversity and inclusion at all levels EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT Employee engagement FY2017 My Say survey score based on an average score for two questions assessing how happy employees are working at Smiths RandD expenditure includes the cost of projects that are being capitalised and customerfunded Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability The calculation of ROCE is defined in note 30 to the accounts Cash conversion is headline operating cashflow divided by headline operating profit CREDIT RATING BBB   B a a 2 STABLE OUTLOOK As issued by Standard and Poors and Moodys Invest more and smarter in RandD and convert it into new business faster Launch our first digital centre of excellence  or forge  in the US with a second planned in Europe to accelerate our digital agenda across the Group Use the central Innovation Fund to support additional projects to drive technological differentiation Continue to build a culture of innovation through our i innovation framework PORTFOLIO POSITIONING 75% Around 75% of revenue now comes from wellpositioned businesses in attractive target markets 2016 60% Operating margin is headline operating profit as a proportion of revenue.
See note 3 to the accounts for the calculation of headline operating profit Cash generated from the change in working capital Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Aftermarket consumables 55% REVENUE MIX O UR MAR K E T S W E S E R V E S E V E N MA IN MA R K E T S W ITH S TR O N G L O N G  T E R M PRO F I T A B L E G R O W T H PRO S PE C T S Through our five divisions we serve seven markets medical technology energy security and defence space and commercial aerospace transportation construction and general industrial.
Around half of our revenue is derived from servicing our customers aftermarket needs or supplying consumables that are used as part of our customers everyday procedures.
This gives resilience to our revenues and provides strong cashflows.
Our largest single end market is medical technology.
The majority of revenue comes from Smiths Medical while both Smiths Interconnect and FlexTek supply components to medical device manufacturers.
The medical technology market is driven over the long term by ageing populations the increasing incidence of chronic diseases and increasing healthcare spending in developing countries.
Some 82% of Smiths Medicals revenue is from singleuse devices used in everyday hospital procedures.
The remaining 18% of revenue is from capital equipment such as infusion pumps.
Smiths Detection provides threat detection equipment that enhances safety and security for airports ports and borders urban security military and emergency responder markets.
Demand is driven in the medium term by growth in air travel and ongoing geopolitical unrest and associated terrorist and criminal threats although there is considerable variation by geography and end market.
The growing installed base creates opportunities for aftermarket and software upgrade revenues.
The defence segment is served by both Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect who provide a range of trace detection and mission critical secure connectivity solutions respectively and is primarily driven by spending on specific programmes in developed markets like the US.
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY SECURITY AND DEFENCE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 SPACE AND COMMERCIAL
STRA TEGIC
This market is primarily served by John Crane with oil and gas representing around 55% of its revenues.
Longterm drivers include increasing global demand for energy and increasing environmental and safety requirements.
John Cranes mechanical seals and seal support systems are primarily used in the process equipment found in downstream eg refineries and midstream eg pipelines gas storage liquefied natural gas LNG transportation applications.
Demand for original equipment 36% of revenue is affected by customer capital expenditure cycles while aftermarket service 64% of revenue depends on utilisation rates and equipment age.
The drop in oil prices since late 2014 has reduced customer capital expenditure but we have seen investment in growing areas such as LNG and pipelines and increased aftermarket demand due to pentup maintenance and upgrade requirements.
FlexTek provides hydraulic hoses and fuel lines for airframes and aeroengines and Smiths Interconnect supplies connectors microwave components and antenna systems for aircraft and satellite communications.
Aerospace demand is driven by investment in new fuelefficient aircraft and increasing passenger and freight traffic.
FlexTek manufactures a range of products such as flexible gas piping and ducting for Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning HVAC applications that are used in the construction of homes and commercial buildings primarily in the US.
Demand for homes for families is driven by population growth.
ENERGY SPACE AND COMMERCIAL
CONSTRUCTION
In the rail segment Smiths Interconnect supplies cable solutions ferrite components and connectors for communications control command and signalling systems in autonomous trains.
Growth is driven by increasingly sophisticated digital train systems high datarate connectivity for passengers and the distribution of high levels of electricity to support the power demand of these systems.
In the automotive segment FlexTek supplies hoses for fuel and brake fluid delivery.
We serve a range of general industrial sectors including petrochemical mining pulp and paper water treatment semiconductor test heating elements and automotive through John Crane Smiths Interconnect and FlexTek.
There are different drivers for each of these markets but overall they tend to track GDP.
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL TRANSPORTATION Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 A D V A NC I NG Highly reliable and durable our Thermopad attenuators help customers reach higher frequencies in the face of congestion in broadcast spectrums for wireless communications and when in orbit for communication satellites.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
CONNECT I V I T Y Our attenuators help ensure the reliability of missioncritical communications systems in telecoms defence and space applications.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Oil and gas c.55% Nonoil and gas c.45%tel J O HN CR A NE MI S S IO N  CRI T IC A L E N G INE E RE D S OLU T I ON S F OR G L OB A L E NE R G Y A ND P R O CE S S IND U S T R IE S PRINCIPAL OPERATING
We have operations in more than 50 countries including around 200 sales and service centres and manufacture in 14 countries.
COMPETITORS
Our main competitors are Flowserve and Eagle Burgmann seals Kingsbury and Waukesha engineered bearings Danaher and Hydac filtration and Rexnord couplings.
CUSTOMERS
We serve process industries including oil and gas chemical power generation and pulp and paper as well as pump and compressor
Our customers include Chevron International Paper ExxonMobil Shell BASF Sulzer GE and Siemens.
REVENUE BY SECTOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE M
We align purchasing across our global supply chain to leverage regional suppliers.
Direct sourcing includes metals ceramics and advanced materials and parts.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
REVENUE IN 2017 DOWN 4% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT DOWN 4% STATUTORY OPERATING PROFIT HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN 23.0% DID YOU KNOW Our Metastream couplings help rotating equipment run smoothly and have been used by the British Navy for nearly 60 years John Crane provides missioncritical solutions for pumps compressors and other rotating equipment across process industries.
Markets and trends We combine technology leadership with proven field experience helping to optimise customers manufacturing operations.
Our comprehensive product portfolio includes mechanical seals seal support systems engineered bearings power transmission couplings and specialised filtration systems.
These engineered solutions drive reliability improvements in customer operations.
Our large installed base  built over the last century across several vertical markets drives significant aftermarket demand.
We have one of largest global sales and service networks in the mechanical seal industry ensuring we are close to customers and provide rapid service.
These centres provide a range of services including repair and refurbishment root cause analysis and alignment and condition monitoring to improve equipment performance and reduce operational downtime.
Our primary vertical market  oil and gas has experienced the most severe market downturn in the past 30 years.
Major oil and gas producers remain cautious around capital expenditures in the face of low and volatile commodity prices although we have seen improving market sentiment and expect a gradual recovery over the next few years.
In particular customers are investing in growing areas such as liquified natural gas and pipelines and we have recently seen increased aftermarket activity in the form of demand for ongoing maintenance and upgrades.
We believe megatrends such as the global demand for energy and more stringent environmental and safety requirements will continue to generate demand for our products over the longer term.
We also have a significant and growing presence in other process industries around 45% of revenue including chemical power generation water and wastewater and pulp and paper.
We expect these verticals will continue to grow in the near term helped by building demand in highergrowth regions.
Although global industrial production forecasts remain cautious due to an uncertain macroenvironment drivers such as improved plant productivity workforce safety and equipment reliability will continue to create growth opportunities over the medium to long term.
Around 64% of our sales stem from the aftermarket servicing and support of existing installed equipment which has proven resilient.
We continue to expand our footprint through opening new service centres in selected highergrowth markets.
GROWTH DRIVERS Need for operational improvements in nonoil and gas process industries Pentup demand for maintenance and upgrades in oil and gas and petrochemical Expansion in high growth markets Disruptive innovations including materials science advancements and digital transformation of industry COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A market leader in mechanical seals Strong proprietary technology and expertise in applied engineering Marketleading aftermarket service offering with around twothirds of sales in aftermarket One of the largest global service networks in the mechanical seal industry with c.
200 sales and service centres Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 J O H N C R A N E C O N T I N U E D INVESTMENT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T UP 17% DID YOU KNOW Every year our upstream pumper seals for the chemical oil paper and water treatment industries help conserve up to 1.3 billion litres of water in the US alone FY2017 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Underlying growth Revenue 885 830 7% 4% Headline operating profit 204 181 12% 4% Headline operating margin 23.0% 21.9% 110bps Statutory operating profit 190 151 26% Return on capital employed 22.9% 20.3% 260bps OUR STRATEGY
Our strategy is to reinforce our global leadership in technologies and services for rotating equipment with a competitively differentiated offering that will deliver abovemarket longterm growth in the most attractive process industries.
We will maintain differentiation by investing in product development broadening our aftermarket value proposition delivering operational excellence with a particular focus on safety and quality and accelerating growth through bolt on acquisitions.
We will also continue to diversify into nonoil and gas segments and highergrowth regions.
Progress in FY2017 Investment in digital transformation technology for John Crane Sense our predictive diagnostics platform with around 30 field trials currently in operation Product development for nonoil and gas markets including launch of Single Use Seal Successful divestment of Artificial Lift business Continuous improvement and lean manufacturing initiatives reducing waste Integration of Asset Management business into Performance Plus aftermarket offering Priorities for FY2018 Continue expansion in selected process industries leveraging sales marketing and product development Develop new products and expand more into innovative digital technologies Maximise aftermarket performance and expand our service offering Build out selected highgrowth markets Enhance productivity and cost competitiveness throughout the supply chain W E HAV E A L E AD IN G A F T E R MAR K E T S E R V I C E O F F E R IN G A ND O NE O F T HE L A R G E S T G L O B A L S E R V I C E NE T W O R K S IN T HE MEC H A NI C A L S E A L IND U S T R Y Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
DRIVING DIVERSIFICATION Leveraging our century of engineering expertise in missioncritical components and extensive global service footprint FY2017 has seen John Crane successfully expand our presence in nonoil and gas markets around the world.
Through focused account management and partnerships with OEMs we are helping customers across process industries including chemical power generation water and wastewater and pulp and paper among others to improve reliability maximise uptime and reduce operating costs.
Nonoil and gas now accounts for c.
45% of revenue  with a strong aftermarket component  and further expansion is a core priority for FY2018.
Performance
Growth in John Cranes nonoil and gas and aftermarket revenue was offset by declines in its oil and gas activities that were impacted by the difficult conditions throughout global energy markets.
On an underlying basis total revenue fell 4%.
Reported revenue increased 7% with favourable foreign exchange translation benefits partially offset by the impact of the divestment of the Artificial Lift business that refocused John Crane onto its core end markets and highermargin businesses.
John Crane continued its expansion into nonoil and gas industries which now represent c.
45% of total revenue with sales up 2% on an underlying basis.
This was offset by reduced oil and gas underlying sales down 7% reflecting the challenging market conditions.
These market conditions also impacted total Original Equipment OE underlying sales that fell 11% during the year.
We remain focused on increased investment in OE projects and expanding the installed base with multiple new project agreements secured during the year particularly in the Middle East.
John Cranes large installed base and marketleading service offering ensured it is well positioned to satisfy the pentup aftermarket requirements for repairs maintenance and upgrades driving 1% growth in underlying aftermarket revenue.
Aftermarket represented 64% of total revenue during the year 2016 59%. an increased aftermarket order book.
Revenue from highergrowth regions represented 24% of sales broadly in line with the prior year on an underlying basis despite lower activity in certain parts of Latin America.
Headline operating profit was down 4% on an underlying basis as lower sales and strategic investments in OE projects were only partially offset by operational efficiencies.
Headline operating profit margin increased by 110 basis points to 23.0% benefiting from the disposal of Artificial Lift and continued operational efficiencies.
The difference between statutory and headline operating profit primarily reflects 7m restructuring and 9m litigation costs net of the 4m gain on the sale of the Artificial Lift business.
Return on capital increased 260 basis points to 22.9% principally due to reduced assets following the disposal of Artificial Lift.
The divestiture of the Artificial Lift business in November 2016 significantly reduced John Cranes exposure to the commoditised aspects of upstream oil and gas and was margin accretive.
Prior to the sale in November Artificial Lift sales were 12m with an operating loss of 2m and net assets were 24m.
The business performance of Artificial Lift up to the date of divestiture is included within the financial summary and results presented above.
Research and development Research and development expenditure increased by 17% to 10m resulting in several new product launches including the introduction of a range of high performance aftermarket replacement filter elements an innovative new pipeline seal engineered to withstand the harsh abrasive and clogging fluid properties of crude oil and two new coupling designs that enhance the protection of critical rotating equipment assets.
Active areas of research include the use of nanomaterials to enhance seal face performance and investment in our dry gas seal development facilities enabling ultrahigh pressure gas seal testing capability.
We continue to further develop Sense our predictive diagnostics platform with the installed base of around 30 field trial units which has grown from five units in 2016 demonstrating excellent performance results and a fast growing customer demand for additional units.
1 Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability 36 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Infusion Systems 32% Vascular Access 33% Vital Care and
Products 35%tel SMITHS MEDICA L HIGHQUA LIT Y COS TEFFECTI V E MEDICA L DE V ICE S A ND CONSUM A BLE S TH AT A RE V ITA L TO PATIENT CA RE GLOBA LLY PRINCIPAL OPERATING
We sell our products in over 120 countries with operations in over 30 with manufacturing in North America Europe and Asia.
COMPETITORS
Our competitors range from large multinational medical device manufacturers such as Medtronic Becton Dickinson Baxter and
Braun through to small singleproduct companies.
CUSTOMERS
Threequarters of our revenue is derived from hospitals while the remainder comes from surgery centres clinics home care providers and products sold to other OEMs.
SUPPLIERS
Assured supply of quality products is critical in the industry.
We work with our supply chain to reduce costs improve delivery performance and ensure high quality standards and continuity of supply.
REVENUE BY SECTOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE M 951M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
REVENUE IN 2017 DOWN 3% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT UP 8% DID YOU KNOW We pioneered safety devices including the first safety peripheral IV catheter and port for delivering chemotherapy.
Smiths Medicals portfolio incorporates established brands and strong positions in select segments of the Infusion Systems Vascular Access and Vital Care markets.
A combination of capital equipment and consumables as well as growing software and service offerings provides diversity within our portfolio and continuous access to customers.
Markets and trends The medical device industry remains very attractive.
The global market we serve is estimated to be 6bn and growing at about 3% annually with longterm trends such as a growing ageing global population increasing incidence of chronic diseases a growing middleclass in developing countries and increased access to healthcare offsetting budget constraints in developed markets pricing pressure provider consolidation and growing regulatory requirements.
Our Infusion Systems products deliver medication for treating indications such as acute and chronic pain cancer pulmonary hypertension and Parkinsons disease in hospital and home settings.
We are one of the market leaders in ambulatory infusion CADD and have strong positions in the syringe pump Medfusion and Graseby market.
The rise in chronic conditions and the continued advancement of digital connectivity between infusion devices remote monitoring systems and hospital information systems indicate growth in this area over the longer term.
Our Vascular Access products protect healthcare workers and patients from the risk of infection.
Our portfolio covers a range of functions including drawing blood infusing fluids via catheters injecting vaccinations Jelco and Portex delivering chemotherapeutic agents Deltec and monitoring blood pressure for critically ill patients Medex.
The
Vascular Access market is expected to grow due to safety legislation producing initiatives for the use of safetyengineered syringes to protect healthcare workers from needlestick injuries and the drive to reduce hospitalacquired infections a growth were well positioned to serve.
Our Vital Care products help to manage patient airways before during and after surgery alleviating breathing difficulties Portex improving bronchial hygiene Acapella and helping maintain body temperature Level 1 and Equator.
Drivers include the expansion of enhanced recovery after surgery and the prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease COPD.
GROWTH DRIVERS Ageing populations with increasing life expectancy and quality of life expectations Growing incidence of chronic diseases Increasing need for interoperable and connected systems Growth of alternate site and homebased medical care Rising healthcare spend in developing markets offsetting budget constraints in developed markets COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS Category leadership in our chosen markets Highly recognised and respected brands Category breadth and depth including capital consumable and software products Reputation for quality and safety Extensive global sales network STATUTORY OPERATING PROFIT HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN 22.0% Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 S MI T H S ME D I C A L C O N T I N U E D INVESTMENT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T UP 16% DID YOU KNOW Our tracheostomy tubes help patients as small as a premature baby weighing 1 kg to a rhinoceros weighing 2000 kg OUR GLOBA L M A RK E T IS E S TIM ATED AT A ROUND 6BN A ND GROW ING AT ABOU T 3% ANNUALLY OUR STRATEGY
Our objective is to achieve category leadership in the infusion systems segment and in selected vascular access and vital care segments.
We will build on our reputation for highquality innovative solutions creating a portfolio of leading products and services that drive sustained competitiveness and abovemarket growth in our chosen segments.
We will achieve this primarily through a pipeline of innovative organic developments including investment in product development manufacturing and supply chain optimisation and efficiency gains in marketing and distribution models.
We will also continue to drive progress in highergrowth regions and new channels to market outside the hospital.
We will continue to review opportunities to accelerate growth through acquisitions.
Progress in FY2017 Divested the Wallace product line to sharpen portfolio focus Expanded presence in highergrowth regions Increased digital capabilities and initiatives Invested in differentiated technology development Priorities for FY2018 Launch differentiated new products in our priority categories Focus on building category leadership Enter highergrowth adjacent categories Advance sales with alternate sites and homecare providers Increase penetration in highergrowth regions Consider inorganic opportunities to build category scale and competitiveness FY2017 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Underlying growth Revenue 951 874 9% 3% Headline operating profit 209 187 12% 8% Headline operating margin 22.0% 21.4% 60bps Statutory operating profit 286 166 72% Return on capital employed 16.7% 15.7% 100bps Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
BREATHING MORE EASILY Patients come in all ages shapes and sizes so our Bivona tracheostomy tubes are fully customisable providing the flexibility to fit each patients unique requirements.
By combining malleable medicalgrade silicone with spiral wire reinforcement this innovative solution allows the tube to adapt to a patients anatomy while also maintaining airway diameter.
Unique in a market of disposables our Bivona tubes for adult patients can be cleaned and sanitised for reuse up to 10 times giving a lifecycle of almost 11 months a significant advantage in the homecare sector.
Performance
During the year Smiths Medical made progress on the ongoing repositioning of its portfolio and increased targeted investment in its key product categories to address the historic underperformance in its product portfolio to support core market category leadership.
Underlying revenue was down 3% driven by softer performances in Infusion Systems and Vascular Access where the product portfolios are in the process of being revitalised and expanded.
Reported revenue grew 9% with favourable foreign exchange translation benefits partially offset by the impact of the divestment of the Wallace product line and the underlying revenue softness.
Underlying revenue declined by 3% in Infusion Systems due to lower sales in hospital infusion hardware and disposables and a slower than anticipated transition to advanced technology ambulatory pumps in the home infusion market.
Vascular Access underlying revenue declined by 4% as growth in cardio thoracic was offset by declines in sharps safety and peripheral intravenous catheters
Underlying revenue from Vital Care and Specialty Products was down 2% with continued growth in tracheostomy and respiratory COPD products being offset by declines in temperature management and commoditised anaesthesia products.
Sales into highergrowth regions decreased 12% on an underlying basis.
This decrease was driven by a oneoff regulatory situation in China which has now been resolved.
Headline operating profit grew 8% on an underlying basis with operational efficiencies and a medical device tax refund more than offsetting the impact of the revenue declines and downward pricing pressure on older products.
The headline operating margin of 22.0% was 60bps higher than the prior year.
The difference between statutory and headline operating profit reflects 16m of restructuring charges 6m amortisation of intangible assets and a 100m gain on the sale of Wallace.
Return on capital employed increased 100bps to 16.7% reflecting improved profitability that supported greater capital expenditure in new product development capacity and manufacturing efficiency.
In November 2016 Smiths Medical divested the Wallace product line as part of an ongoing programme to focus the portfolio on scalable technologydifferentiated leadership positions in its chosen markets.
Prior to the sale Wallace revenue was 5m with operating profit of 4m and net assets sold were 32m.
The business performance of Wallace up to the date of divestiture is included within the financial summary and results presented above.
Research and development During the year Smiths Medical increased investment in research and development to support future growth with the development of innovative commercially focused products across the portfolio generating a strong pipeline of products due to be launched in FY2018 and beyond.
Research and development expenditure increased to 61m 2016 52m representing 6.4% of sales 2016 6.0%.
Specific developments included within Infusion Systems enhanced digital and information security capabilities in particular wirelessly enabling the CADD line of ambulatory infusion pumps to connect to the PharmGuard server software which received FDA clearance post year end differentiated technology developments in Vascular Access including the Closed Blood Sampling System the Jelco Seriva and ViaValve Winged Safety peripheral catheters and the Delta Ven Closed System catheter and a strong pipeline of new products in Vital Care particularly in the tracheostomy product lines.
1 Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability 40 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Air transportation 52% Ports and borders 15% Military 9% Urban security 24%tel tel467 SMITHS DE TECTION A LE A DER IN THE DE TECTION A ND IDENTIFICATION OF SECURIT Y THRE ATS A ND CONTR A BA ND PRINCIPAL OPERATING
We sell our products to around 200 countries and territories with manufacturing facilities in Germany France Malaysia USA and the UK.
COMPETITORS
We compete with a wide range of companies in each enduse market.
Those with the broadest global reach include Rapiscan L 3 SDS and Nutech.
CUSTOMERS
The majority of revenues are influenced by over 100 governments and their agencies.
The acquisition of Morpho Detection significantly enhances our marketleading positions and expands the product portfolio.
SUPPLIERS
We coordinate manufacturing and purchasing activity globally to achieve economies of scale and meet stringent quality and delivery standards.
REVENUE BY SECTOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE M 687M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
REVENUE IN 2017 UP 4% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT UP 21% DID YOU KNOW Our trace detectors can identify a billionth of a gram of explosives on a persons hands.
Smiths Detection is a leader in its sector and produces equipment for customers in the air transportation ports and borders urban security and military enduse markets.
Markets and trends Demand for our detection equipment and service is forecast to continue to grow at midsingle digits per annum over the near term driven by ongoing geopolitical unrest and the resulting terrorist and criminal threats but there is considerable variation by geography and enduse market.
The majority of customers are governmentfunded so budget constraints affect market revenues.
Nevertheless our growing installed equipment base creates significant opportunities for aftermarket service and support and digital revenues through the sale of software upgrades.
The heavily regulated air transportation sector is our largest market.
Rising passenger volumes together with continuing security threats a strong replacement cycle and increasing air freight volumes from continuing globalisation of trade are expected to continue to support market growth and new airport investment.
Integrated networked systems of screening equipment and airport information are being used to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the security process resulting in increased demand.
In the ports and borders market continuing globalisation of trade combined with increasing regulatory standards will drive the growth in demand for security screening equipment and digital solutions that can integrate a disparate installed equipment base.
Powerful technologies are required to address a variety of threats as governments become increasingly concerned about the smuggling of explosives weapons and radiological materials while continuing to recognise the strong revenuegenerating potential from contraband detection.
The urban security market is large but fragmented and unregulated.
Growth in demand continues as public and private sector organisations seek to provide better protection for their assets and staff in response to a wide and everincreasing range of threats.
Global demand for chemical warfare agent detection equipment and other threatspecific sensors required by the military is forecast to grow steadily in our key NATOoriented markets.
GROWTH DRIVERS Persistent and evolving terror threats Changing security regulations for air cargo and passengers Equipment replacement cycle typically 710 years Softwaredriven solutions providing functionality networking and systems integration Growth of security infrastructure in emerging markets COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A market leader with a strengthened global position following the Morpho acquisition Operate in several regulated markets requiring product certification Technologies leveraged across many markets and applications Growing aftermarket revenues 39% of total STATUTORY OPERATING PROFIT HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN 15.0% Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 S MITH S D E TEC TI O N C O N T I N U E D ADVANCING TRANSPORT SECURI T Y Airports airlines and authorities around the world trust our deep expertise in designing and servicing integrated detection solutions.
In the past twelve months we have secured orders for hold baggage screening Explosives Detection Systems EDS worth over 80 million from airports in the Americas Middle East and Europe.
Our nextgeneration scanners combine highresolution Xray technology medical quality computed tomography and advanced detection algorithms to deliver exceptional levels of security and efficiency while the ability to upgrade software to combat evolving threats helps to futureproof our customers infrastructure investments.
OUR STRATEGY
Customers choose to partner with us because we can equip them with high integrity solutions that satisfy their security needs while meeting broader commercial and operational requirements.
Highly targeted investment in products and software development should enable us to outperform our chosen markets.
We continue to grow our aftermarket and digital solutionsupgrade offer an increasingly important source of profitable revenue which counteracts the volatility of prime contracting.
Operational improvements based on quality waste elimination and reduced lead times deliver savings which are reinvested in the development of products and software solutions.
Progress in FY2017 Focused investment in air transportation hold baggage and checkpoint Delivery of customeroriented products and integrated networked solutions Extending product certification in response to customer demand Implementation of lean standards eliminating waste improving flow and reducing working capital Key digital product launches CORSYS EDS CB upgrades and Checkpoint.
Priorities for FY2018 Continue the integration of Morpho Detection and deliver planned phased savings Strengthen sales channels in all regions Drive RandD investment behind key product initiatives Deliver further growth in aftermarket and digital revenues Implement additional continuous improvement initiatives FY2017 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Underlying growth Revenue 687 526 31% 4% Headline operating profit 103 69 50% 21% Headline operating margin 15.0% 13.0% 200bps Statutory operating profit 70 63 12% Return on capital employed 12.6% 11.9% 70bps Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
Performance
Smiths Detections marketleading position in growing markets drove an underlying revenue increase of 4% in particular in the air transportation market and in the Asia Pacific region.
Focus on aftermarket supported growth in revenue and aftermarket revenue now accounts for 39% of total revenue 2016 37%.
On a reported basis revenue grew by 31%.
This included 62m revenue from the acquisition of Morpho Detection Morpho which completed in April 2017 and is now being integrated as well as favourable foreign exchange translation benefits.
Underlying revenue in air transportation increased 9% with strong growth in EMEA and Asia including deliveries to Berlin Brandenburg Airport and revenue from longterm contracts in Abu Dhabi.
Contract wins during the year include orders for 85 CT hold baggage scanners for Amsterdam Airport Schiphol London Gatwick Airport Cochin International Airport EL AL Airlines and by the US Transportation Security Administration TSA.
Post year end we have also won two additional contracts for orders totalling 55 CT scanners for Frankfurt Airport and Narita International
Future growth in air transportation was also underpinned by key regulatory certifications achieved in the period.
Revenue from ports and borders decreased by 2% on an underlying basis as growth in EMEA including major deliveries in Africa Italy and the Middle East was offset by last years strong comparator due to the completion of a number of key programmes.
Underlying revenue in military decreased by 2% as a number of US military programmes started to wind down partly offset by stronger growth in
Urban security revenues were flat on an underlying basis with strong growth in Asia and sales to emergency responders in the US offset by lower sales elsewhere.
We continued to experience pressure on government budgets in all regions which was most marked in the US due to the effect of the Continuing Budget Resolution.
Revenue from highergrowth regions represented 21% of sales broadly in line with prior year on an underlying basis.
Headline operating profit grew 21% on an underlying basis reflecting the strong sales growth increased focus on aftermarket and improved business mix.
This growth in profitability was despite continued competitive pricing pressure on large programme contracts and the ongoing challenge from lowerpriced competitors in unregulated parts of the market.
Headline operating margin increased by 200 basis points to 15.0%.
Headline reported operating profit improved 50% including 8m profit contribution from the Morpho acquisition and 10m of favourable foreign exchange translation benefit.
The difference between statutory and headline operating profit includes a 4m restructuring charge 8m amortisation of intangibles and the 18m costs of the acquisition of Morpho.
Return on capital employed improved 70 basis points to 12.6% with higher profitability offsetting the dilutive impact of the acquisition of Morpho.
The acquisition of Morpho completed on 6 April 2017 and significantly enhances Smiths Detections position in attractive growth markets and expands the product portfolio.
Regulatory clearance for this acquisition was conditional on the post completion divestment of Morphos explosive trace detection business which completed on 7 July 2017.
For the four months since completion Morpho delivered headline revenue of 62m and headline operating profit of 8m with good air transportation sales during the second half of the year including deliveries to the US TSA.
The integration of Morpho is progressing well and we are confident that we will be able to drive even more benefits from the combination than initially anticipated and expect the acquisition to drive future margin expansion for the division overall.
Research and development Smiths Detection increased its investment in research and development during the year accounting for 7.1% of sales or 6.0% excluding customerfunded RandD 2016 5.2% and 4.7% respectively.
Specific highlights include for the air transportation market xray machines capable of meeting the new EUECAC Standard C3 new versions of our Checkpoint.
CORSYS our largescale enterprise platform that connects an entire ports and border security operation and supports the need for digital expansion in this market and we continue to focus on software development building on the strengths of our existing business and Morphos software expertise as well as value engineering projects to deliver competitive products in costcritical sectors as well as countryspecific versions of some of our most successful products.
Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability 44 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Defence 28% Semiconductor 20% Medical 8% Space 5%
Rail Industrial Other 29%tel SMITHS INTERCONNECT SOLU TIONS FOR HIGHSPEED SECURE CONNECTI V IT Y IN DEM A NDING A PPLICATIONS PRINCIPAL OPERATING
We sell products to over 50 countries manufacture in nine and have offices across North and Central America Europe and Asia.
COMPETITORS
Our competitors range from large multinationals through to small more focused companies across our product portfolio.
Examples include Amphenol TE Connectivity Yokowo and Cobham.
CUSTOMERS
Our bluechip customers are prime contractors OEMs system suppliers and subsystem manufacturers.
Examples include Raytheon Lockheed Martin BAE Systems Huawei NVIDIA and Biosense Webster.
SUPPLIERS
We cultivate deep supplier partnerships that enable new technology developments quality and efficiency while ensuring we have no substantial dependencies on individual sources.
REVENUE BY SECTOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
REVENUE IN 2017 UP 1% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT UP 5% DID YOU KNOW Our inflight antenna systems have given passengers more than 15 million hours of internet access on over 1000 planes Smiths Interconnect provides high reliability innovative connectivity solutions for the defence aerospace space rail medical and semiconductor test end markets.
Markets and trends We provide a range of missioncritical products to the defence market including microwave technology and ruggedised and highspeed connector solutions.
These are deployed in the most extreme environments such as in sensors communications equipment and next generation radar systems.
Global defence spending has been constrained in recent years as governments maintained tight budget control.
However the current economic environment and increasing geopolitical uncertainty represent a platform for growth.
New investment is focused on system upgrades in critical areas such as intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance force protection and force multipliers.
In aerospace we provide connectors components and satellite communications antenna solutions for various aircraft and space applications.
The commercial aerospace market remains robust driven by increasing passenger and freight demand particularly in developing regions and the need to upgrade aircraft fleets to more efficient models.
In the rail market our cable solutions provide communications connectivity while our ferrite components and connectors are used in applications such as control command and signalling in autonomous train systems.
Growth is driven by increasing demand for sophisticated digital train systems that improve safety and security high datarate connectivity for passengers and the distribution of high levels of electrical power.
Rail applications can be some of the harshest environments our products face and qualifying products can be challenging.
Our medical portfolio includes high reliability enhanced signal integrity performance connectors for applications requiring higher bandwidth and data rates including advanced imaging augmented reality and surgical robotics.
A growing ageing population and the rise in chronic diseases continue to drive growth for the global medical market especially in China and India.
Consumers demand improved accuracy efficiency and cost effectiveness in healthcare services meaning aligning our technologies with the costcontrol mindset of this market is a key consideration.
We provide test sockets probe heads and cable assembly solutions for semiconductor testing applications.
The high rate of technology refresh increased functionality and greater connectivity requirements of electronic devices are key drivers for this market.
GROWTH DRIVERS Growth in high data rate applications Continued proliferation of electronics Demand for greater connectivity and mobility Increasing sophistication of customer needs in highgrowth markets Increasing geopolitical uncertainty COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS Innovative and technically differentiated offerings Ultrahigh reliability solutions used in demanding applications Customer intimacy responsiveness and product customisation Global presence reach and support STATUTORY OPERATING PROFIT HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN 13.4% Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 S MI T H S IN T E R C O NNEC T C O N T I N U E D INVESTMENT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T UP 7% DID YOU KNOW We are providing the entire Ethernet data cabling network for the Orion spacecraft that will one day fly astronauts to Mars W E FOCUS ON CUS TOMER S W HO VA LUE OUR INNOVATI V E TECHNICA LLY DIFFERENTI ATED SOLU TIONS A S W ELL A S OUR AGILIT Y A ND R E S P O N SI V E N E S S OUR STRATEGY
We focus on customers who value our innovative technically differentiated solutions as well as our agility and responsiveness.
Our offering includes both custom and platform solutions.
We focus our portfolio and resources on the most attractive regions such as Asia and end markets particularly defence aerospace space rail medical and semiconductor.
We aim to outperform our end markets through customer focused innovation service and sales and marketing initiatives as well as attracting and retaining the best talent.
Restructuring and efficiency initiatives including lean and value engineering drive competitiveness and provide funds for investment.
Progress in FY2017 Restructured to create a functional organisation aligned around six markets Migrated all historical brands to Smiths
Established a key account management programme focused on deep relationships with technology seekers and partners Rationalised and simplified our distribution channels Enhanced programme management tools to improve execution and time to market Divested noncore businesses of Power and Microwave Telecoms Priorities for FY2018 Sharpen focus on strategic markets customers and sales channels International expansion particularly in Asia New product investments targeted at highergrowth end market segments Reduce costs through value engineering and scale efficiencies Attract retain develop engage and inspire talent FY2017 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Underlying growth Revenue 419 435 3% 1% Headline operating profit 56 57 1% 5% Headline operating margin 13.4% 13.1% 30bps Statutory operating profit 124 26 372% Return on capital employed 11.4% 10.3% 110bps Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
INCREASING DIGITAL RELIABILITY As computers mobiles and smart devices become more advanced so must the integrated chips that support them.
Were leading the way with our Volta semiconductor test solutions.
Used for testing the integrated chip packages behind everything from Bluetooth and power management to digital displays Volta significantly outperforms the competition in both durability and performance.
By developing new electrical contact technologies and integrating manufacturing and assembly processes we opened up an attractive new market segment and demonstrated our commitment to continuously innovating to meet the changing needs of our customers.
Performance
During the year Smiths Interconnect completed significant strategic and structural change to focus on fewer highergrowth end markets.
This included the divestments of the Power and Microwave Telecoms businesses and a major reorganisation of the business structure.
In a period of considerable change the business was able to deliver an underlying revenue increase of 1% driven by growth in both the space and aerospace segments.
On a reported basis revenue declined by 3% as favourable foreign exchange translation benefits were offset by the impact of the divestments.
Isolating
Underlying revenue grew by 20% in the space segment driven by increased spending on Low Earth Orbit constellations and increased content of the next generation highthroughput satellites using flexible digital payloads.
In aerospace underlying revenue grew by 44% driven by the continued deployment of our SATCOM antenna products and connector and component solutions on military and commercial airframes tied to new higher efficiency engines.
The strong double digit growth in both these segments was offset by small declines in the defence semiconductor test and rail segments.
Underlying revenue decline in defence of 4% reflected a slowdown in deliveries on several key defence programmes approaching end of life that was not offset by revenues from new programme wins.
The medical segment grew with underlying revenue up 4% tied to increased volume at one of our leading customers.
Industry consolidation impacted the buying patterns of several of our key customers in the semiconductor test segment with underlying revenue down 4%.
Operating profit grew 5% on an underlying basis and the headline operating margin increased 30bps to 13.4% driven by the benefits of restructuring activity in the prior year combined with a continued procurement and operational efficiency focus.
The difference between statutory and headline operating profit primarily reflects a 72m profit on business disposals.
Return on capital employed increased 110 basis points to 11.4% driven by the higher profitability during the year and the positive mix impact of the two disposals.
During the course of the year Smiths Interconnect disposed of both its Power and Microwave Telecoms businesses to concentrate on its remaining core with scalable top three leadership positions in its chosen markets.
Prior to the sale of the Power business in January 2017 sales were 47m with headline operating profit of 7m and net assets were 157m.
Prior to the sale of the Microwave Telecoms business in May 2017 sales were 55m headline operating profit was 1m and net assets were 41m.
The performance of both the Power and Microwave Telecoms businesses are included within the financial summary and results presented above.
Research and development Total research and development expenditure of 28m was 2m higher than the prior year representing 6.7% of revenue.
During the year Smiths Interconnects engineering function was realigned with our strategic market segments of defence aerospace space rail medical and semiconductor test with significant emphasis on driving improved time to market for new product development and an increased focus on developing product platforms over bespoke solutions.
Product developments during the year included for the space market the development of the K2TVA Series to our Thermopad portfolio with an improved thickfilm thermistor technology to enable more temperature compensation and mitigate the degradation at higher frequencies typical of this type of technology in semiconductor test we introduced a higher performance version of our DaVinci test socket which can now be used to test the most advanced CPU and GPU semiconductor devices and we also expanded our Outrigger resistor line with the CRHB 1216 product series improving the powertosize ratio of our resistor line which has applications in most of our core markets.
Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability 48 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Products 32%
Management 24% Heat Solutions 25% Flexible Solutions 19%tel F L E X T E K INNO VAT I V E COMP ONEN T S TO HE AT A ND MO V E F LUID S A ND G A SE S PRINCIPAL OPERATING
The majority of our sales and operations are in North America with some operations and a growing sales mix across Europe and Asia.
COMPETITORS
We compete with leading providers in each of our product categories.
Examples include ParkerHannifin and Eaton for aerospace tubing Omega Flex for flexible natural gas tubing and Nibe for heating elements.
CUSTOMERS
We serve the US construction industry domestic appliance aerospace engine and airframe manufacturers and other specialist markets.
Large customers include Watsco Ferguson Boeing Airbus Pratt and Whitney GE Samsung Trane and Carrier.
SUPPLIERS
We source key materials from worldclass companies selected to provide the quality service and value needed for missioncritical components.
REVENUE BY SECTOR REVENUE PERFORMANCE M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
REVENUE IN 2017 UP 3% HEADLINE OPERATING PROFIT UP 11% DID YOU KNOW Our heated hoses maintain a constant air temperature and are helping sleep apnoea patients breathe more easily at night FlexTek provides engineered components that heat and move fluids and gases for aerospace consumer products construction medical and industrial applications.
Markets and trends Our business is structured around four segments Heat Solutions Construction Products Fluid Management and Flexible
Key markets include US residential and commercial construction global aerospace tubing and hoses and electrical heating elements.
Our business performance generally follows macroeconomic indicators such as US GDP US housing growth healthcare spending and capital goods expenditure.
Population growth drives residential construction and domestic appliance demand in the US while highgrowth markets drive commercial aerospace demand through increasing air passenger and freight volumes and investment in nextgeneration aircraft.
The diverse nature of our markets reduces our reliance on any specific technology although we are primarily exposed to the US economy.
In heating we are one of the worlds largest manufacturers of open coil heating elements.
These specialised elements and thermal systems provide consistent temperature controls to improve system efficiency and performance for heating ventilation and air conditioning HVAC equipment tumble dryer and other bespoke applications.
Growth in Heat Solutions is largely driven by the US housing market along with an increasing number of specialty heating applications in North America and
Steady growth in US housing is also driving demand for our leading flexible gas piping and HVAC ducting in our Construction Products segment.
Our Heat Solutions elements are also used in the manufacturing of medical devices and our Flexible Solutions hoses are used in this market too particularly for respiratory care devices.
Increasing
In the automotive market our hoses are used to deliver fuel and brake fluid and will play a crucial role in the delivery of gas and hydrogen in nextgeneration vehicles.
In aerospace we are a marketleading provider of specialty highperformance flexible and rigid Fluid Management tubing assemblies that provide reliable efficient delivery of hydraulic fluids and jet fuel for commercial and military aircraft globally.
The market for commercial aircraft remains strong with an OEM order book of over 13000 aircraft.
GROWTH DRIVERS Steady growth of the US housing construction market Continued increase in large commercial aircraft production Growth of medical devices and their increased use of flexible tubing Growing presence in Europe and Asia with further expansion potential COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS A strong performance in residential gas tubing Highperformance flexible tubing products for aerospace Leading capability in the design and manufacture of heating solutions for bespoke applications Strong customer relationships STATUTORY OPERATING PROFIT HEADLINE OPERATING MARGIN 1 9.3% Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 F LE X  TE K C O N T I N U E D DID YOU KNOW Our heaters are used to convert soy beans into sustainable biofuels W E D EL I V ER ED A N O T HER S T R O N G P E R F O R M A N C E W I T H R E V E NUE UP 4% O N A N U ND E R LY IN G B A S I S OUR STRATEGY
Our strategy is to outperform our markets through technological differentiation with the need for safer more energyefficient solutions providing opportunities for us to establish leadership positions across our segments.
We aim to do this by developing our product portfolio expanding in our target regions growing existing market shares and driving operational excellence to increase competitiveness.
We also consider the right strategic bolton acquisitions to support growth.
Specific focus areas include growing our share in the US housing market expanding our markets for gas tubing and securing positions on nextgeneration aircraft.
Progress in FY2017 Heat Solutions total revenue grew 12% largely in the engineered solutions segment Enhanced sales efforts in Europe and Asia Expanding range of applications for bespoke heating element solutions Fluid Management delivered first production orders of tubing for GEs GEnx jet engine platform Priorities for FY2018 Expansion of our Heat Solutions product application base through new technologies Growth of Gastites natural gas tubing business in Europe New product development in Gastite Expansion of sales in Asia especially
Delivery of new aerospace platform wins Complete the acquisition and integration of Osrams heating solutions business FY2017 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Underlying growth Revenue 338 284 19% 3% Headline operating profit 65 51 28% 11% Headline operating margin 19.3% 18.0% 130bps Statutory operating profit 68 37 85% Return on capital employed 35.8% 31.6% 420bps Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
QUICK CONTROLLABLE COMFORT From hospitals and office spaces to indoor sports arenas our new Eseries duct heater technology is helping to control zone temperatures across a range of complex environments.
With improved electrical efficiency a wider range of watt densities and symmetrical design to ensure versatility our Tutco business line is driving innovation in the duct heater market.
Even with a fully custom design we have reduced our lead time to as little as 24 hours  significantly less than the competition  allowing us to reach new customers in the fastmoving construction and product replacement markets.
Performance
FlexTek delivered a strong performance with revenue up 3% on an underlying basis driven by growth in all segments except Fluid Management.
On a reported basis foreign exchange translation benefits led to revenue growth of 19%.
Construction revenue grew 2% on an underlying basis with both Gastite and Thermaflex benefiting from growth in the US housing market and Gastites increasing European presence.
Heat
Solutions revenue increased by 12% on an underlying basis principally due to growth in its engineered solutions.
Flexible
Solutions underlying revenue growth of 3% was driven by increased demand from the medical sector partially offset by a decline in the floor care segment.
Fluid
Management revenue was down 2% on an underlying basis primarily due to order timing issues associated with a specific customer.
The aerospace market for components otherwise remained strong.
Headline operating profit increased 11% on an underlying basis to 65m and the headline operating margin increased 130bps to 19.3%.
Margins expanded in all segments with the exception of Thermaflex due to pricing pressure.
Improvements
The difference between statutory and headline operating profit is primarily due to the 4m release in the provision for Titeflex Corporation subrogation claims due to increasing US discount rates.
Return on capital employed increased 420 basis points to 35.8% driven by improved profitability.
Since the year end Tutco LLC part of the Heat Solutions business has signed an agreement to purchase the heating element division of Osram broadening its portfolio into faster growing engineered heating solutions.
Research and development Total research and development expenditure remained broadly consistent at 0.6% of sales focused on market leading innovative solutions to meet specific customer needs.
In particular the continued development of 5000psi aerospace tubing for a broader range of applications in Gastite the further development of its technologyleading FlashShield product to improve ease of installation heat Solutions refocused development of flexible heaters with a new production cell for this product now operational and Flexible Solutions expanded the use of its heated wire hose technology in medical hose applications.
1 Underlying excludes the effects of foreign exchange translation and acquisitions but includes divested business for the period they were owned in the reported financial year and adjusts the prior financial year comparator as if the divested business were owned for the same period in that financial year to aid comparability Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 F I NAN C IAL R E V IE W O U R S T R O N G F IN A N C I A L F R A ME W O R K P R O V ID E S T HE F L E X IB IL I T Y T O E N A B L E U S T O C R E AT E S U P E R I O R R E T U R N S A ND IN V E S T IN G R O W T H.
W E H AV E S T R O N G G O V E R N A N C E A ND A R O B U S T A P P R O A C H T O R I S K MA NA G E ME N T AND F INAN C IAL C O N T R O L Nonheadline items relating to continuing activities excluded from headline profit before tax These items amounted to a gain of 73m compared to a charge of 105m in 2016.
They comprised 175m gain on the four disposals made in the year 4m on John Crane Artificial Lift 100m on Smiths Medical Wallace 22m on Smiths Interconnect Power and 50m on Smiths Interconnect Microwave Telecoms 37m charge for restructuring 2016 37m which included 33m in respect of the Fuel for Growth programme which completed in the year 2016 37m and 4m of restructuring costs associated with the integration of Morpho Detection and the existing Smiths Detection business.
The fouryear Fuel for Growth programme has now concluded with total spend of 185m and cumulative benefits to date totalling 70m.
Ongoing
19m charge for acquisition costs 2016 6m 9m net charge 2016 7m in connection with John Crane Inc.
4m credit 2016 11m charge in connection with Titeflex Corporation litigation 9m charge for changes to post retirement benefits and administration costs 2016 16m nil impairment of goodwill property plant and equipment and trade investments 2016 31m amortisation of intangible assets acquired in business combinations of 17m 2016 15m.
The ongoing amortisation charge relates principally to technology and customer relationships 3m charge for the unwind of fair value uplift of inventory on the acquisition balance sheet 2016 nil 6m charge related to the unwind of discounts on provisions 2016 5m nil fair value gain on contributing government bonds to a pension scheme 2016 19m 8m of financing losses 2016 1m gain and 2m gain on retirement benefit finance 2016 3m gain.
Discontinued operations Discontinued operations comprised the Morpho Detection explosive trace business generating a loss after tax of 8m in the year 2016 nil.
CASH CONVERSION 1 18% HEADLINE EARNINGS PER SHARE RETURN ON CAPITAL EMPLOYED 16.2% Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
Taxation
The principles of the Groups approach to taxation remain unchanged.
The Group seeks to manage the cost of taxation in a responsible manner to enhance its competitive position on a global basis while managing its relationships with tax authorities on the basis of full disclosure cooperation and legal compliance.
Audit Committee to monitor compliance with these principles to ensure the Group delivers its tax objectives.
The headline tax charge for 2017 of 140m 2016 113m represented an effective rate of 26.5% on the headline profit before taxation 2016 25.0%.
On a statutory basis the tax charge on continuing activities was 29m 2016 85m representing an effective tax rate of 4.8% 2016 24.6% impacted by the recognition of UK deferred tax assets and gains on sale of businesses which were either nontaxable or sheltered by previously unrecognised losses.
The Group aims to utilise global manufacturing research and development and other tax incentives to allocate its capital in the most tax efficient manner where the regulatory environment allows and to ensure the effective and timely management of its tax filings and compliance.
In 2017 the Group paid 82m in direct corporate tax on profits 2016 62m and 116m in employment and other taxes 2016 105m.
The Group additionally collected 224m on behalf of tax authorities primarily from employees but also other indirect taxes such as VAT 2016 210m.
The total amount of tax paid over to tax authorities during the year totalled 422m 2016 377m.
A rate of between 29.5% and 30.0% is expected in the year ending 31 July 2018.
Earnings per share Basic headline earnings per share from continuing activities were 97.6p 2016 The reported 15% increase was driven by favourable foreign exchange movements and higher operating profit partly offset by an increase in the effective tax rate to 26.5% from 25.0% in 2016.
EARNINGS PER SHARE PENCE On a statutory basis the basic earnings per share from continuing activities was 144.1p 2016 65.6p reflecting the profit on disposal of businesses of 175m and lower non headline costs compared to 2016.
Cash generation and net debt Operating cash generation remained strong with headline operating cashflow of 695m 2016 520m representing 118% 2016 102% of headline operating profit see note 29 to the accounts for a reconciliation of headline operating cash and free cash flow to statutory cashflow measures.
Movement in working capital was an inflow of 85m 2016 inflow of 9m reflecting a reduction in inventory and receivables.
CASH CONVERSION % Total free cashflow stated after all legacy costs interest and taxes but before acquisitions divestitures and dividends increased by 127m to 370m 2016 243m reflecting the higher operating cash generated and reduced pension payments.
Continued strong cash generation is expected in FY2018.
On a statutory basis net cash inflow from operations was 479m 2016 358m.
NET DEBT M Net debt at 31 July 2017 was 967m a decrease of 11m in the year.
On an underlying basis excluding the impact of foreign exchange movements net debt reduced by 72m reflecting strong operational cash generation and the Morpho acquisition being largely financed from business disposals.
At the end of the period the Group had gross debt of 1749m 2016 1409m and cash reserves of 782m 2016 431m.
Of
2018.
On 11 August 2017 the Group prepaid these Notes in full from cash resources.
The maturity profile of the major tranches of the debt in issue is as follows 2018  133m 175m 7.37% bond 2019  189m 250m 7.20% bond 2022  301m 400m 3.625% bond 2023  533m 600m 1.25% bond 2027  574m 650m 2.00% bond prepaid in August 2017
The Board has a progressive dividend policy for future payouts with the aim of increasing dividends in line with the longterm underlying growth in earnings.
This policy will enable us to retain sufficient cashflow to finance our investment in the drivers of growth and to meet our financial obligations.
In setting the level of dividend payments the Board will take into account prevailing economic conditions and future investment plans along with the objective to maintain minimum dividend cover of around 2.0.
As part of our disciplined approach to balance sheet management we seek to maintain a strong investmentgrade credit rating with a net debtEBITDA ratio of two time or lower over the medium term.
We would be willing to temporarily exceed this upper limit in the case of acquisitions provided there were clear actionable plans to return to the upper limit of 2.0 within an acceptable timeframe.
For more information see note 25 to the accounts.
Dividends paid in the year on ordinary shares amounted to 167m 2016 163m.
The Board has recommended a final dividend of 29.70p per share to be paid on 17 November 2017 to shareholders on the register at close of business on 20 October.
When added to the 2017 interim dividend of 13.55p per share paid on 28 April 2017 the 2017 full year dividend of 43.25p represents an increase of 3.0% on the 2016 full year dividend of 42.0p per share.
Acquisitions and disposals On 6 April 2017 we completed our acquisition of Morpho Detection for final consideration of 590m.
A condition of this transaction receiving regulatory approval was the subsequent disposal of Morpho Detections explosive trace detection business.
This was sold to OSI Systems Inc. on 7 July 2017 for 63m.
The Group has completed the disposal of a number of noncore businesses our Artificial Lift business in John Crane for 29m in November 2016 our Wallace business in Smiths Medical for 132m in November 2016 our Power business in Smiths Interconnect for 164m in January 2017 and our Microwave Telecoms business in Smiths Interconnect for 85m in May 2017.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Other financial information Retirement benefits As required by International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS the balance sheet reflects the net surplus or deficit in retirement benefit plans taking assets at their market values at 31 July 2017 and evaluating liabilities at periodend AA corporate bond interest rates.
The tables below disclose the net status across a number of individual plans.
Where any individual plan shows a surplus under IAS 19 this is disclosed on the balance sheet as a retirement benefit asset.
The IAS 19 surplus of any one plan is not available to fund the IAS 19 deficit of another plan.
The net pension position has improved to a surplus of 224m at 31 July 2017 from a surplus of 80m at 31 July 2016 benefitting from 105m of cash contributions in the year the matching level between assets and liabilities and changes in UK and US mortality assumptions.
The accounting basis under IAS 19 does not necessarily reflect the funding basis agreed with the Trustees and should the schemes be wound up while they had members they would need to buy out the benefits of all members.
The buyouts would cost significantly more than the present value of scheme liabilities calculated in accordance with IAS 19.
The retirement benefit position is shown below 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Funded plans UK plans  funding status 111% 109% US plans  funding status 91% 69% Other plans  funding status 81% 88% Total  funding status 109% 105% 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
Funded plans 354 217 Unfunded plans 130 137 Total surplusdeficit 224 80 Retirement benefit assets 390 328 Retirement benefit liabilities 166 248 The approximate pension membership for the three main schemes at 31 July 2017 is set out in the table below Pension scheme members as at 31 July 2017 SIPS TIGPS US plans Total Deferred active 276 161 2090 2527 Deferred 9880 11496 2922 24298 Pensioners 13023 15761 384 29168 Total 23179 27418 5396 55993 Goodwill and intangibles Goodwill from acquisitions has been capitalised since 1998.
Until 1 August 2004 it was amortised over a maximum 20year period.
Under IFRS goodwill is no longer amortised but instead is subject to annual reviews to test for impairment.
Intangible assets arising from business combinations acquired intangibles are assessed at the time of acquisition in accordance with IFRS 3 Revised and are amortised over their expected useful life.
This amortisation is excluded from the measure of headline profits.
When indicators of impairments are identified the intangible assets are tested and any impairment identified is charged in full.
The impairment charge is excluded from the measure of headline profits.
Other intangible assets comprise development costs or software which are capitalised as intangible assets as required by IFRS.
Amortisation charged on these assets is deducted from headline profits.
Return on capital employed The return on capital employed ROCE is calculated over a rolling 12month period and is the percentage that headline operating profit comprises of monthly average capital employed.
Capital employed comprises total equity adjusted for goodwill recognised directly in reserves postretirement benefitrelated assets and liabilities net of tax litigation provisions relating to exceptional items net of tax and net debt.
ROCE increased 90 basis points to 16.2% 2016 15.3% as a result of increased profitability across the Group.
Policies and judgements Accounting policies The accounts in this report are prepared under IFRS as adopted by the European Union EU.
The accounting policies used in preparing these accounts are set out on pages 141 to 147.
Significant judgements key assumptions and estimates Applying accounting policies requires the use of certain judgements assumptions and estimates.
The most important of these are set out on pages 141 to 142.
Essential contracts The divisional reviews describe our main customer and supplier relationships and the Risks and uncertainties section outlines the risk management aspects of our contractual arrangements.
Smiths Group has a wide range of suppliers and customers and while the loss of or disruption to certain of these arrangements could temporarily affect the operations of an individual division no single contract is considered essential to the Group.
Financial controls While the Groups decentralised organisation delegates daytoday control to local management the Group has comprehensive control systems in place with regular reporting to the
The Group has comprehensive formalised business risk management processes operating at each division.
The Internal Audit Department completes sitebased reviews of reporting units as set out in a riskbased audit plan reviewed and approved by the Chief Financial Officer and Audit Committee.
Further information regarding the Groups risk management procedures is set out in the Risk management section on pages 60 to 61 and the Corporate governance statement on pages 82 to 102.
F I NAN C IAL R E V I E W C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
Exchange rates The results of overseas operations are translated into sterling at average exchange rates.
The net assets are translated at yearend rates.
The principal exchange rates expressed in terms of the value of sterling are shown in the following table.
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Average rates US dollar 1.27 1.46 Dollar strengthened 13% Euro 1.16 1.32 Euro strengthened 12% Yearend rates US dollar 1.32 1.32 No change Euro 1.12 1.19 Euro strengthened 6%
The Board maintains a Treasury Risk Management Policy which governs the treasury operations of the Group and its subsidiary companies and the consolidated financial risk profile to be maintained.
A report on treasury activities financial metrics and compliance with the Policy is prepared monthly.
This is circulated to the Chief Financial Officer each month and to the Audit Committee on a semiannual basis.
The Policy maintains a treasury control framework within which counterparty risk financing and debt strategy cash and liquidity interest rate risk and currency translation management are reserved for Group Treasury while currency transaction management is devolved to operating divisions.
Centrally directed cash management systems exist globally to manage overall liquid resources efficiently across the divisions.
The Group uses financial instruments to raise financing for its global operations to manage related interest rate and currency financial risk and to hedge transaction risk within subsidiary companies.
The Group does not speculate in financial instruments.
All financial instruments hedge existing business exposures and all are recognised on the balance sheet.
The Policy defines four treasury risk components and for each component a set of financial metrics to be measured and reported monthly compared against preagreed objectives.
Credit quality The Groups strategy is to maintain a solid investmentgrade rating to ensure access to the widest possible sources of financing at the right time and to minimise the resulting cost of debt capital.
The credit ratings at the end of July 2017 were BBB  Baa2 both stable from Standard and Poors and Moodys respectively.
An essential element of an investment grade rating is consistent and robust cashflow metrics.
The Groups objective is to maintain a net debtheadline EBITDA ratio at two times or lower over the medium term.
Debt and interest rate management Debt financing is managed centrally.
At 31 July 2017 net debt was 967m 2016 978m.
The Groups strategy is to finance the majority of its debt from longterm bond markets and at 31 July 2017 1730m of bonds were outstanding 2016 1392m.
On 17 October 2016 the Group signed a 2.5bn Euro Medium Term Note Programme and on 23 February 2017 issued from it a 650m 2% bond with a maturity in 2027.
The core backstop financing for the Group is provided by a 800m committed revolving credit facility provided by a group of ten global banking partners.
This facility has a maturity in February 2021.
The
Group remains in full compliance with all covenants within its external debt agreements.
The Groups risk management objectives are to ensure that over time funding drawn from the bank market is less than 30% of net debt the average maturity profile of gross debt is at or greater than four years and over 55% of gross debt is at fixed rates.
At 31 July 2017 these measures were 0% 2016 0% 5.9 years 2016 4.5 years and 57% 2016 47%.
Liquidity management At 31 July 2017 the 800m committed bank facility was undrawn 2016 undrawn.
The Groups objective is to ensure that at any time undrawn committed facilities net of shortterm overdraft financing are greater than 200m and that committed facilities have at least 18 months to run until maturity.
At 31 July 2017 these measures were 607m 2016 605m and 43 months 2016 55 months.
At 31 July 2017 cash resources were 782m 2016 These resources included funds received from the 2017 650m Notes issuance to prefund the repayment of the 7.37% 175m Notes in August 2017.
The Group aims to ensure that these resources are placed on deposit with highlyrated relationship bank counterparties at shortnotice availability.
Credit exposure to every approved bank is defined by the Treasury Risk Management Policy with counterparty limits established by reference to their Standard and Poors longterm debt rating and CDS trading levels.
At 31 July 2017 98% 2016 98% of cash resources were on deposit with the ten global banking partners.
Of these resources 82m 2016 90m was invested with counterparties rated less than A.
Currency management The Group has adopted hedge accounting for the significant majority of transaction hedging positions thereby mitigating the impact of market value changes in the income statement.
Material sales or purchases in foreign currencies are hedged at their inception by appropriate financial instruments principally forward foreign exchange contracts and swaps.
The Groups objective is to reduce mediumterm volatility to cashflow margins and earnings.
The Group is an international business with the majority of its net assets denominated in foreign currency.
We protect our balance sheet and reserves from adverse foreign exchange movements by financing our foreign currency assets where appropriate in the same currency and targets that where the value of net asset exposure is over 30m equivalent over 50% of those assets are matched with the same currency liability.
At 31 July 2017 45% 2016 50% of total foreign currency assets were matched by related currency liabilities.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 F I NAN C IAL R E V I E W C O N T I N U E D
Smiths Group faces different types of litigation in different jurisdictions.
The high level of activity in the US for example exposes the Company to the likelihood of various types of litigation such as mass tort and class action litigation legal challenges to the scope and validity of patents and product liability and insurance subrogation claims.
These types of proceedings or the threat of them are also used to create pressure to encourage negotiated settlement of disputes.
John Crane Inc.
John Crane Inc.
JCI a subsidiary of the Group is currently one of many codefendants in litigation in the US relating to products previously manufactured which contained asbestos.
This litigation began more than 30 years ago and typically involves claims for a number of diseases including asbestosis lung cancer and mesothelioma.
The JCI products generally referred to in these cases consist of industrial sealing products primarily packing and gaskets.
The asbestos was encapsulated within these products in such a manner that according to tests conducted on behalf of JCI the products were safe.
John Crane ceased manufacturing products containing asbestos in 1985.
The litigation involves claims for a number of allegedly asbestosrelated diseases with awards for mesothelioma tending to be larger than those for the other diseases.
JCIs ability to defend mesothelioma cases successfully is therefore likely to have a significant impact on its annual aggregate adverse judgment and defence costs.
JCI continues to actively monitor the conduct and effect of its current and expected asbestos litigation including the effective presentation of its safe product defence and intends to resist these asbestos cases based on this defence.
Approximately 273000 claims against JCI have been dismissed before trial over the last 38 years.
JCI is currently a defendant in cases involving approximately 50000 claims.
Despite these large numbers of claims since the inception of litigation JCI has had final judgments against it in 138 cases and has had to pay awards amounting to approximately 160m.
At 31 July 2017 the aggregate provision for JCI asbestos litigation including for adverse judgments and defence costs amounted to 237m 2016 252m expressed at the then current exchange rate.
In deciding upon the amount of the provision JCI has relied on independent expert advice from a specialist.
The provision is based on past history and published tables of asbestos incidence projections and uses a 10year time horizon.
We consider that to forecast beyond ten years requires the litigation environment to remain largely unchanged with regard to estimating future asbestos expenditures.
Historically this has not been the case with a significant change occurring more often than every ten years and therefore a 10year time horizon has continued to be applied.
Sensitivities around the provision time period have been included in note 22 to the accounts.
In establishing this provision no account has been taken of any recoveries from insurers as their nature and timing are subject to pending litigation.
Because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of asbestos claims and of the costs arising out of the related litigation there is no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred.
Titeflex Corporation litigation Titeflex Corporation a subsidiary of the Group in the FlexTek division has received a number of claims in recent years from insurance companies seeking recompense on a subrogated basis for the effects of damage allegedly caused by its flexible gas piping products being energised by lightning strikes.
It has also received a number of product liability claims relating to this product some in the form of purported class actions.
Titeflex
Corporation believes that its products are a safe and effective means of delivering gas when installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and local and national codes however some claims have been settled on an individual basis without admission of liability.
At 31 July 2017 provision of 84m 2016 94m has been made for the costs which the Group expects to incur in respect of these claims.
Because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of claims and of the costs arising out of the related litigation there is no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
VIABILIT Y STATEMENT In accordance with the requirements of the 2016 revision of the UK Corporate Governance Code the directors have assessed the longerterm prospects of the Group taking into account the current position of the Group and a range of internal and external factors including the principal risks detailed on pages 60 to 67 the viability assessment.
The directors have determined that a threeyear period to 31 July 2020 is an appropriate time frame for the viability assessment.
The selected period is considered to be appropriate as based on the historic performance of the Group a threeyear outlook represents an optimum balance of longterm projection and acceptable forecasting accuracy.
This time period also takes into account considerations such as the maturity of the Groups borrowing facilities and the cyclicality of the performance of the Groups underlying markets.
In making this viability assessment the directors have considered the current financial position and prospects of the Group including the current year business performance the detailed budget for 2018 and the Strategic Plan.
Against these financial projections the directors took into account the principal risks as outlined on pages 60 to 67 to develop a set of plausible scenarios with potentially highimpact outcomes including product liability and litigation programme delivery supply chain disruption and business continuity fraud and corruption and compliance with laws and regulations.
Consideration was then given to the magnitude of the gross risks and their potential impact directly or indirectly on the Groups future performance and liquidity.
The assessment included stress testing of the Groups financial capacity to absorb the impact of such adverse events either individually or in combination and what mitigating actions the Group could take to respond to them in order to protect its business.
The directors also considered the Groups ability to raise additional liquidity.
In performing this assessment the directors have taken comfort from the diversity of the Groups businesses across different markets industries geographies products and customers.
Based on the robust assessment the directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation the Group will remain viable for the period being assessed and will continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due.
The directors have no reason to doubt that the Group will continue in business beyond the period under assessment.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 D E L I V E R I N G Our complex fuel manifolds deliver leadingedge fluid management at extreme pressures and temperatures in aircraft engines.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
E F F I C I E N C Y Used in nextgeneration aeroplane engines our fuel manifolds are making airliners more fuelefficient and environmentally friendly.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 R I S K MANA G E ME N T W E O P E R AT E A C R O S S A R A N G E O F M A R K E T S A ND G EOG R A P HIE S A ND A R E P R E PA R E D T O A C C E P T C E R TA IN L E V E L S O F R I S K IN P U R S U IN G O U R A MB I T I O N O F E S TA B L I S HIN G S MI T H S A S O NE O F T HE W O R L DS L E A D IN G T EC HN O L O G Y C O MPA NIE S.
Risk governance The Board and its committees set the tone at the top and approve the strategy of the business.
The Board ensures appropriate oversight and monitoring through a number of mechanisms including strategy reviews committee meetings management reports and focused reviews of selected risk areas.
On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing and assessing the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
The review covers financial operational and compliance controls as well as the Groups principal risks.
The Executive Committee is responsible for designing the Enterprise Risk Management ERM system and ensuring it is effectively deployed throughout the
The Executive Committee also ensures the Boards risk appetite is understood by risk owners and decision makers in the business and conducts an annual assessment of strategic risk.
Divisional and functional teams are responsible for the daytoday management and reporting of risks.
They identify new and emerging risks escalate where appropriate and take action to manage risks as required.
Our divisions also conduct an annual assessment of strategic risk with formal presentations to the Audit Committee each year.
Internal Audit provides independent and objective assurance to both the Audit and Executive Committees of the adequacy and effectiveness of our risk management and internal control processes.
They facilitate the ERM process and provide sitebased controls reviews and assurance reviews of key programmes processes and systems.
We are very clear about the specific risks we face and take a proactive approach to risk management to maximise opportunities drive better commercial decisionmaking and protect our business and people.
Tone at the top Set the strategy Board and Audit Committee Review and assess
risk management
Design the system
Committee
Identify and assess strategic and operational risks Complete risk reviews Divisional and functional teams
Annual Report 2017 M A N A GE A N A LY SE
IDENTIF Y
RISK MANAGEMENT
STRA TEGIC
HOW WE MANAGE RISKS Within this governance framework we operate a three lines of defence approach to ensure clarity around roles and responsibilities and effective risk management.
This model ensures the three layers  management control risk and compliance and independent assurance  are clearly defined and work effectively within our wider governance structures to manage the risks identified through our ERM.
The ERM process Running any business involves constant risk management  it is an integral and often implicit part of daytoday operations.
Our ERM process is designed to ensure a constant feedback loop between the Board and Audit Committee the Executive Committee divisions functions and sites to enable us to manage and monitor the risks that threaten the successful execution of our strategy.
This framework ensures our strategic financial and operational risks are appropriately considered by the Executive Committee and the Board.
During 2017 a risk workshop was facilitated by the Director of Internal Audit at the Executive Committee.
The workshop resulted in an update to the principal risk register which was presented to the Audit Committee.
In addition the Executive Committee selected three of the principal risks  a significant ethical breach cyber security and quality at Smiths Medical  for deep dive reviews at both the Executive and Audit Committees.
A further 44 risk workshops were facilitated at key sites during the year to gather a bottomup view of risk.
To ensure alignment a summary of these was mapped to divisional risk registers and the Groups principal risks and uncertainties.
The Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the risk management process considering the principal risks and uncertainties actions taken by management to manage those risks and the Boards risk appetite in respect of each risk.
The Board considers the risk management process to be effective.
It recognises this is an ongoing process and work will continue in FY2018.
REGUL ATORS AND EXTERNAL AUDIT BOARD AND AUDIT COMMITTEE Tone at the top Setting the strategy Reviewing and assessing the effectiveness of risk management and internal control systems Monitoring through Board processes EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT Designing and establishing the risk management system and internal control Ensuring the risk appetite of the Board is understood by decision makers Ensuring risks are adequately managed FIRST LINE OF DEFENCE Risk ownership and mitigation operational teams
Establishing and applying internal control systems Complying with policies Following risk management processes SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE Monitoring and compliance risk and compliance functions
Operational
Risk management
Quality
Health and
THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE
Internal Audit
Internal controls
System controls
HOW WE MANAGE RISK Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 We maintain a register of principal risks and uncertainties covering the strategic operational financial and compliance risks faced by the Group.
We rate them according to likelihood of occurrence potential impact and the likely velocity of each risk.
This measure reflects the expected time we would have to react were a risk to materialise.
The trend metric reflects the net position of a risktaking into consideration both external factors and internal risk mitigation activities when compared to the same time last year.
We consider our current and target exposure to each risk which defines our risk appetite.
We updated our register of principal risks and uncertainties following our Executive Committee workshop held during FY2017 and made the following adjustments to the principal risks disclosed in the 2016 Annual Report Financial risk has been removed.
We consider the diversified nature of our global operations and the financial strength of the Group provide appropriate mitigation such that this risk does not require a standalone disclosure.
Pension Funding risk has been removed.
We consider the increased strength of the funding level of the Groups defined benefit pension arrangements and the actions agreed on 17 November 2015 and 1 March 2016 in order to address potential funding shortfalls in the Smiths Industries Pension Scheme and TI Group Pension Scheme.
While we continue to monitor and manage a wider range of risks the table below summarises those we feel most likely to have the greatest impact on the business if they were to materialise and the key mitigating actions taken to address them.
RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS
DISRUPTION BY EXISTING OR FUTURE
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Increased
VELOCITY
Low
Developing differentiated new products and services is critical to our success.
We may be unable to maintain technological differentiation or meet customers needs and face more effective or disruptive innovation by a competitor.
Potential impact Loss of market share and competitive advantage Materially adverse effect on profitable growth Erosion of our reputation as a leader in our markets and ability to attract and retain talent Increased speed of innovation in certain markets may lead to shorter product lifecycles which would increase the level of RandD spend needed to maintain sales growth Our diversified technology portfolio serves a range of sectors and geographies mitigating our exposure to any one sector or area We are actively repositioning the portfolio around our most attractive markets where we consider we can sustainably hold a top three position based on technology leadership Increased and smarter investment in RandD 2017 4.6% of revenue 2016 4.0% focused on our most attractive markets New Groupwide innovation framework  i focused on building a culture of innovation.
Focus areas include process enhancements to improve innovation effectiveness horizon scanning to develop longrange technology roadmaps for each division and driving digitisation New central Innovation Fund to leverage our critical mass and accelerate key areas  first projects approved and underway New Head of Innovation and Group Digital Director appointed in FY2017 to spearhead the agenda Aligned New Product Introduction NPI process rolled out across divisions to accelerate time to market P R IN C IPA L R I S K S A ND U N C E R TA IN T IE S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
No change
Low
People are our only truly sustainable source of competitive advantage and competition for key skills is intense especially around science technology engineering and mathematics
We may not be successful in attracting retaining developing engaging and inspiring the right people with the right skills to ensure organisational effectiveness and achieve our growth ambitions.
Potential impact The inability to attract key talent could lead to a loss of competitive advantage and materially affect our growth prospects In acquisitions losing key personnel from the newlyacquired business or making the wrong leadership appointments could significantly impact performance and value Building a learning organisation is a key part of our growth strategy with a focus on culture reward and recognition HR infrastructure and learning and development Talent and succession plan reviews are held at least annually to balance internal management continuity with external recruitment Remuneration packages are evaluated regularly against market trends The Chief Executive annually assesses the top leadership team and presents development and succession plans to the Board Annual performance management reviews are carried out for the majority of employees using best practice processes such as 360 degree feedback surveys A clearly defined people integration plan for acquisitions ensures an effective approach to appointments and organisation design Launched a new leadership development programme in partnership with UCLA Anderson Executive Education in FY2017 WRONG ACQUISITIONS AND POOR
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
No change
Medium
We are focusing the portfolio around the most attractive markets where we can sustainably achieve a top three leadership position.
The success of our acquisition strategy depends on identifying suitable targets obtaining necessary authorisations and financing and successfully integrating newlyacquired businesses.
Potential impact Newlyacquired products and solutions may deliver less value fewer synergies or require more investment than anticipated The Groups return on capital employed may fall if acquisition hurdle rates are not met The Groups financial performance may suffer from goodwill or other acquisitionrelated impairment charges Insufficient allowance for potential claims arising from indemnities and warranties given on a business disposal may detrimentally affect our financial position Changes to disposal provisions will affect the income statement and settlement will utilise Group funds Detailed due diligence and integration work is undertaken and reviewed in accordance with Group policy A new Acquisition and Disposals Policy has been developed for the entire transaction cycle Due diligence includes an assessment of the acquisition targets talent and competencies.
Monthly reviews of the acquisition pipeline and a stagegated MandA process ensure strong focus on and oversight of the pipeline The Acquisitions and Divestments sub Committee of the Board has authority to approve smaller acquisitions and divestments whereas larger transactions can only be approval by the full Board The Board reviews postacquisition performance and integration P24 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 R I S K MANA G E M E N T C O N T I N U E D RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS NOT OPERATING IN THE RIGHT MARKETS RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
No change
Low
We are repositioning the portfolio around our most attractive markets where we can deliver abovemarket growth on a sustainable basis. western governments.
Failure to select the right markets and geographies could impact our strategic progress and financial performance.
Potential impact Smiths Detection Smiths Medical and Smiths Interconnect frequently tender for government contracts both directly and indirectly.
Any significant disruption in government budgets could result in fewer contracts being awarded and lower revenues for Smiths Our growth strategy places emphasis on expanding our operations in highergrowth end markets and regions that are currently underserved including Asia and China in particular A diversified portfolio of businesses mitigates exposure to any one country sector or customer The Groups Government Relations function works to inform policy and collaborate with colleagues across the business to advise on developments Some of our governmentrelated businesses have a services or consumables component which can be more resilient during an economic downturn when customers capital expenditures on original equipment may be more constrained Appointment of a Group President of Asia Pacific  a new role  to help accelerate our growth in the region ECONOMIC OUTLOOK AND GEOPOLITICAL
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
No change
Medium
Global economic and financial market conditions have stabilised after the turmoil following the 2008 financial crisis in large part due to the various impacts of quantitative easing and austerity measures.
However there remains continued uncertainty arising from a range of geopolitical and economic issues across the world.
Smiths operates in more than 50 countries and is affected by global economic and political conditions.
The business is affected by government spending priorities in particular in the US and UK and the willingness of governments to commit substantial resources to homeland security and defence.
The impact of the UKs decision to withdraw from the EU Brexit remains uncertain.
Potential effects of Brexit applicable to many businesses include economic and operational uncertainty volatility of currency exchange regulatory changes and the imposition of tariffs on trade between the UK and the Eurozone.
Global security concerns continue to drive uncertainty.
These include the continuing situation in Syria and the Middle East and recent events in North Korea.
The global oil price continues to trade at levels below the average of the past few years which impacts the mediumterm capital expenditure plans of a number of our customers predominantly within the John Crane division.
The Group has a diversified portfolio of businesses that mitigates exposure to any one country or sector The divisions monitor their order flows and other leading indicators where available so that they may respond quickly to deteriorating trading conditions The Group monitors the ongoing negotiations between the UK and the EU in order to assess the potential impact of Brexit and any transitional arrangements that may be agreed Maintaining our competitiveness and continually improving our product offering for our customers ensures we remain resilient and well placed to take advantage of commercial opportunities Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS INTERRUPTION TO SUPPLY CHAIN
CONCENTRATION
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Decreased
VELOCITY
High
Timely efficient supply of raw materials and purchased components is critical to our ability to deliver to our customers and drive our growth.
Potential impact Our manufacturing continues to be exposed to the risk of a number of external events which could have significant adverse consequences.
These include natural catastrophes disease pandemics and terrorist attacks.
We are also affected by the social economic regulatory and political conditions where we operate The concentration of manufacturing in lowercost countries in particular in Mexico increases the length of the supply chain and means an adverse event could have more significant consequences for our ability to supply customers on time Supply Excellence is one of the six pillars of our SES operating model providing an increased focus on efficient resilient and costeffective supply Business continuity and disaster recovery plans are in place and tested for critical locations We regularly evaluate our key sites for a range of risk factors using externally benchmarked assessments Business interruption and property damage insurance is in place INTERRUPTION TO SUPPLY CHAIN  SOLE SOURCE OF SUPPLY RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Decreased
VELOCITY
High
We rely on sole source component suppliers to provide raw materials or purchased components for some of our products.
Any failure on their part or unforeseen adverse consequences in the region or market in which they operate would impact our ability to deliver solutions to customers and drive growth.
Potential impact Disruption to a solesource supplier could impact our ability to deliver solutions to customers impacting our financial performance and reputation We identify solesource supplier risks and dual source where possible The Procurement Leadership Team PLT continues to identify and monitor highrisk solesource suppliers and puts in place mitigation plans including qualification of alternative sources of supply where appropriate Our PLT is also developing a risk management system based on Failure Modes Effect Analysis in order to understand the risk of occurrence and mitigation solutions P23 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 R I S K MANA G E M E N T C O N T I N U E D RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS PRODUCT QUALITY ISSUE  RECALL
CATASTROPHIC
EVENT
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Decreased
VELOCITY
High
In the ordinary course of business we are subject to litigation such as product liability claims and lawsuits including potential class actions alleging that our products have resulted or could result in an unsafe condition or injury.
The missioncritical nature of many of our solutions makes the potential consequences of failure worse than would otherwise be the case.
Potential impact Manufacturing flaws component failures and or design defects could require us to recall products many of which are used in critical applications where the consequences of a failure could be extremely serious and in some cases potentially catastrophic The Group in particular Smiths Detection and Smiths Medical may potentially be exposed to losses in the event of a cyber security breach relating to the Groups products.
These include not only customers losses but also those of a potentially large class of third parties Our businesses are active in markets and product areas that are known to be of interest to cyber criminals We have insurance cover for product liability.
The US SAFETY Act provides legislative protection for certain Smiths Detection products in the US and we support efforts to implement similar legislation in other markets eg ongoing third party limitation lobbying seeks mirror legislation in the EU Quality assurance processes embedded in manufacturing locations for critical equipment supporting compliance with industry regulations eg FAA FDA API etc.
Material litigation is managed under the oversight of the Group General Counsel Our Groupwide Quality Council drives standard definitions identifies and shares best practice and reduces the cost of poor quality Risk analysis and mitigation processes relating to product cyber resilience are embedded in the product lifecycle process.
Proactive steps are taken to ensure product cyberrelated risks are continually monitored and managed FAILING TO MEET
OBLIGATIONS
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Decreased
VELOCITY
High
There is a risk that we may fail to deliver in a timely fashion or at all the products and services that we are obliged to deliver or fail in our contractual execution due to delays or breaches by our suppliers or other counterparties.
Potential impact There may be differences between the estimated costs in our medium and longterm contracts and actual costs due to factors such as production delays and cost overruns Some of our contracts particularly those with governments may include terms that provide for unlimited liabilities on our part or allow the government body or counterparty to terminate unilaterally reduce or modify the relevant contracts or seek alternative sources of supply at our expense Contracts are managed and delivered by programme management teams that regularly review risks and take appropriate action A review and approval process for significant and higherrisk contracts is in place at Group and divisional levels The diversified nature of the Group mitigates the exposure to any single contract We are working to enhance the contract review process across the business to increase the uniformity of process risk tolerance where appropriate personnel and contract management In relation to government contracting in particular legal functional policy deployment improvement targets include a specific action to determine and roll out best practice Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
RISK AND POTENTIAL IMPACT KEY MITIGATING CONTROLS SIGNIFICANT ETHICAL OR COMPLIANCE
RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
No change
High
We operate in highly regulated markets as well as in countries where the risks of bribery corruption and modern slavery are high.
There is a risk that a significant ethical or compliance breach may occur.
Potential impact A failure to comply with export regulations could lead to significant fines and a loss of export privileges A significant proportion of revenue stems from government contracts with strict conditions attached.
Failure to meet those conditions particularly in the US can have serious financial and reputational consequences We operate in a number of relatively consolidated markets which increases the risk of illegal anticompetitive activity such as collusion with competitors.
US fines and penalties imposed for price fixing bid rigging and other cartel type activities can exceed 100m per violation Any breach could seriously harm our reputation and impact our financial performance customer relationships and ability to attract and retain talent We have a network of trade compliance officers across the Group to oversee import and export activities Medical has dedicated staff who maintain close contact with the FDA and other key regulators The Group General Counsel and divisional General Counsels monitor legislative changes and report and monitor actions as necessary We have adopted a set of shared values across Smiths and have a comprehensive ethics and compliance programme that supports our Ethics Code.
It is overseen by a dedicated Ethics and Compliance function and Business Ethics
We conduct Groupwide training programmes and regularly hold ethics conferences around the world We operate an Alertline for reporting concerns and have strong reporting and investigation mechanisms A new AntiModern Slavery Policy and procedures are being rolled out to reduce the risk of modern slavery in Smiths and our supply chain Competition law training programmes have been developed to educate employees We regularly review our Ethics and Compliance programme to address evolving risks CYBER SECURITY RISK APPETITE Current  Target POTENTIAL IMPACT
TREND
Increased
VELOCITY
High
Cybercrime levels continue to rise around the world and we operate in markets and product areas that are known to be of interest to cyber criminals.
Our information assets and the systems we depend on are exposed to risks that could result in theft corruption or breach of confidentiality.
Potential impact Cyber attacks could compromise the confidentiality integrity and availability of our assets impacting our ability to deliver to customers and ultimately financial performance and reputation The Group and especially Smiths Detection and Smiths Medical is exposed to significant losses in the event of a cyber security breach relating to the Groups security or medical products.
These include not only customers losses but also those of a potentially large class of third parties The Board provides oversight of our approach to cyber risks.
We have a proactive ongoing focus on information and cybersecurity risks and have a sophisticated information security programme which is supported by a strong governance framework Groupwide assessment of our most critical information assets and protection to enhance security.
This follows a riskbased approach and includes information classification and handling rules Information Security Awareness programme including online ecompliance training to educate employees Management of user privileges to ensure that users only have access to appropriate information and programmes Security monitoring to provide early detection of hostile activity on Smiths networks and an incident management process Partnership and monitoring arrangements are in place with critical third parties including our communications service provider Risk analysis and mitigation processes relating to product cyber resilience are embedded in the product lifecycle process.
Proactive steps are taken to ensure product cyberrelated risks are continually monitored and managed Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 O UR A PPRO A CH T O R E S P O N S IBL E B U S INE S S P R O M O T IN G A C U LT U R E O F R E S P O N S IB L E B U S INE S S I S F U ND A ME N TA L T O A C HIE V IN G O U R V IS I O N O F D E L I V E R IN G INN O VAT I V E S O LU T I O NS F O R T HE W O R L DS C H A L L E N G E S  A ND T O HE L P IN G U S B EC O ME O NE O F T HE W O R L DS L E A D IN G T EC HN O L O G Y C O MPA NIE S Our Responsible Business governance framework Strong governance is essential to embedding responsible business practices across the Group.
Our Board of directors oversees our approach to responsible business including our Code of Business Ethics the Code.
The Board sets our strategic and financial objectives establishes high ethical standards and robust risk management frameworks and monitors succession planning.
The Audit Committee monitors how we implement and comply with the
It reports to the Board on the effectiveness of our internal controls and processes to identify evaluate and manage significant business risks including potential violations of the Code.
The Chief Executive and Executive Committee are responsible for delivering our responsible business strategy.
They champion the strategy within the business setting and continually reinforcing the tone from the top.
This includes ensuring the Code is upheld implementing supporting policies setting targets and reviewing performance across key areas.
Our corporate centre helps foster our sustainable business culture.
It sets governance and risk management frameworks and develops tools policies and programmes that help to embed a strong culture of responsible behaviour and continuous improvement across the Group including the Smiths Excellence
Our divisions tailor these programmes to reflect their specific business needs and local regulations.
Identifying our responsible business priorities We use our strategy risk management and stakeholder engagement processes to identify focus areas.
We engage with a wide range of stakeholders  including our employees customers investors industry bodies and suppliers  around the world on an ongoing basis and use their insights and feedback to help shape our activities and communication.
We also use a range of external sources to identify potential issues.
These include regulatory guidelines and legislation peer reviews sustainability standards and guidelines and experts and consultants.
Through this process we have identified a number of material issues grouped under our five focus areas  Ethics Health Safety and Environment People Products and Communities.
Our responsible business strategy Our Groupwide responsible business strategy sets out our approach to these focus areas underpinned by a robust governance framework and management approach.
We set Group performance targets across a number of areas of responsibility and our sites and divisions regularly report their performance.
At Smiths being a responsible business is firmly embedded in the ways we think and operate.
With around 22000 people working in more than 50 countries it is important that we maintain the highest standards of corporate responsibility.
Behaving ethically working safely providing highquality innovative solutions reducing our environmental impact developing and engaging our people and contributing to our communities is fundamental to our longterm success.
Many of our products and services deliver valuable benefits to society and the environment helping to reduce harm keep people safe improve efficiency and minimise environmental impact.
As a global technology company operating in highly regulated sectors operating responsibly also helps us create longterm value by Enhancing our reputation with our people customers suppliers and investors Winning business from customers who value responsible business performance Improving efficiency and reducing costs Providing a safe and ethical work environment that supports health and productivity and reduces the risk of an ethical breach Attracting and retaining key talent in an increasingly competitive market Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
DOING THE RIGHT THING Integrity is one of our core values and doing the right thing is at the heart of what it means to work at Smiths  and it was the theme of our FY2017 Business and Ethics conference which brought together 100 leaders from across the organisation to consider the ethical issues we face at Smiths.
Integrity is one of our core values and underpins our commitment to doing business the right way.
It supports our ambition to establish Smiths as one of the worlds leading technology companies.
Being ethical means applying our shared values to our everyday actions and decisions.
Acting with integrity helps to protect our reputation business and people safeguard our shareholders investment and support our ambition to become one of the worlds leading technology companies.
We are continuously improving our approach and strengthening our ethical culture so that everyone knows what is expected of them where they could face exposure to ethical risks how to ask for help and where to report concerns.
The Board is ultimately responsible for the ethical conduct of the Group and our employees.
On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee assesses the ethical risks to our reputation and performance monitors the implementation of the Code and reviews reports and investigations from our Ethics Alertline.
They are supported by our cross divisional Business Ethics Council and Ethics and Compliance team who design and implement our compliance programme manage our Ethics Alertline investigate breach allegations and promote the Code across the Group.
They are supported by internal teams including HR Legal and Internal Audit.
We aim to continuously reinforce a strong ethical culture and enhance our compliance programmes to address evolving areas of risk.
In FY2017 our principal compliance programmes included modern slavery risks trade compliance supplier conduct antibribery and corruption antitrust and data protection.
Culture
Our shared values underpin a culture of doing the right thing every time while the Code provides more detailed guidance on our expectations of employees.
Our Chief Executive and Executive Committee champion our values and the Code and set the tone through communications and interactions with employees and stakeholders.
We give everyone a copy of the Code when they join us.
We support it with an online training course and refresher training every two years.
Both the Code and the training come in our top 19 operating languages.
We want everyone to feel confident about speaking up if they have a concern.
We offer an independently operated confidential Ethics Alertline for those who feel uncomfortable with raising an issue with their manager.
In FY2017 182 issues were reported via the Alertline all of which were thoroughly investigated and disciplinary action was taken in 26 instances.
Education and compliance We regularly review and update our ethics training materials in line with changes to risks and regulations.
Our
Throughout the year we arrange global forums to deepen our managers understanding of the ethical challenges facing the business.
In FY2017 we held regional events in growth markets such as Dubai Indonesia Thailand and China as well as our Global Business Ethics Forum in San Diego California.
During FY2017 we continued to align and strengthen our global compliance programme across the business further enhancing our central policies training and oversight including establishing a global centre of excellence for trade compliance and launching a new Gifts Meals and Entertainment Policy.
We are committed to upholding all internationally recognised human rights standards wherever we operate.
We do not tolerate any use of child or forced labour within our facilities or those of our suppliers.
During FY2017 we rolled out a policy and risk assessment to help address modern slavery risks.
This can be found on site Our Supplier Code of Business Ethics informs our suppliers contract manufacturers and other third parties exactly what we expect of them in terms of ethics compliance human rights and social and environmental issues.
As a global organisation we have to comply with numerous local and regional laws.
To support this we revised our Export and Import Controls Policy to provide better corporate oversight.
We also conduct regular sitebased reviews of trade activity to identify and manage any areas of risk.
FY2018 priorities Refresh and roll out our Code of Business Ethics and associated training Upgrade the Ethics Alertline operating system and raise employee awareness Hold regional ethics conferences in India and Eastern Europe Continue to enhance our risk management tools to better assess ethical risks site by site Refresh and roll out our Supplier Code of Business Ethics and continue to embed our prequalification questionnaire for new suppliers Oversee the ongoing implementation of our AntiModern Slavery Policy E T HI C S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 O U R A P P R O A C H T O R E S P O N S I B L E B U S I N E S S C O N T I N U E D At Smiths we are determined to achieve worldclass health safety and environmental HSE performance.
Wherever we operate we aim to provide injuryfree and environmentally responsible workplaces.
We are committed to protecting our people communities customers and the environment.
This commitment is demonstrated by our comprehensive HSE Policy available at site and our HSE governance framework.
Together we are creating a culture that prioritises the health and wellbeing of our people and minimises our impact on the environment.
Our Chief Executive has ultimate oversight of HSE across the Group.
Working closely with the Executive Committee he is responsible for executing our Group wide HSE strategy implementing our policies and processes and meeting our HSE targets.
To ensure these principles are fully and effectively embedded the president of each division sets HSE programmes specific to their business.
They are supported by the HSE Technical Committee who track performance and identify areas for improvement.
By developing a shared approach to HSE across the Group we manage our safety and environmental risks more effectively and provide better protection for our employees our communities the environment and shareholder value.
HSE management and compliance Our management systems help us identify and prioritise HSE risks across the Group.
They drive continuous improvement and provide the externally verified framework behind a consistent bestpractice approach to HSE management.
Our HSE performance against Group targets is tracked on a sitebysite basis using dedicated HSE management software and is reviewed by the Executive Committee.
We use external auditors to check compliance at sites often as part of their management system certification.
Audit findings drive corrective action plans and are shared with other sites to promote best practice.
Environmental performance To ensure we are using energy and natural resources efficiently we implement world class production processes that decrease waste and energy consumption.
We also invest in lowcarbon technologies and environmental management systems that drive improvement in our performance.
In FY2013 we set new fiveyear environmental targets having exceeded previous targets two years early.
Using
FY2013 as the baseline our targets are to achieve a reduction of energy usage Greenhouse Gas GHG emissions and waste generation of 15% and water usage of 10% by FY2018 all normalised to revenue.
By installing more energy efficient equipment implementing water reuse programmes and focusing on green energy contracts we have made good progress against these objectives.
Compared to our baseline year of FY2013 we have achieved good progress in reducing our environmental metrics with GHG and nonrecycled waste already exceeding our fiveyear goal and water consumption on target.
During FY2017 our overall environmental performance continued its longterm improvement trend with normalised reductions in energy water usage and GHG emissions while non recycled waste remained broadly in line.
Absolute environmental metrics reduced in 2017 with 4% energy 9% water usage 7% GHG and 2% nonrecycled waste.
See our 2017 Responsible Business Report or our website site for a detailed review of environmental performance.
Energy and greenhouse gas We measure and monitor energy consumption at a site level using our tracking software which provides a consolidated view of overall performance across the Group.
Our Energy and Greenhouse Gas Policy HE A LT H  S A F E T Y A ND E N V IR O NME N T GHG EMISSIONS Emission FY2017 FY2016 FY2015 Absolute values Scope 1 direct emissions t CO e 11000 12000 14000 Scope 2 indirect emissions t CO e 62000 69000 81000 Total t CO e 73000 81000 95000 Normalised values Scope 1 direct emissions t CO em revenue 3.74 3.95 4.54 Scope 2 indirect emissions t CO em revenue 20.83 22.56 26.08 Total t CO em revenue 24.57 26.51 30.62 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC practices are shared across the Group.
Our GHG emissions calculations and reporting follows the Greenhouse Gas Protocol operational approach and cover emissions from all sources under our control grouped under Scope 1  direct GHG emissions from owned assets and Scope 2  GHG emissions from supplied electricity.
Emissions from company vehicles production processes and fugitive sources are small and not deemed to be material and as such are not included in reported totals.
Workplace health and safety Our people are our most important asset and we are committed to protecting their health safety and wellbeing and delivering a culture of zero harm.
To achieve this we are rolling out a series of Groupwide initiatives that drive continual improvements in our safety culture and shape our behaviours while reducing exposure to risks.
We monitor various leading and lagging measures for health and safety.
Safety
Leading Indicator Activities assess initiatives undertaken by sites to improve performance and are established as a company KPI.
We also monitor the Recordable Incident Rate RIR and Lost Time Incident Rate LTIR across the Group measured per 100 employees per year.
Since 2004 we have cut our RIR from 4.6 to 0.36 achieving our lowest RIR in FY2017.
Our LTIR increased slightly to 0.16 in FY2017.
FY2018 priorities Continue to improve our safety performance and draw ever closer to our target of zero injuries Develop a new set of environmental goals for our next commitment period WORKPL ACE HEALTH AND SAFET Y FY2017 FY2016 FY2015 Recordable incident rate Where employees require medical attention beyond first aid per 100 employees per year 0.36 0.47 0.55 Lost time incident rate Where employee is unable to work the day following an incident per 100 employees per year 0.16 0.14 0.22 RECORDABLE INCIDENT RATE PER 100 EMPLOYEES TAKING OWNERSHIP OF HEALTH AND SAFETY With service teams often working in external environments outside our direct control their ability to recognise unsafe conditions and act accordingly is critical.
Smiths Detection has launched a new online training tool and webbasedmobile risk assessment platform thats giving both leadership and field service engineers a better understanding of how to stay safe when working offsite.
We encourage everyone at Smiths to take ownership of both their own health and safety and that of their colleagues and this tool is helping our service teams do just that.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 People are our one truly sustainable source of competitive advantage and critical to our growth strategy.
We are passionate about helping them fulfil their potential so we can reach ours.
Our people strategy is focused on building a learning organisation that attracts retains engages develops and inspires the very best people.
We do this by focusing on four key areas culture leadership and learning reward and recognition and infrastructure.
Culture engagement and communication We are building a culture based on our shared values of integrity respect ownership customer focus and passion and we are doing this through the Smiths Way which we launched in April 2017.
As well as using our shared values to guide our decisions and behaviours we are aligning globally on key initiatives and a shared operating model to make us a bigger better more focused Smiths.
We use regular surveys to measure engagement and gather insights into our employees experience and perceptions.
A new survey  My Say  was launched in FY2017 to encourage an ongoing twoway dialogue across the Group with a refreshed set of questions that better align with our new strategy and culture more granular reporting and increased frequency.
We achieved a participation rate of 82% and an employee engagement score of 71 across the Group in our latest survey.
The data and insights gathered will be used to identify global priorities for FY2018.
Leadership and learning Providing our employees with the best learning and development opportunities is a vital aspect of our people plan.
Line managers and HR professionals work with employees to identify their skills areas for improvement and development opportunities.
These personal development plans form a key part of our annual performance review process.
Competition for talent is increasing so it is essential we can identify and engage with our leaders through worldclass development programmes.
In FY2017 we launched an executive development programme in partnership with UCLA Anderson Executive Education.
The programme currently has two streams leadership and strategy and finance and has been successfully piloted with a cohort of our senior leaders with three further cohorts set to participate in
These programmes challenge and engage our team and enhance their core leadership capabilities.
Reward and recognition Recognising and rewarding our employees in a fair and transparent way ensures that our people feel incentivised to succeed that strong performance is recognised and that individuals are differentiated based on abilities and results.
To reinforce this a global grading project is being rolledout to help identify distinct career paths for all employees.
Initially
During the year we introduced new incentive plans for some of our employees that align individual objectives with the delivery of our growth strategy such as Smiths Excellence System and sales targets.
Incentive plans are adapted each year as specific focus areas change.
Diversity and inclusion Respect is one of our core values and we aim to provide an inclusive collaborative culture where respecting diversity is woven into everything we do.
We ensure that equal opportunities are practiced when interviewing recruiting and promoting employees with decisions made based on skills and expertise first and foremost.
In FY2017 we introduced a Group Culture and Diversity function to increase our focus on diversity and inclusiveness across the business.
Specific diversityfocused questions were added to the engagement survey and an online training course addressing unconscious bias was piloted across several business functions.
PE O PL E SMITHS EXCELLENCE AWARDS We believe that recognition is broader than reward and compensation and the Smiths Excellence Awards recognise the highest levels of achievement across our six pillars of Excellence as well as outstanding contributions to Health and Safety and our communities.
This year we expanded the programme to celebrate success more widely and further embed Excellence across the business by rolling out a tiered scheme with divisional winners being rolled up into an overarching Group scheme.
The winning teams were celebrated at a gala dinner and received a 1000 contribution to a charity of their choice.
O U R A P P R O A C H T O R E S P O N S I B L E B U S I N E S S C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
DIVERSIT Y PERFORMANCE Male Female Total Board of directors 7 2 9 Senior managers 218 36 254 Employees total 13600 8300 21900 Senior managers are as defined by the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013 which includes employees who have responsibility for planning directing or controlling the activities of the Group or a strategically significant part of the Group other than Board members andor who are directors of subsidiary undertakings.
We are committed to broadening the diversity of our workforce and are developing programmes such as our global Womens Leadership Network that increase the diversity of candidates for senior positions.
At the end of FY2017 38% of our global workforce and 14% of our senior managers were women.
In addition two of our Board directors are women representing 22% of the Board as at 31 July 2017.
It is our policy to provide equal employment opportunities.
The Group recruits selects and promotes employees on the basis of their qualifications skills aptitude and attitude.
In employmentrelated decisions we comply with all applicable antidiscrimination requirements in the relevant jurisdictions.
People with disabilities are given full consideration for employment and subsequent training including retraining if needed for people who have become disabled career development and promotion on the basis of their aptitudes and abilities.
We endeavour to find appropriate alternative jobs for those who are unable to continue in their existing job because of disability.
We believe all our employees should be treated with respect and dignity.
Accordingly any harassment or bullying is unacceptable.
The Group respects the right of each employee to join or not to join a trade union or other bona fide employee representative organisation.
FY2018 priorities Continue to embed the Smiths Way of working including our shared values Integrate workforce planning with talent development to ensure we develop the right people to drive our strategy Develop and implement our unique employer brand to help attract and retain the best talent Continue the rollout of our global jobgrading programme to support the creation of new job opportunities career paths and aligned remuneration across Smiths IMPROVING MOTIVATION ON THE SHOP FLOOR Recognising the key role supervisors play in employee engagement and operational performance John Crane launched a Supervisor Development Programme in Bangalore India.
By building the knowledge and skillset of site supervisors the programme has increased motivation and engagement among shop floor production teams as well as creating a new passion for learning.
Sathishbabu Palani Continuous Improvement Manager at John Crane said The scheme has been really successful  its enabling our people to become better coaches to their teams and ultimately improve safety productivity and team engagement.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 O U R R E S P O N S IB L E B U S INE S S C O N T I N U E D PROTECTING PEOPLE FROM DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES The threat of fentanyl a highly dangerous pain relief drug that can be absorbed through the skin is on the rise and Smiths Detection has adapted its leadingedge technology to detect and identify it  helping protect the security and health professionals coming into contact with this dangerous substance in emergency situations.
And the ReachBackID 247 hotline service has been enhanced so first responders using our products in the field can speak directly to PhD scientists to help them better analyse situations and reduce risk.
PROTECTING THE EN V IRONMEN T John Cranes noncontacting gas seal technology has been helping to protect the environment for nearly 40 years.
This innovation helped slash methane emissions from centrifugal compressor shaft seals by a factor of 10  helping natural gas processing and transmission companies reduce their carbon footprint across the world.
Gas Seal technology is now the de facto standard on new equipment and can be readily retrofit into most existing equipment in the field.
Many of our solutions play a mission critical role in our customers operations and ensuring consistently high standards of quality and safety through their manufacture distribution and end use is essential to our reputation and longterm success.
The Smiths Excellence System drives our approach to quality both within Smiths operations and throughout our supply chain ensuring consistent best practice across the business.
We are also committed to using materials that are ethically and safely sourced.
Where possible we look for ways to design out or replace less sustainable materials and chemicals used in our manufacturing processes with more sustainable alternatives.
Technological differentiation is critical to outperforming in our chosen markets on a sustainable basis and innovation is a key part of our growth strategy.
Our New Product Introduction process assesses the current and future needs of customers and considers health safety security and environmental outcomes when determining and developing the solutions that make up the pipeline.
P R OD U C T S By developing leadingedge missioncritical solutions we help to drive safety security health productivity reliability connectivity and progress around the world every day.
Our solutions enable customers to operate in safe efficient and environmentally friendly ways and we ensure that our products meet the highest standards of quality and safety.
From Smiths Medicals products which are vital to patient care globally and Smiths Detections security scanners which play a vital role in enhancing security around the world to John Cranes seals which help its customers reduce their environmental impact  we provide innovative solutions to some of the worlds toughest challenges.
INVESTMENT IN NEW PRODUCT D E V EL O P M EN T 150M Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 STRA TEGIC
C O MM U NI T IE S COMMUNITY GIVING IN COSTA RICA The team at Smiths Interconnect Costa Rica ran a wideranging community programme during the year.
The team supported projects ranging from sponsoring a shelter for atrisk teenagers and young mothers providing food clothing and baby supplies  as well as helping with building repairs and maintenance through to a reforestation project in the local national park.
The team of volunteers showed real passion for the initiative and were recognised at our 2017 Smiths Excellence Awards as an outstanding example of supporting local communities where we operate.
FUNDING FOR CLEAN WATER Clean water is in short supply in many parts of the world.
In the developing nations people have to walk around 5km each day to collect water thats often dirty and contaminated.
To help raise funds for clean water Smiths Medical organised a global sponsored water walk across its sites.
In total more than 1800 employees from 26 sites took part in 5km walks.
Together they walked 10000km donated 25000 litres of water through water collection drives and raised money for the Red Cross and other charities.
Supporting the communities in which we operate helps drive prosperity locally  providing jobs boosting the economy and supporting local initiatives  as well as enhancing both employee engagement and our reputation as an employer.
Given the diversity of our business we manage our community relationships and charitable programmes at a local level so each business can focus on its own markets and communities.
We also offer Grouplevel support to charities and organisations that can show how a donation will increase the wellbeing of people through improvements to their education health welfare or environment.
In FY2017 the Group made charitable donations of 348000.
In addition our employees donated and raised money for a number of good causes through a range of fundraising initiatives across the business.
Our global footprint means we generate financial value for a wide range of communities.
As well as paying wages and benefits to our c. purchase of local goods and services.
We encourage our people to get involved in their local communities as it promotes employee engagement and builds a sense of pride in our business.
We celebrate the best of these initiatives through our Excellence Awards scheme.
The ten winning teams from across our Excellence pillars also receive 1000 to donate to a charity of their choice.
Strategic report The Strategic report was approved by the Board on 21 September 2017.
By order of the Board ANDY REYNOLDS SMITH CHIEF EXECUTIVE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 G O V E R NAN C E Board of Directors 78 Corporate governance statement 82 Directors remuneration report 103 Directors report 121 GOVERNANCE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 77 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 B O A R D O F DI R E C T O R S SIR GEORGE BUCK L E Y C H AI R MAN A NDY RE Y NOLDS SMITH CHIEF E X ECU T I V E BIL L SEEGER IN T ERIM CHIEF F INANCIAL OF F ICER
1 August 2013 nonexecutive director and Deputy Chairman 19 November 2013 Chairman Relevant skills and experience Sir George was Chairman President and CEO of 3M a USbased global technology company until 2012 and he brings his extensive experience of large global multiindustry businesses to the Board.
Sir
George has a PhD in Electrical Engineering and spent most of his long and successful career in the US including as Chairman and CEO of Brunswick Corporation and President of Mercury Marine.
His previous experience also includes Chief Technology Officer for appliances motors and controls at Emerson Electric Company.
Sir Georges track record in strategic transformation engineering and innovation are invaluable to the Group and support his effective Chairmanship of the Board.
Other significant appointments Stanley Black and Decker Inc.
Chairman
Hitachi Ltd.
PepsiCo Inc.
Appointed
25 September 2015 Relevant skills and experience Andy has extensive experience in driving business strategy technological innovation and operational excellence.
Before joining Smiths Group he was CEO of GKN Automotive serving on the Board since 2007.
Andy joined GKN in 2002 and held several senior positions across the Group including leading the Driveline Powder Metallurgy and Land Systems divisions.
In previous roles Andy was Managing Director Europe for Ingersoll Rands Bearings and Components business Vice President International Operations at Invensys and UK Country Director and Global Customer Director Japan for Delphi Automotive Systems.
His past experience includes Chairman of the CBI Manufacturing Council membership of HM Governments Ministerial Advisory Group for Manufacturing and Green Economy Council and as nonexecutive director of Morgan Advanced Materials plc.
Appointed
12 May 2014 nonexecutive director 19 May 2017 Interim Chief Financial Officer Relevant skills and experience Bill has an established career in finance in the engineering sector in addition to an indepth knowledge of global markets long term contracts and strategy execution supporting his effective contribution to the work of the Board.
Bill has an MBA and a BA in Economics and was previously Chief Financial Officer at GKN plc retiring in 2014.
Prior to his role at GKN Bill held a number of senior finance posts during a 28year career with TRW a USbased automotive and aerospace group.
Bill chaired the Smiths Group Audit Committee for almost three years and was well placed to assume the role of Interim Chief Financial Officer in May 2017.
Bill stepped down as Chair of the Audit Committee following this appointment.
Other significant appointments Spectris plc nonexecutive director Committee membership Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE BRUNO A NGEL ICI N ONE X E CU T I V E DI R E C T OR TA N YA F R AT TO N ONE X E CU T I V E DI R E C T OR
1 July 2010 Relevant skills and experience Bruno has an MBA from Kellogg School of Management and has held senior management roles in global medical device and pharmaceutical companies throughout his career.
Bruno has extensive international experience including at Baxter a USbased global supplier of medical devices.
At AstraZeneca he held the role of Executive Vice President International and was responsible for Europe Japan Asia Pacific Latin America Middle East and Africa.
Bruno provides the Board with valuable global experience of both the medical device and pharmaceutical industries.
Other significant appointments Vectura Group plc Chairman Wolters Kluwer nv Supervisory Board member
1 July 2012 Relevant skills and experience Tanya has a BSc in Electrical Engineering and her executive career includes 20 years at GE.
She brings knowledge of manufacturing and operations to the Board in addition to experience of sales and marketing across a range of sectors.
Most recently she was CEO of Diamond Innovations Inc. products for the material removal industry.
In 2017 Tanya was appointed nonexecutive director at Mondi Group an international packaging and paper business and her exposure to a global industrial company further strengthens the contribution she makes to the Smiths Group Board.
Other significant appointments Advanced Drainage Systems Inc.
Ashtead Group plc nonexecutive director Committee membership key Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Denotes Chair of the Committee Committee membership Committee membership Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 B O A R D O F DI R E C T O R S A NNE QUINN CBE N ONE X E CU T I V E DI R E C T OR MARK SEL IGMAN N ONE X E CU T I V E DI R E C T OR NOEL TATA N ONE X E CU T I V E DI R E C T OR
1 August 2009 Relevant skills and experience Anne has extensive global experience in the oil and gas sector enjoying a 25year career with Standard Oil of Ohio and BP.
Anne has a BCom from Auckland University and an MSc in Management Science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
At BP she held a number of executive positions including Group Vice President in the US UK Belgium and Colombia.
Following her career at BP Anne was Managing Director of Riverstone LLP an energy private equity group.
Annes experience and knowledge of the oil and gas industry is particularly valuable when the Board is debating strategy for John Crane as a provider of products and services to global energy services customers.
Anne also brings extensive experience as chair of remuneration committees.
Appointed
16 May 2016 Relevant skills and experience Mark is a Chartered Accountant and has an MA in Philosophy Politics and Economics.
Mark was previously Chairman of UK Investment Banking for Credit Suisse and his career in investment banking brings a deep understanding of investment strategy and corporate finance to the Board.
Mark has nonexecutive experience serving on Audit Committees which has been valuable to the Board in 2017 as he has been appointed Chair of the Audit Committee following Bill Seegers appointment as Interim Chief Financial Officer.
Other significant appointments Kingfisher plc Senior Independent
Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc nonexecutive director Panel on Takeovers and Mergers Alternate Member
1 January 2017 Relevant skills and experience Noel has a BA in Economics and is currently Managing Director of Tata International Limited a global trading and distribution company and a trading arm of the Tata Group the privately owned multinational holding company headquartered in Mumbai India.
Noel has a successful career in global business and his executive role within the Tata Group of companies provides him with current contacts and experience in high growth economies including Asia and Africa which is valuable as the Smiths Group continues to grow in these regions.
Other significant appointments Tata Investment Corporation Chairman Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd non executive director Trent Ltd nonexecutive director Titan Company Ltd nonexecutive director Voltas Ltd nonexecutive director Listed on the Bombay and Indian National Stock
Committee membership Committee membership Committee membership Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE SIR K E V IN T EBBI T KCB CM G SENIOR INDEPENDEN T DI R E C T OR MEL RO W L A NDS COMPA N Y SECRE TA R Y A ND DEP U T Y GROUP GENER A L COUNSEL
14 June 2006 nonexecutive director 17 November 2015 Senior Independent Director Relevant skills and experience Sir Kevin brings considerable experience in the security and defence sectors to the Board as well as his expertise and depth of knowledge of Government.
This is particularly important when the Board considers Smiths Detection.
Sir Kevin has a BA in History and over his career has held posts in the Ministry of Defence MoD the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and NATO.
His roles have included Defence and European Counsellor at the British Embassy in Washington Director of Government Communications Headquarters GCHQ and Permanent Under Secretary at the MoD.
Other significant appointments Executive Vice President AECOM UK Government and Defence Institute of Security Science and Technology Imperial College London Advisory Board Member
29 May 2015 Relevant skills and experience Mel holds an MA in Law from Oxford University and is a qualified solicitor.
She joined Smiths in 2013 having previously held senior roles in BG Group plc and Linde AG.
Most recently she was the General Counsel of British Gas and Legal and HR Director of Edwards Group.
Committee membership key Audit Committee Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Denotes Chair of the Committee Additional biographical information for each of the directors can be found online at site Committee membership Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C O R P O R AT E G O V ER N A N C E S TAT E MEN T C HA IR MA NS IN T R O D U C T I O N SIR GEORGE BUCKLEY
During 2017 the Smiths leadership team have continued on the path of building our new future.
Elsewhere in this Annual Report you will read about our story how we are creating a more vibrant faster growing and innovative company and how this will benefit our investors employees and other stakeholders alike.
In this Corporate Governance Review you will read about the part your Smiths Board of Directors has played during the year and our plans for the future.
The building blocks of any great company include ensuring there is a strong framework of company governance.
This should never be done with a tick box mindset it needs to be engaged thoughtful and effective.
Boards need to take the lead to set a positive culture and to make sure that good governance forms a firm foundation for decision making throughout the company.
The Smiths Way was launched in 2017 and this framework provides our shared set of values a common approach to strategy and a commitment to excellence across all our businesses.
Our ambition for Smiths is one with innovation and growth in its DNA but also where colleagues act with integrity and respect towards each other and keep each other safe.
It is often said that the true test of integrity is that you do the right thing  even when no one is watching and I can assure you that the Board gives a great deal of focus to corporate governance in its widest and deepest sense.
The
Audit Committee reviewed the Groups ethics and compliance programme during the year which has led to a number of significant improvements.
We also strengthened our antislavery compliance programme and published an updated Smiths Modern Slavery Statement which affirms our commitment not to tolerate this in any part of our business or supply chain.
Another fundamental and vital building block is people.
The
Nomination Committee of the Board sponsored the new Group wide process for talent and succession planning across Smiths and we continue to work to achieve an appropriate balance of experience skills domain knowledge and background in both the Boardroom and at senior leadership levels of the Group.
We are mindful of the reports from Sir Philip Hampton and the late Dame Helen Alexander and from Sir John Parker in the areas of women in leadership positions and ethnic diversity respectively and are committed to staffing diverse Board and senior leadership teams.
We firmly believe that diversity improves our performance as it produces better ideas.
Board succession and composition continues to be a priority for the Board and I was delighted that Noel Tata was appointed to the Board as an additional nonexecutive director in January 2017.
Noel brings a very valuable and distinct contribution to Smiths with his current experience and connections in those economies where we are focusing on higher levels of growth.
In May 2017 Chris OShea stepped down as Chief Financial Officer to pursue his career outside the Group.
I was delighted that Bill Seeger agreed to take on the role of Interim Chief Financial Officer whilst we carried out a search for a replacement.
I was also delighted that Mark Seligman agreed to take on a key nonexecutive role as Audit Committee Chair.
I am personally grateful to Bill and to Mark and to Anne Quinn as Chair of the Remuneration Committee for all the support they have shown to me and to Andy over recent months.
As further detailed in its report the Nomination Committee continues to keep Board composition and succession plans under regular review but with an eye to maintaining a good measure of stability and continuity during a time of significant change for the Group.
As Chairman I am responsible for leading an effective Board and I am pleased to report that your Board has been effective during the year.
Details of the annual appraisal process and the actions and improvements that we agreed to drive through 2017 are set out on pages 89 and 90 of this Report.
I want to take this opportunity to record my thanks to all members of the Board for their hard work and support throughout the year.
I hope you find this report interesting and enlightening as it details the work the Board and its Committees have carried out on your behalf during the year.
I strongly urge you to attend this years shareholders Annual General Meeting and take the opportunity to engage with us in person.
SIR GEORGE BUCKLEY CHAIRMAN Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE UK Corporate Governance Code the Code As the Company is listed on the London Stock Exchange we comply with the Code.
A copy of the Code published in 2016 and applying to financial years beginning on or after 17 June 2016 can be found at www. rc.
31 July 2017 and at the date of this report we applied the main principles and complied with the provisions of the Code.
B O A R D S TAT E M E N T S Requirement Board Statement Where to find further information Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code For the year ended 31 July 2017 and at the date of this report the Company has been in full compliance with the 2016 UK Corporate Governance Code.
Page 83 Going concern basis of accounting The directors continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual accounts of the Company and the Group.
Page 124 Viability statement The directors have assessed the longerterm prospects of the Group and they have a reasonable expectation the Group will remain viable for the period being assessed and will continue to operate and meet its liabilities as they fall due.
Page 57 Robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group The Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
Page 93 Annual review of systems of risk management and internal control The Audit Committee on behalf of the Board monitored reviewed and assessed the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems.
Page 93 Fair balanced and understandable The Board considers the 2017 Annual Report to present a fair balanced and understandable overview of the Groups position and performance.
Page 97 Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules This corporate governance statement is incorporated into the Directors Report by reference and is compliant with the corporate governance statement requirements of the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C O R P O R AT E G O V E R N A N C E S TAT E M E N T C O N T I N U E D B OA R D AC T I V I T IE S DURIN G F Y 2 017 Principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code Activity in FY2017 Leadership  Held a Board strategy week to set Smiths vision for five years Oversight of MandA including acquisition of Morpho Detection and its integration with Smiths Detection Board members attended Smiths Global Leadership Conference at UCLA Sponsored the launch of the Smiths Way culture and values for the Group Nomination Committee sponsored a new Groupwide process for talent succession and strategic workforce planning Effectiveness  Actioned the Board evaluation improvements Appointed a new nonexecutive director Noel Tata Reviewed the Board skills matrix and discussed succession planning for the Board Search for a new Chief Financial Officer Accountability  Held a riskfocused Audit Committee meeting Agreed the Audit Tender timetable Added cyber security to the Audit Committee terms of reference Reviewed the financial statements to ensure they are fair balanced and understandable Monitored the work programme for managing modern slavery risks in the Groups business and supply chain and approved the updated Smiths Modern Slavery Statement Remuneration  Considered and approved annual incentive plan payouts and set targets for the new financial year Approved the salary proposal for the Chief Executive members of the Executive Committee and reviewed fees for the Chairman Determined Chris OSheas arrangements on stepping down from the Board and agreed Bill Seegers package for assuming the role of Interim Chief Financial Officer Relations with shareholders  Held the 2016 AGM Met with shareholders and brokers regarding director changes Sponsored and reviewed the 2017 investor survey Held a number of investor roadshows and conferences Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE The Board of directors is collectively responsible for ensuring the longterm success of Smiths.
This includes reviewing and approving strategy in order to create sustainable value for the shareholders as well as setting the Companys culture and values.
This is underpinned by a strong framework of good governance including the Boards responsibility for setting risk appetite.
Governance structure In order to fulfil their collective responsibility effectively the Board of directors has established the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
Each Committee has authority delegated to it by the Board and their responsibilities activities and membership are described in this corporate governance statement.
The full terms of reference for each Board Committee have been approved by the Board and are available online at site L E A D E R S HI P There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Board and the Executive Committee and senior management who are responsible for the daytoday management of the business including the execution of strategy set by the Board.
The role of the Board The directors are responsible for the longterm success of the Group and in order to retain control over decisionmaking there is a formal schedule of matters which have been reserved for the decision of the Board as opposed to those matters that are delegated to management.
These matters include approval of the following Group strategy business plans and budgets halfyearly financial reports and the Annual Report and Accounts acquisition or divestment of significant companies or businesses remuneration policy for directors and other senior executives changes to the structure size and composition of the Board the issuance of Smiths Group plc shares In addition to the above there are a number of functional committees which include the Environmental Health and Safety Steering Committee i Smiths innovation forum and the Business Ethics Council.
GOVERNANCE MODEL Board and Board Committees Executive Management structure
Responsible for ensuring the Groups longterm success by creating sustainable shareholder value.
EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE
Develops and recommends strategy to the Board recommends budgets and plans to the Board executes strategy and drives performance to budget and plans.
INVESTMENT
COMMITTEE
Assesses highvalue and highrisk proposals capital expenditure asset disposal and special revenue expenditure projects that will require Board or Chief Executive approval.
DISCLOSURE
COMMITTEE
Advises the Chief Executive and the Board in accordance with the Disclosure Policy.
Makes recommendations concerning the identification of inside information and the timing and method of disclosure.
ACQUISITIONS AND
COMMITTEE
Approves mergers acquisitions disposals and joint ventures within the parameters delegated by
NOMINATION COMMITTEE Reviews and makes recommendations to the Board on the structure size and composition of the Board and Board Committees and succession planning for directors and senior management.
See page 91 for more information REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Makes recommendations to the Board on the remuneration framework including the remuneration of the Chairman executive directors and senior management.
See page 103 for more information AUDIT COMMITTEE Monitors the integrity of financial statements risk management and internal control systems and internal and external audit.
See page 94 for more information Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Only the Board has the authority to approve any changes to the formal matters reserved for its decisionmaking.
The full list was reviewed in July 2017 and can be found online at site To ensure that they continue to operate effectively the directors have at least six formal Board meetings a year.
Board meeting agendas have been reshaped during the year to include more time to focus on the long term and less on backwardlooking financial information and performance.
Board agendas include a review of elements of the Group strategy and its execution at each meeting in addition to the meetings focused on strategy which take place in May each year.
Regular matters for review by the Board including the Groups financial performance divisional business plans and progress against them budgets mergers and acquisitions material investments large projects the people plan and possible threats to the business are all considered by the Board under the framework of the agreed strategy.
The Board also assesses the implementation of strategy within a framework of prudent and effective controls a key part of ongoing risk management is ensuring that the strategy in place remains fit for purpose.
The Board is responsible for steering our culture and our shared values of integrity ownership respect customer focus and passion.
The Board sets the tone from the top and oversees key programmes including ethics and compliance health and safety and our people plan.
In 2017 the Board supported the launch of the Smiths Way a shared way of working that includes our values operating model and strategy.
As part of this we celebrate the best examples of excellence in Smiths with our annual Excellence Awards and members of the Board attended the gala dinner for winners in April 2017.
Division of responsibilities While the Board is collectively responsible for the success of the Group there is a clear division of responsibilities between running the Board and the executive responsibility for running the business.
The Board recognises the importance of ensuring that no one individual should have unfettered powers of decisionmaking and has clearly defined roles for the Chairman and the Chief Executive which have been agreed by the Board.
A summary of the responsibilities of the Board are identified in the adjacent table.
In order to fulfil his role effectively the Chief Executive is supported by the Executive Committee.
The Committee normally meets once a month and includes the five divisional Presidents the Asia President and the functional heads.
The Committees responsibilities include ensuring the Groups continued financial performance daytoday management of the Companys business and the implementation and delivery of the strategy set by the Board.
Chairman
Responsibilities include leading the Board including ensuring constructive relations between executive and nonexecutive directors the Boards continued effectiveness and integrity promoting high standards of corporate governance ensuring effective communication with shareholders Chief Executive Responsibilities include developing and recommending strategy to the Board setting and embedding an appropriate culture for the Group and communicating the tone from the top with a focus on ethical behaviour and health and safety leading the Executive Committee ensuring strategic and financial objectives and business KPIs are met effectively managing stakeholders including shareholders customers and employees Senior Independent Director Responsibilities include acting as a sounding board for the Chairman being available to shareholders where their concerns cannot be resolved by the Chairman or executive management if necessary acting as an intermediary for directors Nonexecutive directors Responsibilities include helping to formulate strategy providing constructive challenge in Board discussions assessing whether the systems of internal control and risk management are sufficiently robust as members of the Board Committees fulfilling the responsibilities of those Committees set out in their terms of reference Company Secretary Responsibilities include maintaining the Groups governance framework and advising on matters of governance and legislative and regulatory developments ensuring that the directors are provided with all relevant information in a timely manner facilitating new director inductions and ongoing director training L E A D E R S HIP C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Chairman 1 11% Executive directors 2 22% Nonexecutive directors 6 67% EXECUTIVE BALANCE This includes Bill Seeger Chief Financial Officer Female 2 22% Male 7 78% GENDER BALANCE 12 years 3 33% 35 years 2 22% Over 5 years 4 45% TENURE OF THE BOARD UK 4 45% New Zealand 1 11% France 1 11% India 1 11% US 2 22% NATIONALITY BALANCE EF F E C T I V EN E S S Board composition The Board composition as at 22 September 2017 is detailed in the attendance table on page 88 and the relevant skills and experience each director brings to the Board are described in their biographies on pages 78 to 81.
In order to operate effectively the Board and its Committees must be comprised of a suitable balance of tenure skills experience knowledge and independence.
The Board and the Nomination Committee keep this under regular review and in 2017 concluded that the range of experience and diversity of skills has allowed the Board to effectively discharge its duties and responsibilities.
Diversity
The directors believe that a mix of experience interests and personalities ensures the effective functioning of a Board in which the dialogue is both challenging and constructive.
The Board currently has no quota in place to achieve diversity.
The diagrams below illustrate the independence of the Board and also its composition and balance as at 22 September 2017.
In particular the tenure of longer standing Board members and more recent appointments ensuring both continuity and fresh perspectives and the diversity in gender and nationality on the Board.
Time commitment Each of the directors must be able to allocate sufficient time to the work of the Board in order to discharge their responsibilities effectively.
The current directorships in listed companies and other significant commitments of the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors are shown on pages 78 to 81.
Ahead of his appointment as nonexecutive director in January 2017 the Board assessed Noel Tatas other commitments and agreed that as many of his other appointments are as part of his employment in the Tata Group he is able to commit sufficient time to the work of the Smiths Board.
The Board considers the external appointments of each of the directors twice yearly and for 2017 it is confirmed that the Chairman and the nonexecutive directors have sufficient time to fulfil their commitments to Smiths and that no executive director holds more than one nonexecutive directorship of another FTSE 100 company.
Independence
As identified in the table on page 88 over the financial year at least half of the Board members excluding the Chairman were independent nonexecutive directors.
Sir George Buckley was considered to be independent on appointment as Chairman.
The
Board keeps the independence of its members under continued review and in July 2017 the Nomination Committee assessed the independence of each of the nonexecutive directors and concluded that all of them were independent.
More information on the work of the Board regarding succession planning and director tenure can be found in the Report of the Nomination Committee on page 92.
Specific points for Board consideration over the past financial year are set out below Bill Seeger Following his appointment as Interim Chief Financial Officer Bill Seeger is no longer considered an independent nonexecutive director.
A search for a new Chief Financial Officer is underway and the Board expects Bill Seegers appointment to be for a short period.
When a new Chief Financial Officer is appointed Bill Seeger will resume his role as a nonexecutive director and the Board will review his independence in light of the guidance in the UK Corporate Governance Code and criteria for independence determined by the Board.
Sir Kevin Tebbit As Sir Kevin Tebbit has served on the Board for 11 years a rigorous review of his performance was undertaken.
The Board concluded that Sir Kevin continues to demonstrate the qualities of objectivity and independence and to contribute to constructive challenge and debate at meetings and therefore should continue as Senior Independent Director.
Through a year of significant change on the Board Sir Kevin fulfilled an important role supporting the Chairman and making himself available to investors and the other directors.
Conflicts of interest Directors must avoid situations where they have a direct or indirect interest that conflicts or may possibly conflict with the Companys interests.
The Companys Articles of Association allow the Board to authorise conflicts and potential conflicts where appropriate and there are procedures in place for directors to report any potential or actual conflicts to the other members of the Board for their authorisation.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 A Register of Conflicts and Potential Conflicts is maintained by the Company Secretary and the directors are advised of the requirement to seek Board approval for any new situations which may present a conflict as they arise.
In September and March the Board formally reviews the Conflicts Register considering the conflicts disclosed and authorisations given including any conditions determined by the
In the past financial year there was a temporary crossdirectorship when Tanya Fratto joined the Mondi Group Board on 1 January 2017 as Anne Quinn was a serving nonexecutive director.
The Smiths Board did not consider this crossdirectorship a conflict of interest or an independence issue as neither director held an executive position on the Mondi Board.
Anne Quinn retired from the Mondi Board on 11 May 2017.
Board meetings and visits The table below shows the directors attendance at Board meetings held during the financial year ended 31 July 2017.
In order to discharge their responsibilities effectively all directors should be able to allocate sufficient time to Smiths and the table discloses the number of meetings that each director attended out of those that each was eligible to attend.
Board meeting attendance Role Independent Attended
Current directors Sir George Buckley Chairman 7 7 Andy Reynolds Smith Chief Executive 7 7 Bill Seeger Interim Chief Financial Officer 7 7 Bruno Angelici Nonexecutive director  7 7 Tanya Fratto Nonexecutive director  7 7 Anne Quinn Nonexecutive director  7 7 Mark Seligman Nonexecutive director  7 7 Noel Tata Nonexecutive director  3 4 Sir Kevin Tebbit Senior Independent Director and nonexecutive director  7 7 Former director Chris OShea Former Chief Financial Officer 5 6 1 Noel Tata was unable to attend one meeting due to a prior commitment arranged before he joined the Board 2 Chris OShea did not attend a meeting at which his retirement from the Board as Chief Financial Officer was on the agenda The directors attend additional meetings outside the formal meeting schedule as well as making site visits to the various global divisions.
To ensure that the Board is kept up to date with senior management priorities and challenges and in order to gauge the culture embedded within the business invitations to Board meetings are regularly extended to divisional presidents business managers heads of functions and external advisers.
During the year the Board had a number of opportunities to meet and hear from Smiths employees including at Board dinners and during Board and individual director visits to sites.
To ensure the continued effectiveness of the Board and to allow different members to fulfil their separate responsibilities after each Board meeting the Chairman meets the nonexecutive directors without the executive directors present.
He also has separate meetings with the Senior Independent Director and the Chairs of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
In addition the Senior Independent Director meets the other nonexecutive directors without the Chairman present at least annually.
BOARD VISIT TO SMITHS DETECTION SITE NEWARK USA In 2017 the directors travelled to Palo Alto USA.
Their itinerary included visiting the Smiths Detection Site formerly Morpho Detection in Newark San Francisco where they spent time with the senior management team and met other employees informally.
In addition they toured the sites operations and were given presentations on a number of matters including the integration of the legacy Morpho Detection business with the Smiths Detection business the Morpho business and its products customers and financial performance.
EF F E C T I V EN E S S C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Appointments to the Board The Nomination Committee has a formal rigorous and transparent process in place for the appointment of new directors to the Board.
Appointments are made based on the merit of the individual having due regard for the benefits of diversity in its broadest sense including gender ethnicity nationality age and experience.
Matters considered by the Board prior to all appointments include the following agreed Group strategy the Board skills matrix satisfaction that the director is able to allocate sufficient time to their responsibilities to Smiths and existing succession plans.
Following their appointment to the Board directors undergo an induction programme to ensure that they have the necessary knowledge and understanding of the Group to contribute to Board discussion and decisionmaking.
Each directors individual experience and background is taken into account and a programme is developed which is tailored to their own requirements.
This will include meeting senior individuals in the business receiving copies of previous Board papers and visits to operational sites.
The appointment of Noel Tata was approved in 2016 and he joined the Board on 1 January 2017.
More information about his appointment process can be found in the Report of the Nomination Committee on page 92.
Information and training provided to the Board In addition to the induction programme for new directors the Board recognises the importance of ongoing training and directors are given the opportunity to continue to update their skills and knowledge on a regular basis throughout their time on the Board.
Ongoing training includes receiving twiceyearly governance briefings and technical updates on regulatory developments.
The Board is regularly presented with updates from each of the divisions to ensure the directors remain aware of their priorities and challenges and the Board committees are provided with relevant material by external advisers.
The suitability of external courses is kept under review by the Company Secretary who ensures that these are sent to Board members regularly.
Following feedback from the Board evaluation in FY2016 a number of improvements were made to the quality and timeliness of information received by the directors.
Clearer guidance and procedures have been put in place to ensure that information received is presented in an appropriate format and contains the level of detail required for directors to fulfil their responsibilities effectively.
The Company Secretary and her team assist the Chairman and Chief Executive in ensuring that the Board is provided with all relevant information in a timely manner.
Advice and insurance All directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary and a procedure is in place for them to take independent professional advice at the Groups expense should this be required.
The directors and officers of the Smiths Group and its subsidiaries have the benefit of a directors and officers liability insurance policy.
Reelection
It is Company practice for all directors to stand for shareholder election at the first Annual General Meeting AGM following their appointment.
In addition the Board has resolved that all directors who are willing to continue in office will stand for annual reelection by the shareholders at each AGM.
Nonexecutive directors are appointed for a specified term of three years subject to annual reelection at the AGM and reappointment for a second threeyear term is not automatic.
At the 2017 AGM the shareholders will be asked to approve a change to the Companys Articles of Association to reflect the annual reelection of directors.
Any term for a nonexecutive director beyond six years is subject to a particularly rigorous review.
The Chairman has confirmed that following the performance reviews undertaken in 2017 the performance of each of the directors standing for reelection at this years AGM continues to be effective and that they each continue to demonstrate commitment to their respective roles and dedicate the time necessary to perform their duties.
Board performance evaluation The Board undertakes an annual evaluation of its own performance as well as that of its committees and directors.
The appraisal process provides an opportunity for Board members to take a step back from the daytoday board business and consider the Boards effectiveness and to identify areas for further development and find any ways of working more efficiently.
In accordance with the Code an external evaluation is carried out every three years.
Sheena Crane carried out an external review of the Board for FY2015.
Sheena Crane is independent to the Company and to the directors.
For FY2016 the Board conducted a review with the support of Lintstock Limited Lintstock also provides the software which Smiths uses to manage its insider lists however Lintstock is determined to be independent.
Together with the Chairman and the Company Secretary Lintstock designed a structured set of questionnaires.
The questionnaires focused on areas of specific relevance to Smiths and also checked on progress against matters identified in the previous evaluation.
Topics addressed included the composition of the Board and its committees Board dynamics time management Board support and efficiency the Boards oversight of strategy risk management and internal controls succession planning people issues and priorities for change.
Using online questionnaires Lintstock produced an anonymised report which was presented to the Board for discussion at its meeting in November 2016.
Overall the results were positive and a number of actions were agreed.
Progress made against these actions was reviewed by the Board at its meetings in March and September 2017.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 The Board evaluation for 2017 is underway and is being supported by Lintstock again in order to build on the previous evaluation.
Questionnaires have been provided to the directors and the Company Secretary covering the previous years topics and providing a deeper dive into some key areas.
In addition a number of priorities were identified during the previous evaluation in terms of improving performance of the Board in FY2017 and these have also been addressed in the survey.
Some of the key areas identified and actions taken or underway are set out below.
2017 Board evaluation actions Evaluation topic Actions Board composition Refreshed Board skills matrix to reflect the updated Smiths strategy Held a Board discussion on succession for key nonexecutive director roles Board support and efficiency Improvements made to length focus and clarity of Board papers Strategic oversight and priorities for change Redesigned Board and Board committee agendas to focus more meeting time on key areas of strategy and execution MandA and portfolio changes and innovation and technology Culture people and succession planning Increased Board oversight of people talent and succession planning and strengthened link between strategy and people planning processes Increased opportunities for Board members to meet with senior managers and wider population of Smiths employees Risk Introduced more regular deep dives into ethics and compliance Director evaluation During the year the Chairman provided feedback on the performance of individual Board members in onetoone meetings.
In addition the Senior Independent Director led an evaluation of the Chairmans performance on behalf of the nonexecutive directors.
Details on executive director performance and remuneration are set out on page 113.
Following this it is confirmed that each Director continues to make an effective and valuable contribution to the Board and to demonstrate the required commitment to their role.
EF F E C T I V EN E S S C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE N O MIN AT I O N C O MMI T T E E SIR GEORGE BUCKLEY CHAIRMAN OF THE NOMINATION COMMITTEE Committee membership and meeting attendance Membership and meeting attendance during the year is set out in the table below
Director Attended Eligible to attend Sir George Buckley Chairman 3 3 Bruno Angelici 3 3 Tanya Fratto 3 3 Anne Quinn 3 3 Bill Seeger Mark Seligman 3 3 Noel Tata appointed 1 January 2017 2 2 Sir Kevin Tebbit 3 3 1 Bill Seeger was not a member of the Committee from the date he stepped into the Interim Chief Financial Officer role 19 May 2017.
The Committee holds one scheduled meeting each year when it conducts its annual review of senior management talent and succession plans with a view to ensuring a strong and robust plan exists in all parts of the Group.
Otherwise during the year it meets as and when required.
The Chief Executive is normally invited to attend the Nomination Committee and has attended each of this years meetings.
The
HR Director and the Director of Talent have also attended some meetings in order to advise the Committee.
Role and responsibilities The Nomination Committees terms of reference are available on the website site The Committee leads the process for identifying candidates for appointment as directors of the Company and as its Company Secretary.
It also leads the process for their removal or retirement giving full consideration to succession planning and leadership needs.
It makes recommendations to the Board on the composition of the Nomination Committee and the composition and chairmanship of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
It reviews the structure size and composition of the Board including the balance of skills At the start of the financial year the Nomination Committee refreshed its assessment of Board capability against the fiveyear skills analysis that the Committee had discussed in 2016.
We considered the future profile of the Group from the perspective of end markets geographic focus and strategic priorities.
It was clear that the Board would benefit from an additional non executive director who had a current executive role working in higher growth economies where Smiths is accelerating its growth agenda.
I was delighted that we were able to bring Noel Tata on to our Board from the start of the 2017 calendar year.
As Managing Director of Tata International Limited and a board member of various Tata Group companies he has brought a wealth of market knowledge and makes a distinct contribution to the Board.
In May we announced that Chris OShea was stepping down from the Board to pursue his career outside the Group.
The Nomination Committee was pleased to have Bill Seeger on the Board with his recent experience as a Chief Financial Officer of a FTSE 100 company who agreed to step in as Interim Chief Financial Officer whilst we conducted a search for Chris OSheas successor.
In view of his interim assignment Bill was no longer able to chair the Audit Committee and the Nomination Committee was pleased that Mark Seligman agreed to take on this key nonexecutive role.
Mark is well placed to do this with his finance background and previous experience of chairing audit committees.
This report sets out further details of the work done by the Nomination Committee during the year.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 knowledge and experience and the independence of the non executive directors and makes recommendations to the Board with regard to any changes.
The Committee also holds an annual review of the succession plans and talent pipeline for senior management roles.
In doing this the Committee takes account of the current and future needs challenges and opportunities relating to the Group with knowledge of the strategic and commercial issues affecting Smiths and the markets in which we operate.
The Committee has access to information and advice both from within Smiths and externally at the cost of the Group.
This may include the appointment of recruitment consultants.
The Committee conducts annual reviews of its terms of reference and effectiveness and recommends any changes to the Board.
The annual review of the Committees terms of reference was conducted in July and certain changes were approved with effect from 1 August 2017.
This included ensuring the Committees commitment to considering diverse candidates for appointments including a clear reference to ethnic origin in addition to diversity of gender and experience.
The Committee conducted a review of its performance to ensure compliance with appropriate corporate governance guidelines and obligations and the performance of the Committee was considered as part of the wider Board evaluation process.
It was confirmed that the Committee continues to operate effectively.
The Board continues to support Lord Davies aspiration for female board representation but this presents a particular challenge for a small board.
The Nomination Committee and the Board remain committed to ensuring diversity is included within the remit for appointments to the Board.
This commitment extends to appointments at all levels in Smiths as evidenced by the appointment of a senior leader with responsibility for culture and diversity.
Further information on diversity is provided in the Strategic report.
Committee activities during 2017 The Board commenced the search for a new nonexecutive director in 2016 and following an evaluation of the skills knowledge experience and diversity on the Board the Nomination Committee identified a role profile.
External recruitment consultants were engaged to assist with the search for a candidate with current experience of working in highergrowth regions.
Noel
Tata was appointed as a nonexecutive director of the Company on 1 January 2017 using external search firm Buchanan Harvey and Co.
Independent Director the Remuneration Committee Chair and meetings with the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer.
Buchanan Harvey and Co.
Conduct for executive search firms.
The Committee also considered Noel Tatas experience and commitments elsewhere and was satisfied that he would have time available to discharge his responsibilities effectively.
The terms of his appointment are set out in a formal Letter of Appointment.
Chris OShea stepped down from his role as Chief Financial Officer and as a director of the Company on 19 May 2017 and commenced a period of garden leave.
His exit was overseen by the Nomination
Chris OSheas employment is expected to end on 18 November 2017 but may end at an earlier date on payment in lieu of notice.
Full details are set out in the Directors remuneration report on page 103.
The Nomination Committee considered the succession plan and recommended that an external search process was undertaken and that during this process the Board appoint Bill Seeger as Interim Chief Financial Officer.
In making the recommendation the Committee considered his skills knowledge and experience.
The Committee considered he had excellent credentials to step into this interim role having joined Smiths in May 2014 as a nonexecutive director and having chaired the Companys Audit Committee for almost three years.
In addition he was previously Chief Financial Officer of GKN plc.
The Committee approved the role description for the recruitment of the permanent position of Chief Financial Officer ensuring that the criteria were objective and would enable candidates from a wide range of backgrounds having due regard for the benefits of diversity in its broadest sense.
The Nomination Committee has commenced a search for the replacement Chief Financial Officer using Buchanan Harvey and Co.
In July 2017 the Committee considered the appointment and reappointment of certain members of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees and the appointment of the Chairs of those committees.
It recommended the appointment and reappointment of members and Chairs as set out in more detail in the relevant sections of this report.
In particular the Committee considered and recommended to the Board that Mark Seligman replace Bill Seeger as Chair of the Audit Committee.
The
Committee considered Mark Seligman as having excellent credentials to step into this key nonexecutive role with his finance background and experience of chairing audit committees and having been a member of the Board and Audit Committee for over 12 months.
In July 2017 the Committee met with the Group HR Director and the Director of Talent to carry out its annual review of the Smiths Group talent pipeline and succession planning process.
During
2017 it has sponsored the creation and implementation of a Groupwide process for talent succession and strategic workforce planning which is now being embedded.
The aim is to have a formal rigorous and transparent approach to identifying and developing a talent pipeline with the knowledge skills and potential to fill key business leadership positions in the Company.
Succession planning increases the availability and development opportunities for our talent pipeline which is prepared to assume these roles as they become available.
During the year the Committee received advice from the Company Secretary concerning the corporate governance trends in respect of board evaluation and board succession planning.
The
Committee reviewed the size and composition of the Board and its succession plan in the light of the outcomes of the Board strategy reviews in May 2017 and the future profile of the Group from the perspective of end markets geographic focus and strategic priorities.
Succession planning is seen as a constant requirement.
Over the next two years two nonexecutive Directors Anne Quinn and Bruno Angelici will have completed nine years on the Board and in recognition of the Codes guidance in respect of independence we are looking to establish a pipeline of potential candidates who could succeed them.
As set out on page 87 the independence of Sir Kevin Tebbit is kept under frequent review.
The Committee also reviewed the composition and balance of skills of the Board and has drawn up a succession plan that takes into account the desirability of maintaining a good balance of director tenure and the need to ensure there is a succession for key nonexecutive director roles as well as executive positions.
N O MIN AT I O N C O MMI T T E E C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE A CCO U N T A B I L I T Y Corporate reporting The Board is responsible for promoting the longterm success of the Company and is accountable to the Groups various stakeholders for doing so.
When reporting externally the Board aims to present a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Companys position and prospects and the Board is satisfied that when taken as a whole the 2017 Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Companys position and performance business model and strategy.
During the year the Group has had internal control and risk management arrangements in place to support the financial reporting process requiring the divisions to certify that their reported information gives a true and fair view of the results for the period supporting record keeping to accurately and fairly reflect transactions and the disposal of assets and providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded to permit the preparation of financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS.
For the year ended 31 July 2017 the Audit Committee considered on behalf of the Board the John Crane Inc. asbestos litigation disclosure.
In order to assist with disclosure in the financial statements the Committee received advice from Bates White LLC Economic Consultants regarding the appropriate provisioning for the risk of litigation.
More information including disclosure regarding the FRC Corporate Reporting Review can be found in the Audit Committee report on page 98 Smiths strengthened its antimodern slavery compliance programme.
A new AntiModern Slavery Policy was introduced and the Board approved the Smiths AntiModern Slavery
The Ethics and Compliance team conducted a risk assessment to identify the three greatest modern slavery risk areas in the Smiths business and has since introduced programmes to reduce risk in these areas.
Further detail in relation to our antimodern slavery activities is included in Smiths Modern Slavery and Human Trafficking Statement which is available on the Group website site Internal control and risk management The Board is responsible for determining the nature and extent of the principal risks it is willing to take to achieve its objectives and for ensuring that there are sound risk management and internal control systems in place to safeguard shareholders investments and the Groups assets.
The Boards explanation of the basis on which the Group generates and preserves value over the longer term and its strategy for delivering the Companys objectives can be found in the Strategic report on page 24.
The Board Statements table on page 83 of this corporate governance statement signpost where various director confirmations statements and assessments can be found.
The internal control system is based on an assessment of risk and a framework of control procedures to manage risks and monitor compliance with procedures.
The Groups internal control systems are designed to meet Smiths particular needs and the risks to which it is exposed however they can provide only reasonable not absolute assurance against material loss to the Group or material misstatement in the financial statements.
The Executive Committee is responsible for designing the Enterprise Risk Management ERM system and ensuring it is effectively deployed throughout the Group more detail can be found on page 61.
Over the year ended 31 July 2017 the Audit Committee on behalf of the Board and with the assistance of the Internal Audit function monitored reviewed and assessed the effectiveness of the Groups risk management and internal control systems in the context of the Groups strategy and business model.
The review covered material financial operational and compliance controls.
In 2016 the Audit Committee annual calendar was updated to include an additional meeting in order to facilitate its increased focus on risk management.
This meeting was maintained in the 2017 calendar with the May 2017 Audit Committee meeting.
Each divisional president attended and presented their respective risk register to the Audit Committee which included a risk dashboard the process each division uses to identify and evaluate risk and their internal controls and procedures to mitigate any identified risk.
In addition the Executive Committee selected three principal risks for deep dive reviews at the Audit Committee meeting  a significant ethical breach cyber security and product quality at Smiths Medical  and the owner of each risk attended to discuss the risk with the Board.
The Investment Committee assists the Board with practical risk management meeting approximately 10 times a year to consider highrisk and highvalue proposals that are either beyond the authority delegated to divisional presidents or prior to Board approval.
This can include capital and special revenue expenditure or asset disposals.
By reviewing the details in advance the Investment Committee assesses the risks and reviews investment papers ahead of their presentation to the Board for approval thereby helping to manage the associated risk.
Principal risks During the year the Board carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
In 2017 the Internal Audit function ran a global programme of risk workshops at divisional sites in order to ensure that risk is being identified from the bottom up.
At the workshops local business controls and the likelihood and potential impact of risks were reviewed.
Following this exercise the Executive Committee were presented with a refreshed list of principal risks for the Group and agreed a top 10 to be presented to the Board.
On consideration of the principal risks and uncertainties facing the Group and the actions taken by management to manage those risks the directors then determined the Groups risk appetite and the nature and extent of the risks the Board is willing to take.
The Executive Committee ensures the Boards risk appetite is understood by risk owners and decisionmakers in the business.
A description of the principal risks facing the Company can be found on pages 6267.
The Board takes these into account when considering the Companys viability as set out on page 57.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 A U D IT C O MMIT TE E MARK SELIGMAN CHAIR OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE The 2017 financial year was a busy year for the Audit Committee and I am pleased to share with you an insight into some of the matters the Committee considered.
As a member and then Chair of the Committee I would firstly like to extend my thanks to Bill Seeger.
Bill led the Committee through the majority of the year under review and has helped me settle into the role of Committee Chair whilst maintaining a high degree of professionalism throughout.
I remain confident in the Finance function and that Bill will lead the team in an effective manner until a permanent Chief Financial Officer is appointed.
In addition to reviewing the financial statements and related fiscal matters the Committee has focused on the risks and internal controls exercised throughout the Group.
As the Chairman mentions in his report on page 82 the Committee paid particular attention to the Groups ethics and compliance programme reviewing the existing processes and enhancing areas where the Committee felt more could be done to emphasise our core value of integrity.
The Committee also reviewed the Groups position on AntiModern Slavery and more information on this can be found on the Smiths website site.
The analysis of risk forms a growing part of the Committees agenda both in the context of examining future threats and opportunities to the Group and also in identifying and assessing the controls in place to mitigate those identified risks.
The
Committee held a dedicated meeting in May to discuss and review those risks identified by management.
The process for determining those risks is set out in the Risk management section on page 60 which formed the basis for the Viability Statement on page 57.
Whilst discussing the deep dive on cyber security the Committee agreed to amend its forward agenda to add a review of the Groups cyber security measures biannually and to specifically add this review to the Committees Terms of Reference.
This is a growing area of threat to the Group and the Committee will continue to monitor the Groups response and preventative measures.
I am pleased to be able to report that the FRCs review of the Groups 2015 Annual Report has been closed and the Board has agreed to make further disclosures in respect of the asbestos litigation provisioning as described on page 98.
The Committee has also agreed a timetable for an audit tender with a view to appointing a new auditor for the 2020 audit.
The process will begin in earnest in early 2018.
The Committee has been fully briefed on its responsibilities and expects to approve the tender document setting out the Groups requirements having consulted with shareholders and other stakeholders as appropriate.
This will form a key focus point for the Committee over the next 12 to 18 months.
Having conducted a thorough evaluation of PwCs audit in respect of the previous financial year and the current half year the Committee remains satisfied that PwC are both effective and retain a degree of professional scepticism in conducting their audit.
A recommendation to appoint PwC as auditor for the FY2018 audit will be presented to shareholders at the AGM to be held in November.
As the FY2018 financial year progresses the Committee expects to review the Groups position in respect of its tax risks and opportunities and specifically in respect of the strategy as global uncertainty on tax rates continues.
In addition uncertainty around Brexit remains and the Board as a whole will keep this area under review.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Committee membership and meeting attendance Membership and meeting attendance during the year is set out in the table below
Director Attended Eligible to attend Bill Seeger Chair until 18 May 2017 3 3 Mark Seligman Chair from 19 May 2017 4 4 Bruno Angelici 4 4 Tanya Fratto 4 4 Anne Quinn 4 4 Noel Tata appointed 1 January 2017 2 3 Sir Kevin Tebbit 4 4 1 Bill Seeger was not a member of the Committee from the date he stepped into the Interim Chief Financial Officer role 19 May 2017.
2 Noel Tata was unable to attend one meeting due to a prior commitment arranged before he joined the Board.
The Committee met four times during the 2017 financial year with three meetings timed to align with the financial reporting and audit cycles of the Group namely the approval of the Annual Report in September the approval of the halfyear report in March and the presentation of the preyearend early warnings report from the external auditor PwC in July.
A meeting was also held in May 2017 at which the Committee reviewed the risk management reports of the Groups five divisions.
All the members of the Committee at the time attended the AGM in November 2016.
All members of the Committee who served during the year are in the view of the Board independent nonexecutive directors and have recent and relevant financial accounting and sector experience gained from their respective international business activities.
In particular Bill Seeger was Chief Financial Officer of GKN plc a post he had held for over six years before his retirement in 2014 and Mark Seligman has a long history in corporate finance as well as being a qualified accountant.
Tanya Fratto Anne Quinn and Bruno Angelici have extensive senior management experience in international oil and gas engineering and medical devices industries respectively Sir Kevin Tebbit has substantial knowledge of international governmental relationships and Noel Tata has had a successful career in global business with extensive experience in highgrowth economies.
As part of his induction programme as a director of the Company which included a detailed overview of the Groups business model strategy and risk profile Noel Tata was provided with relevant material on the responsibility and working of the Committee and copies of recent papers and presentations.
Upon becoming Chair of the Audit Committee Mark Seligman was provided with a short structured induction programme which included meetings with senior members of the Finance team the external auditor PwC the Internal Audit team and other senior executives in the business.
Further details of the qualifications and experience of the members of the Committee are contained in the biographies of the directors on pages 78 to 81.
There have been no changes to the membership of the Committee since the financial year end.
In order to maintain effective communications between all relevant parties the following were frequent attendees at the meetings the Chairman of the Board the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer the Group Financial Controller the Company Secretary the Director of Internal Audit the Group Director of Tax and Treasury and the Group audit partners of the external auditor PwC.
In addition annual presentations on risk management were given to the Committee by the divisional general manager of each of the Groups five divisions and the head of Business Information Services BIS the Groups IT function.
The General Counsel and the Senior VicePresident and General Counsel  Ethics and Compliance reported to the Committee on the implementation of the Business Ethics programme the work of the Companys Code Compliance Council and the investigations into allegations of noncompliance with the Ethics Code including issues raised through the Groups whistleblowing procedures.
At the conclusion of the meetings the representatives of the external auditor and the Director of Internal Audit were each given the opportunity to discuss matters with the Committee and without executive management being present.
The Director of Internal Audit the Senior VicePresident and General Counsel  Ethics and Compliance and the external auditor have direct access to the Committee Chair and the members of the Committee should they wish to raise any concerns outside formal Committee meetings.
The members of the Committee also had the opportunity to meet separately at each meeting to discuss any relevant matters in the absence of all the invitees.
The Committee receives briefing notes from the Group and PwC on all relevant developments in company law governance standards and international and domestic financial accounting practices and regulations.
Outside of the formal meetings schedule the Chairs of the Audit Committee met separately with senior management representatives of PwC to discuss the Groups financial reporting internal control and governance.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Role and responsibilities The primary role of the Audit Committee is to ensure the integrity of the financial reporting and audit processes and the maintenance of sound internal control and risk management systems.
This includes responsibility for monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the Groups financial statements the significant reporting issues and judgements contained therein and the reports of the external and internal auditors the bases for the Boards statement on the adoption of the going concern basis of accounting its assessment of the longterm viability of the Company and its description of the information contained in the Annual Report as enabling a fair balanced and understandable assessment of the Group the consistency of the Annual Report and the annual financial statements financial announcements released by the Company and any reports or returns made by the Group to financial regulators the appropriateness of the Groups relationship with the external auditor including auditor independence and objectivity auditor compliance with relevant ethical and professional standards and guidance audit fees and provision of nonaudit services the terms of engagement of the external auditor the scope of the annual external audit plan and the quality and experience of the external audit team assigned to its execution the reports of the external auditor including any major issues or reservations and significant accounting and audit judgements highlighted therein the effectiveness of the external audit process making recommendations to the Board on the appointment or reappointment or the removal of the external auditor the remit and effectiveness of the Internal Audit function and the appropriateness of the resources available thereto the effectiveness of the Groups policies on internal control and risk management systems in the evaluation and management of significant business risk statements on the assessment and management of risks and on internal controls the Groups implementation of its Code of Business Ethics and Business Ethics programme including the Groups arrangements for its employees to raise any issues of concern whistleblowing and the process for the investigation and resolution of any such issues the Groups procedures for detecting fraud and systems and controls for preventing bribery and the Groups risks associated with the internal and external threats to and the resilience of the Smiths IT enterprise information operations and products relating to cyber security.
The Chair of the Audit Committee reports formally to the full Board on the activities of the Committee after each Committee meeting.
Financial and narrative reporting During the financial year the Committee has considered information presented by management on key matters of accounting judgements and policies adopted in respect of the 2016 Annual Report and 2017 halfyear report and relevant changes to accounting standards and agreed their appropriateness discussed with PwC the firms audit reports and noted the key accounting matters and significant judgements highlighted by PwC in respect of each set of financial statements reviewed documentation prepared to support the statement on internal control in the 2016 Annual Report and was satisfied that the Company was operating an effective system of internal controls to manage risk reviewed documentation prepared to support the going concern judgement in the 2016 Annual Report and concluded that the accounts had been properly prepared on a going concern basis assessed the processes and activities undertaken by the Group in order to ensure that the 2016 Annual Report taken as a whole would be fair balanced and understandable and concluded that the quality and range of information provided in the Annual Report was sufficient to enable shareholders to assess properly the Groups position performance business model and strategy examined key points of disclosure and presentation to ensure the adequacy clarity and completeness of the 2016 Annual Report and 2017 halfyear report and the preliminary announcement of the annual results reported to the Board its views on significant financial reporting issues and judgements applied to the 2016 Annual Report the 2017 halfyear report and the associated information releases including matters communicated to the Committee by the external auditor evaluated the bases for and the content of the Strategic report the operational review and the corporate governance statement contained in the 2016 Annual Report satisfied itself that the 2016 Annual Report was consistent within itself and that the front half and the back half of the publication were thoughtfully cohesive reviewed documentation prepared to support the going concern judgement in the 2017 halfyear report including the review of the principal risks for the second half of the financial year and concluded that the accounts had been properly prepared on a going concern basis in addition to the press releases for the preliminary annual results for 2016 and the 2017 halfyear results reviewed the Companys press releases and announcements containing pricesensitive material and reports made to financial regulators during the year and analysed the methodology and processes presented by the management for the assessment in the 2017 Annual Report of the prospects of the Company over the longer term longterm viability assessment and agreed that a threeyear period is appropriate for this purpose taking into consideration the Companys various business cycles and forecasting models.
The Committee considered scenariobased stress testing models prepared by the Company to assess the impact on Group cash and finances if one or more of the Groups principal risks occurred.
The Committee concurred with the conclusion that the Groups balance sheet and ability to raise cash were more than sufficient to withstand such occurrences comfortably for at least the threeyear period under review.
A U D IT C O M M IT TE E C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Subsequent to the end of FY2017 the Committee has also reviewed and reported to the Board on the reports and information supplied by management and by PwC on the judgements and policies adopted for the 2017 Annual Report and the content of that document.
The Committee considered that the quality and range of the material included within the 2017 Annual Report was sufficient to provide shareholders with the necessary information for them to assess properly the Groups position performance business model and strategy and that the report was presented in such a way as could be considered fair balanced and understandable.
The Committee reviewed the statement on risk management and internal controls the going concern statement the assessment of the longterm viability of the Group and the content of the announcement of the financial results for 2017.
In assessing the fairness balance and understandability of the 2017 Annual Report the Committee considered the accuracy and integrity of the messages conveyed in the report the appropriateness of the level of detail in the narrative reporting the correlation between the judgements and issues and the disclosures and estimation uncertainties the consistency between the narrative reporting in the front half and the financial reporting in the back half of the report the explanations of the differences between statutory and headline reported results and the overall design and layout of the information and data the clarity of the messages and the reporting and the holistic nature of the report.
Following its review of the 2017 Annual Report the Committee was of the opinion that it is representative of the year and presents a fair balanced and understandable overview providing the necessary information for shareholders to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
Significant judgements and issues An important responsibility of the Audit Committee is to review and agree the most significant management judgements and issues.
To satisfy this responsibility the Committee requests a written formal update from the Chief Financial Officer three times a year the Group Director of Tax and Treasury twice a year and reports from the external auditor at each Committee meeting.
The Committee carefully considers the content of these reports and the most significant issues and areas of judgement raised.
The key areas of judgement in the year were as follows Revenue recognition The Committee reviewed the key judgements on revenue recognition.
Attention was given to large multifaceted and nonstandard contracts in Smiths Detection and to contracts where percentage of completion accounting was used in Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect.
The Committee reviewed the accounting treatment of three programmes in Smiths Detection where management assessed the portion of revenue to be attributed and the anticipated profit margin and concluded that the revenue judgements made were appropriate.
The Committee also reviewed bill and hold transactions in Smiths Detection and were satisfied with the adopted accounting treatment.
Impairment
The Committee considered the Groups intangible assets and the assumptions used to justify the carrying values of these assets including fair value less costs to sell.
Particular attention was given to Morpho Detection which was tested on a fair value less cost to sell basis.
A sensitivity is included in note 11 of the financial statements.
The Committee reviewed the carrying value of Medical capitalised development and was satisfied that the treatment was reasonable due to the new product launches planned for FY2018 and FY2019.
The Committee agreed that the projected future cashflows from these assets supported the carrying value.
The
Committee reviewed the disclosures contained in the financial statements and agreed that they appropriately reflect the sensitivity of the judgements made.
Details of impairment testing and sensitivities are included in note 11 of the financial statements.
Acquisitions and divestments The Committee reviewed the judgement and accounting treatment of the acquisition of Morpho Detection.
Particular attention was paid to the opening balance sheet judgements concerning the valuation of acquired assets and the resulting calculation of goodwill.
The Committee also considered the treatment of costs between headline and nonheadline.
The Committee agreed that the judgements made and the accounting treatment were appropriate.
The Committee also reviewed the judgements and accounting treatment relating to the divestments of Smiths Interconnect Power John Crane Artificial Lift Smiths Interconnect Telecoms and the Smiths Medical Wallace and Morpho Trace businesses and the gains losses on disposal.
The Committee was satisfied that these disposals have been appropriately reflected in the Annual Report and Accounts 2017 and the treatment of Morpho Trace as a discontinued operation in the income statement.
Working capital The Committee considered the key judgements within working capital and in particular the level of provisions and overdue receivables in emerging markets.
The Committee determined that the judgements made were appropriate to justify the working capital provision levels at 31 July 2017.
Provisions for liabilities and charges The Committee continued to monitor carefully the expert assessments of the financial exposure of the Group to the John Crane Inc. asbestos litigation and to the Titeflex Corp.
CSST claims.
In particular the Committee considered the treatment of potential liabilities and the changes to the assumptions made in calculating the provisions including the reassessment of the time period for the Titeflex Corp.
CSST provision and the continued appropriateness of the tenyear time period for John Crane Inc. asbestos litigation.
In the case of the John Crane Inc. will be incurred.
In both these cases it was determined that the assumptions fairly reflect the position at 31 July 2017.
Further details of the assumptions used are included in note 22 of the financial statements.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
The Committee assessed the appropriateness of the Groups assumptions and judgements in relation to the estimates of the assets and liabilities to be recognised in income and deferred tax as well as the treatment of losses in the UK.
Particular focus was given to the recognition of UK deferred tax assets which we now judge to be recoverable see note 6 deferred tax assets relating to the John Crane Inc. asbestos provision and the Titeflex Corp.
CSST provision.
In reviewing projected profit streams the Committee was satisfied that where appropriate the relevant entities will generate sufficient future taxable profits to utilise the assets recognised.
Further details on movements in tax balances are set out in note 6 of the financial statements.
Postretirement benefits The Committee reviewed and agreed the methods assumptions and benchmarks used by the actuaries to calculate the position of the UK and US schemes at 31 July 2017 which have now moved to a net surplus position.
The Committee agreed the treatment and the corresponding disclosures on these matters.
More detail on postretirement benefits is contained in note 8 of the financial statements.
FRC Corporate Reporting Review In August 2017 the FRC Conduct Committee closed its enquiry into the Companys 2015 Annual Report.
During 2017 the Committee continued to monitor the dialogue between the Company and the FRC and discuss the matters raised with the external auditor.
As a result of the enquiry the Annual Report 2017 includes enhanced disclosures for the John Crane Inc. litigation provision.
Disclosures have been amended to explain why the Company judged that the circumstances of this provision are extremely rare to provide more context on the judgement to use a tenyear time horizon to calculate the provision and to include additional sensitivities around an extended time horizon.
To support the provision time period and recommended judgement the Committee received advice from Bates White LLC Economic
The enhanced disclosures can be found in note 22 on pages 180 to 183 .
Expanded disclosures in respect of provisions revenue tax inventory provisioning and postretirement benefits arising from the enquiry were included in the Annual Report 2016.
The Committee after receiving the reports on the significant issues and areas of judgement was content that the judgements made were appropriate and are correctly reflected in the Annual Report 2017.
Corporate governance During the year the Audit Committee has reviewed the Companys compliance with its governance obligations.
In particular the Committee has monitored the changes introduced by the Company to ensure full compliance with the requirements of the 2016 edition of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations considered the amendments to and developments in the International Financial Reporting Standards that affected the 2017 and 2018 financial years including the adoption of IFRS 9 15 and 16 taken account of the Competition and Markets Authoritys Statutory Audit Services for Large Companies Market Investigation Mandatory Use of Competitive Tender Processes and Audit Committee Responsibilities Order 2014 the CMA Order and reviewed the changes in the Financial Reporting Councils 2016 Guidance to Audit Committees and Ethical Standards for Auditors reflecting the implementation in the UK of the EU Audit Directive and Regulation.
The CMA Order first applied to the Companys 2016 financial year and the Group has complied with it during the 2017 financial year.
Under the transitional provisions of the order the competitive audit tendering regulations require the Company to put the external auditor role out to tender by 2023.
The Committee decided not to recommend a competitive tender this year given the change to Chief Financial Officer.
The Committees proposal for a competitive audit tender and auditor rotation is described in the External Auditor effectiveness and reappointment section below.
External audit In relation to the activities of the external auditor during the financial year the Committee considered PwCs audit report on the 2016 Annual Report its review of the 2017 halfyear results and its Early Warning report on the 2017 audit monitored PwCs execution of the audit plans for 2016 and 2017 discussed all major issues identified by PwC during the course of the audits including the key accounting and audit judgements taken by management and managements responses to the audit findings agreed materiality and de minimis levels with PwC considered the draft letter of representation from the Company to PwC in connection with the audit of the 2016 financial statements reviewed the nonaudit fees paid to PwC and found them to have been incurred in accordance with the policy on the provision of nonaudit services conducted the annual review of the independence and objectivity of PwC and was satisfied that PwCs behaviour had been professional in both respects conducted an internal survey on the effectiveness of PwC as external auditor and determined that PwC remained effective in its role as external auditor and recommended to the Board that PwC be proposed for re appointment as external auditor at the 2016 AGM for a further year.
Subsequent to the financial year end the Committee has considered and approved the same items in respect of the 2017 audit and the preparation of the 2017 Annual Report.
Subsequently the Committee has also recommended that PwC be proposed for reappointment as external auditor at the 2017 AGM.
The Committee considered that each of the directors had taken all necessary steps to ensure that he or she was aware of all pertinent audit information and that such information had been properly communicated to PwC in a timely manner.
External audit plan PwC presented its Group Audit Plan for the financial year ending 31 July 2017.
The Committee discussed with PwC its risk matrix and the factors affecting the various audit risk assessments the proposed audit scope taking into consideration statutory audit requirements financially significant components and significant risk components and central programme testing materiality levels A U D IT C O M M IT TE E C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE the accounting for the acquisition of Morpho Detection Inc and the sale of the Morpho Trace Detection business the movement in working capital relating to aged inventory and receivables and the impact of senior management changes within the business.
The Committee noted the focus on the audit risks associated with revenue recognition certain litigation risks impairment of goodwill and management override of controls.
PwCs proposal to increase the overall materiality level to 20m approximately 3.5% of headline operating profit 2016 17m and a deminimis reporting threshold of 1m 2016 0.5m was accepted as prudent and appropriate.
The Committee considered the resources proposed by PwC including the qualities seniorities and experience of the audit team members to be consistent with the scope of the audit.
It was noted that the Audit Plan had been discussed and coordinated with Internal Audit.
Through a combination of fullscope audits specified audit procedures and local GAAP statutory audits business units producing 78% 2016 79% of the Groups forecast headline operating profit for 2017 would be audited by PwC under the 2017 Audit Plan.
The fee structure and terms of the audit engagement letter which had been agreed with management and PwCs assessment of its independence were considered appropriate for the work proposed and were approved.
Nonaudit services In order to safeguard auditor independence the Committee has monitored compliance with the Group policy on the engagement of external audit firms for nonaudit work.
Nonaudit services were divided into three categories in relation to the incumbent external auditor Preapproved but subject to the Chief Financial Officers approval for projects likely to exceed 10000  where the threat to auditor objectivity and independence is considered low such as regulatory compliance work limited tax advisory work and lowlevel acquisition work Permitted but subject to the approval of the Audit Committee for projects over 10000 and competitive tendering for projects over 100000  such as larger acquisitions corporate reorganisation and IT risk and security and Not permitted  such as book keeping financial system design actuarial services management functions and internal audit.
The Committee recognises that nonaudit services falling in the Preapproved category can be purchased more costeffectively from and completed more efficiently by the incumbent auditor due to the audit firms existing knowledge of the Group and its systems.
The Committee is satisfied that the nonaudit work performed by PwC during the financial year had been properly assessed and authorised in accordance with the Group policy.
On 17 June 2016 the EU Audit Directive and Regulation came into force and the FRC published a revised Ethical Standard for Auditors in respect of audits of financial years beginning on or after that date.
As a consequence of the new regulation and standard the Committee reviewed and approved changes to the Group policy on the engagement of audit firms for nonaudit work in order to take account of the prohibited list of nonaudit services that an incumbent auditor is not permitted to provide in the EU under the regulation and the cap on the level of permitted nonaudit services that can be billed.
External auditor independence The Committee is responsible for the development implementation and monitoring of the Groups policies on external audit which are designed to maintain the objectivity and independence of the external auditor.
These policies also regulate the appointment by the Group of former employees of PwC and set out the approach to be taken when using the external auditor for nonaudit work.
The external auditor is not permitted to provide services which could result in the external auditor auditing its own firms work the external auditor making management decisions for the Group a mutuality of interests being created or the external auditor being put in the role of advocate for the Group.
The Committees review of the independence of the external auditor included examining written confirmation from PwC that they remained independent and objective within the context of applicable professional standards considering the tenure of the audit engagement partner who is required to rotate every five years in line with ethical standards monitoring the ratio between the fees for audit work and nonaudit services and checking that management confirmed compliance with the Groups policies on the employment of former employees of PwC and the use of PwC for nonaudit work.
As a result of this review the Committee concluded that PwC remained appropriately independent in the role of external auditor.
Details of the fees paid to PwC for the year ended 31 July 2017 can be found in note 2 on page 152.
Nonaudit fees incurred during this period amounted to 0.3m which related principally to work on cyber security and auditrelated assurance services in connection with the interim report.
Nonaudit fees as a percentage of audit fees totalled 7%.
All such activities remained within the policy approved by the Board.
External auditor effectiveness and reappointment The Committees review of the performance of PwC and the effectiveness of the external audit process included conducting a survey to take into consideration the views of the executive directors senior management and the divisional finance teams views and opinions of PwCs effectiveness in a number of areas.
The survey included questions on PwCs independence and objectivity audit strategy and planning conduct and communication audit findings and feedback and expertise and resourcing.
The results were positive and confirmed that both PwC and its audit process were appropriate and effective and that the relationships between the audit teams and the Companys businesses continued to provide effective and objective challenge.
The Committee recognised the challenges in ensuring consistency in the audit process across the whole Group and the need to continue to improve communication at local and divisional levels.
Independence Letters sent by PwC in September 2016 in respect of its 2016 audit and September 2017 in respect of the 2017 audit were also considered and the Committee concurred with PwCs opinion that it had complied with all relevant regulatory and professional requirements and that the firms objectivity had not been compromised.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 The Committee noted the findings in the FRCs June 2017 Audit Quality Inspection report on PwC.
It evaluated a summary of PwCs internal quality control procedures and noted that the lead engagement partner Andy Kemp is accountable directly to the Committee for the execution of the audit.
The Committee satisfied itself that the quality of the work exhibited by the firm and its commitment to improvements were of a high standard.
PwC has been the Companys external auditor since its formation in 1998 although a predecessor organisation of PwC held office as sole auditor in 1997.
There has been no external audit tender since PwCs appointment.
In determining whether to recommend PwC for reappointment as auditor in 2017 the Audit Committee took into consideration the following factors the length of PwCs appointment and the guidance on the audit firm rotation regulations and proposals the results of the effectiveness review detailed above the qualities and experience of the audit partner and the changes in the executive management team during 2017 in particular the appointment of Bill Seeger as Interim Chief Financial Officer who took up his post on 19 May 2017.
Taking these elements into account and acknowledging that it would take some time to stage a competitive audit tender from initial planning to final selection the Committee concluded that it would not be practical to put the auditor appointment for 2018 out to competitive tender and that it was appropriate to recommend to the Board that the reappointment of PwC as the Companys auditor for a further year be proposed to shareholders at the 2017 AGM.
Recognising the various requirements in the Code the CMA Order and the Statutory Auditors and Third Country Auditors Regulations 2016 implementing the EUs June 2014 Audit Directive and Regulation the Committee reviewed its decision and concluded that it would remain in the best interests of the Company to plan for a competitive audit tender for the rotation of the external auditor for the 2020 audit.
This would coincide with the end of the current PwC audit partners fiveyear term.
The Committee has reviewed and agreed a timetable for placing a competitive audit tender and will be starting the process during 2018.
PwC will not be invited to participate in the tender.
However the Committee will keep the performance of the incumbent audit firm under annual review.
The Board has considered and adopted the Committees recommendations to propose the reappointment of PwC as auditor in 2017 and to plan for a competitive audit tender and auditor rotation for the 2020 audit.
There are no contractual obligations restricting the Groups choice of external auditor.
Internal control and risk management In fulfilling its responsibilities the Committee reported to the Board on its evaluation of the Groups risk assurance framework and embedded risk management processes based on consideration of the reports by PwC on the Groups control environment and ERP systems and on fraud risk the audits undertaken by Internal Audit and the risk management reports presented by and discussed with each of the divisions and BIS and reviewed managements plans to mitigate and remedy the failings and weaknesses in the Companys internal financial and risk controls that were identified by PwC and Internal Audit and has monitored their effectiveness.
The Committee did not view any of the issues that had been identified and addressed as significant.
The Committee has reviewed the effectiveness of the identification and management of risk at the Group level.
Each division also presents an analysis of its own business strategic risks to the Committee on an annual basis.
Further information on the Groups systems of internal control and risk management is given on page 60.
Internal Audit Internal Audit is independent of the business and as such has no responsibility for operational business management.
This ensures the integrity and objectivity of its annual Audit Plan work which is approved by the Committee.
The authority of the Internal Audit function is derived from the Committee.
The Director of Internal Audit is accountable to the Board of Directors through the Chairman of the Committee.
Administratively the Director of Internal Audit reports to the Chief Financial Officer.
In order to carry out the responsibilities as set out in a charter approved by the Committee the Internal Audit function has full and unrestricted access to all Smiths records property and personnel independent access to the Chairman and members of the or other concerns to the Committee.
The Committee oversees the performance of the Internal Audit function through the Director of Internal Audits attendance at Committee meetings and a review of agreed KPIs which are reported to the Committee three times per year.
In addition during 2018 an independent third party review of the functions effectiveness will be undertaken.
The review will be overseen by the Committee.
During the financial year the Committee received progress reports on the execution of the 2017 Internal Audit Plan discussed the recommendations made by the internal auditors noted the progress being made by management in reducing the numbers of aged outstanding recommendations reviewed the effectiveness of Internal Audit as a part of the Companys risk management process considered the remit of Internal Audit its budget and resources and the nature and extent of the outsourcing to KPMG and approved the 2018 Internal Audit Plan including the proposed audit scope approach coverage and allocation of resources.
Treasury and tax During the financial year the Committee reviewed the report of the Treasury department of the Group on financial risk and treasury management noting the Groups borrowing position and debt capacity.
The Committee also received status reports on tax risk from the Groups Tax department noting the assessments of compliance tax audit risk tax provisions and international tax rates.
The Groups assessment of its appetite for tax risk was also reviewed.
A U D IT C O M M IT TE E C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE
During the financial year the Committee reviewed the annual report of the Groups Business Ethics Council on the Groupwide Ethics programme.
The report included details of the investigations into allegations of noncompliance with the Code of Business Ethics and whistleblowing events including bribery and corruption and the Councils work programme to support the initiatives of the businesses and monitor compliance with both the Groups Code of Business Ethics and the various applicable national regulations.
The Committee received a report on the first phase of an external review of compliance with Group and divisional ethical policies and procedures.
The Committee considered that the Companys processes and arrangements for staff to report concerns about any improprieties were both appropriate and effective.
The
Committee also considered that the Companys investigation of such reports and consequential actions where required were timely and effective.
No issues were raised that required the Committees action.
Constitution
The Committee conducts an annual review of its terms of reference and effectiveness and recommends any changes to the
During 2017 the Board approved changes to the Committees terms of reference to include cyber security and the revised terms of reference are available on our website at site Performance evaluation An annual evaluation of the performance of the Committee is conducted as part of the annual evaluation of the performance of the Board.
Following the conclusion of the evaluation it was determined that the Committee continues to operate effectively.
Discharge of responsibilities During the year the Committee has monitored its discharge of responsibilities.
In addition to the actions reported in the sections above the Committee has observed the induction and onboarding of the new Committee Chairman and Interim Chief Financial Officer and welcomed Noel Tata as a new member.
The Committee has enjoyed a positive relationship with the Board throughout the year and has no contentious or unresolved issues to report.
In light of its work the Audit Committee was content with the effectiveness of the Groups processes governing financial and regulatory reporting and controls its culture ethical standards and its relationships with stakeholders.
The Committee was also satisfied with the appropriateness and adequacy of the Groups risk management arrangements as well as supporting risk management systems including the risk monitoring processes internal controls framework and three lines of defence model.
Advice
The Committee has independent access to the services of Internal Audit and to the external auditor and may obtain outside professional advice at the expense of the Group as it sees fit in the performance of its duties.
MARK SELIGMAN CHAIR OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 R EL AT I O N S W I T H S TA K EH O L D ER S Relations with shareholders and other capital providers During financial year 2017 senior management and the investor relations team had contact with over 200 investors and analysts.
Contact with investorsanalysts United Kingdom 50% US and Canada 30% Rest of Europe 15% Rest of World 5% Dialogue with shareholders During 2017 the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer and the Investor Relations Director communicated with institutional investors through analysts briefings and extensive investor roadshows in the UK US and Europe.
The executive directors regularly met with shareholders to maintain a two way communication on business performance and longterm strategy and the Chairman and nonexecutive directors were available to meet with investors to discuss issues as and when they arose for example to hear views around strategy and management change.
The investor relations programme for the past year is detailed in the activities timeline and a programme for the FY2018 financial year is being developed.
Members of the Board and in particular nonexecutive directors are kept informed of investors views mainly through distribution of analysts and brokers briefings and the Chief Executives written updates.
At least twice a year a detailed written report is provided to the Board on the number and types of meetings between Smiths and institutional shareholders.
The Board is confident that this process enables the non executive directors to maintain a balanced understanding of the views and concerns of major shareholders.
In 2017 an investor perception study was carried out by Makinson Cowell the results of which were presented to the Board at their September 2017 meeting.
Some key messages in the report include that investors believe that the Group comprises some highquality highmargin and highreturns businesses with a strong senior management team.
Smiths is generally rated as a strong communicator with investors who believe that they have sufficient access to senior management and that there is a clear articulation of the nearterm strategy.
The report also identifies some development points including that a deeper understanding of the business could be facilitated by greater access to divisional management and a Capital Markets Day.
A Capital Markets Day for FY2018 is being held in London in December 2017.
Dialogue with other capital providers The Company values the contribution of its committed lending banks and bond holders to the achievement of its strategic aims.
The Chief Financial Officer and the Group Director Tax and Treasury meet with and communicate proactively with this investor base and the rating agencies Standard and Poors and Moodys on a regular basis.
There is also a formal annual meeting with the rating agencies.
Communication with debt markets is generally via investor roadshows at the time of financing activity.
Committed banks are invited to the biannual presentations of the Groups trading results to enable them to keep informed of business strategy and meet both senior corporate and divisional management.
Members of the Board are kept informed of the current credit views of debt investors and the rating agencies through regular commentary and financial metric reporting to meetings.
Investor relations activities timeline Roadshowsconferences Presentations September 2017 Annual results July 2017 Sweden and Denmark equity June 2017 European Capital Goods CEO conference April 2017 US equity March 2017 UK equity Interim results December 2016 Canada equity December 2016 UK private client brokers November 2016 UK private client brokers AGM Best of British conference Best Ideas conference October 2016 UK US Europe equity September 2016 Annual results Annual General Meeting AGM All directors normally attend the AGM and shareholders are invited to ask questions during the meeting and to meet directors before and after the formal proceedings.
The Board values the AGM as an opportunity to meet with those shareholders who are able to attend and to take their questions.
At the 2016 AGM all directors in post including the Senior Independent Director and the Chairs of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees were available to answer shareholders questions.
The directors were also available after the meeting for informal discussion with shareholders.
The notice of the AGM and related papers were sent to shareholders at least 20 working days before the meeting.
The 2017 AGM will be held on 14 November 2017 and is an opportunity for shareholders to vote on certain aspects of Group business in person.
It is intended that there will be a poll vote on each resolution at the 2017 AGM.
The audited final results of the poll votes will be released to the market and published on the Companys website site as soon as is practicable after the conclusion of the AGM.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE DIR EC T OR S R E M U NE R AT I ON R E P OR T ANNE QUINN CBE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Performance highlights Increased profit performance Strong cash conversion performance Group wide operating margin improvement On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present the report of the Remuneration Committee for the year to 31 July 2017.
This report is split into three parts the Annual Statement the policy report which presents the Groups forwardlooking Directors remuneration policy and the Annual Report on Remuneration which details how our remuneration policy was implemented during the year to 31 July 2017 and how we intend to apply our policy in the year to 31 July 2018.
Following the approval of the Policy at the 2015 AGM there are no proposed changes to the Policy this year.
As highlighted by the Chairman and Chief Executive in their annual statements on pages 10 to 17 of this Annual Report the operating environment continued to be challenging in the year to 31 July 2017.
However four of the five divisions reported growth in headline operating profit.
As expected John Crane continued to face tough global energy market conditions leading to an anticipated decline in operating profit.
However the Board was encouraged that along with the other four divisions John Crane reported improved margin performance.
Group performance in cash conversion was strong at 118%.
Taking into consideration EPS performance and each directors performance against their personal objectives the annual bonus outcome was just below maximum.
ROCE at 16.2% remains well ahead of the Groups weighted average cost of capital and resulted in the maximum matching under the final CIP award cycle in which Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea did not participate.
3year EPS growth relative TSR performance and average cash conversion warranted vesting of 62.6% of the 2014 LTIP awards that will vest later this year following the end of the performance period on 31 July 2017.
Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea did not participate in this LTIP cycle as it predates their appointment.
The
Committee recognises the importance of close alignment of remuneration with Group performance and we consider the incentive outcomes for this year to demonstrate this link further details of which are disclosed in this years Annual
Report on Remuneration.
During the year the Committee also considered and agreed the implications on the remuneration of Chris OShea stepping down from the Board of Directors in May 2017.
He will leave the Company in November 2017.
As set out in the RNS of 23 May 2017 the Committee operated within the provisions of its Policy to determine that in addition to contractual payments Chris OShea would remain eligible for a prorated annual bonus payment in relation to the financial year ended 31 July 2017 and retain a pro rated interest in outstanding LTIP awards.
His retained interests in the LTIP will vest on the normal vesting date to the extent warranted by performance at the end of the normal performance period.
Any awards vesting to Chris OShea before 18 November 2017 are unaffected by his stepping down from the Board.
In addition the Committee determined the package for Bill Seeger on his appointment as Interim Chief Financial Officer.
The arrangements for Bill Seeger further details of which are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration reflect the short term interim nature of his appointment and are in line with the Remuneration Policy currently in force.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank shareholders for their continued support.
ANNE QUINN CBE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D R E MUN E R A T I O N AT A G L A N CE Key activities Salary and annual incentive plan Approve salary proposal for Chief Executive members of the Executive Committee and reviewed fees for the
Considered and approved annual incentive plan payouts and set targets for the new financial year Long Term Incentive
Agreed performance measures for 2017 LTIP awards Determined vesting levels for 2014 CIP and LTIP awards Executive Director
Determined Chris OSheas arrangements on stepping down from the Board Agreed Bill Seegers package for assuming the role of Interim Chief Financial Officer Remuneration for the year ended 31 July 2017 Committee details activities and performance Membership and meeting attendance during the year is set out in the table below
Director Attended Eligible to attend Anne Quinn Chair 4 4 Sir George Buckley 4 4 Bill Seeger 3 3 Bruno Angelici 4 4 Tanya Fratto 4 4 Mark Seligman 4 4 Noel Tata appointed 1 January 2017 2 3 Sir Kevin Tebbit 4 4 Bill Seeger was not a member of the Committee from the date he stepped into the Interim Chief Financial Officer role 19 May 2017 Noel Tata was unable to attend one meeting due to a prior commitment arranged before he joined the Board The Chief Executive is normally invited to attend Remuneration Committee meetings except when his own remuneration is under discussion.
The Group HR Director the Director of Reward and external remuneration advisers Mercer  Kepler have also attended meetings in order to advise the Committee as and when required.
The Committees activities and focus during the year are described in the following Directors Remuneration Report.
The Committee reviews its terms of reference annually and recommends to the Board any changes required as a result.
The latest annual review of the Committees terms of reference was conducted in July 2017 when they were updated to reflect current Committee practice regarding the annual review of the remuneration policy and ongoing contact with principal shareholders.
The terms of reference can be found on the Smiths website site An evaluation of the performance of the Committee is included in the annual Board evaluation and following the conclusion of the evaluation it was determined that the Committee continues to operate effectively.
Actual
OnTarget
Maximum
ANDY REYNOLDS SMITH TOTAL REMUNERATION VS OPPORTUNITY 000
Cash
Personal
ANNUAL INCENTIVE PLAN OUTTURN % OF SALARY LTIP OUTTURN VALUE OF AWARDS 000S No LTIP awards eligible to vest in 2017 Threshold Target Maximum
OnTarget
Maximum
CHRIS OSHEA TOTAL REMUNERATION VS OPPORTUNITY 000
Cash
Personal
ANNUAL INCENTIVE PLAN OUTTURN % OF SALARY LTIP OUTTURN VALUE OF AWARDS 000S No LTIP awards eligible to vest in 2017 Threshold Target Maximum Fixed Pay AIP LTIP Extent to which AIP performance targets have been met Prorated to Chris OSheas leaving date of 18 May 2017 Note During the year Bill Seeger served as Interim Chief Financial Officer from 19 May 2017 to 31 July 2017.
Mr Seegers remuneration comprises a fixed salary only recognising the interim nature of his appointment and is not shown here Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Remuneration policy report This section of the report sets out our remuneration policy for directors which shareholders approved at the AGM on 16 November 2015 and is effective for a period of three years from the date of the 2015 AGM.
The only amendments to this policy report from the version approved by shareholders in 2015 are to update the data used in the payforperformance scenarios and to add page references.
Remuneration policy for the executive directors The remuneration policy for the executive directors at Smiths is summarised in the table below Element and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Base salary To attract motivate and retain executive directors with the required skills and expertise to deliver the Groups objectives.
Salaries are reviewed but not necessarily increased annually and benchmarked against comparable roles at companies of similar market capitalisation revenues and complexity.
The review also takes into account individual performance and experience the relative performance of the Company and the remuneration policy operated across the Company as a whole.
Salary increases are typically effective 1 August.
Base salaries are adjusted according to the outcome of the annual review and will be disclosed in the Annual Report on
Salary increases for the executive directors will normally be in line with those awarded to Smiths wider employee population.
Where increases are awarded in excess of this for example if there is a material change in the responsibility size or complexity of the role or a significant change in the market competitiveness of salary the Committee will provide the rationale in the relevant years
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Not applicable
Enables executive directors to save for their retirement in a costefficient manner.
Executives may choose either to participate in the Companys defined contribution pension plan or to receive a pension allowance in lieu thereof and thus arrange their own pension provision.
Pension allowances are reviewed periodically to ensure market competitiveness.
Salary is the only element of remuneration that is taken into account when determining pension contributions or allowances.
Pension contributions or cash allowances in lieu thereof are set at a level that the Committee considers appropriate having regard to prevailing market practice at other FTSE 100 companies of similar market capitalisation revenues and complexity.
Pension arrangements for current executive directors are set out in the Annual Report on
The maximum level of pension contribution or allowance in lieu thereof is 30% of annual base salary.
Not applicable The Directors remuneration report is presented to shareholders by the Board.
The report complies with Regulation 11 and Schedule 8 of the Large and MediumSized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 the Regulations.
As required by the Regulations the Annual Report on Remuneration will be put to an advisory shareholder vote at the Annual General Meeting on 14 November 2017.
The Committee also continues to comply with the provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code relating to directors remuneration except as disclosed in the Corporate governance statement on page 82.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Element and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Annual bonus Incentivises shortterm cash management and profit growth as well as annually defined non financial goals.
Annual bonus payments are determined based upon performance against measures and targets set by the Committee at the start of each financial year.
After the end of the financial year to the extent that the performance criteria have been met up to 67% of the earned annual bonus is paid in cash.
The balance is deferred into shares and released after a further period of three years subject to continued employment only.
The Committee may use its discretion to adjust payout of the annual bonus to executive directors within the range of the minimum to maximum opportunity.
Such discretion will only be used where the Committee believes that performance against the prescribed targets does not accurately reflect the Companys underlying performance In addition cash and deferred share bonuses awarded for performance in 201516 onwards will be subject to malus and or clawback for a period of three years from the end of the relevant performance year in case of misconduct or material misstatement in the published results of the Group.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity for executive directors is up to 180% of salary.
The annual bonus opportunities for the year under review and the coming year are disclosed in the
Annual Report on Remuneration.
Under the financial element of the annual bonus threshold performance must be exceeded before any annual bonus becomes payable.
The percentage payout then increases according to the level of achievement against targets.
Based on a combination of financial and nonfinancial performance measures linked to shortterm objectives.
Financial performance will account for no less than 70% of the bonus opportunity and may include but is not limited to profit and cash measures.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Element and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP Incentivises longterm value creation for shareholders sustainable profit growth and effective management of the balance sheet.
Awards of conditional shares are granted annually and vest after a performance period of at least three years subject to the achievement of performance targets set by the Committee at the start of each cycle.
For awards made in 2016 onwards vested shares may also be subject to a post vesting holding period.
Details of any such holding period will be disclosed in the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year in which the relevant award is made.
To the extent that the performance targets are not met over the performance period awards will lapse.
No retesting of awards under any performance condition is permitted.
Dividends accrue and are paid in cash at the end of the vesting period on shares that vest.
The Committee may use its discretion to adjust payout of the LTIP to executive directors within the limits of the Plan rules.
Such discretion will only be used where the Committee believes that performance against the prescribed targets does not accurately reflect the Companys underlying performance.
Awards are also subject to clawback for a period of five years from the date of grant in case of misconduct or material misstatement in the published results of the Group.
The maximum LTIP award opportunity for executive directors is up to 400% of salary.
LTIP award sizes for the year under review and the coming year are disclosed in the Annual
Report on Remuneration.
At threshold performance against each measure up to 25% of the award subject to that measure vests increasing on a straightline basis to 100% for achieving stretch targets.
Based on measures of performance that are aligned with the Groups strategy.
To ensure continued alignment with the Companys strategic priorities the Committee may at its discretion vary the measures and their weightings from time to time but will consult shareholders before making significant changes to the performance measures.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Element and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures
To provide marketcompetitive benefits to executive directors.
Benefits comprise car allowance life assurance and private healthcare insurance and other such benefits as the Committee may from time to time determine are appropriate.
These include but are not limited to relocation allowances as well as any other future benefits made available either to all employees globally or all employees in the region in which the executive director is employed.
Benefits vary by role and individual circumstances.
Benefits in respect of the year under review are disclosed in the
Annual Report on Remuneration.
It is not anticipated that the costs of benefits provided will increase significantly in the financial years over which this policy will apply although the Committee retains discretion to approve a higher cost in exceptional circumstances eg to facilitate recruitment relocation expatriation etc or in circumstances where factors outside the Groups control have changed materially eg market increases in insurance costs.
Not applicable Element and link to strategy Operation Performance measures
Encourages ownership of shares in the Company and alignment with shareholder interests.
All UK employees including executive directors may save up to a maximum monthly savings limit as determined by UK legislation or other such lower limit as the Committee may determine at its discretion for three or five years.
At the end of the savings period participants may use their savings to exercise options to acquire shares which may be granted at a discount of up to 20% to the market price on grant.
The Company intends to look into introducing allemployee share schemes to some nonUK countries on a basis consistent with local laws and market practice.
Not applicable Shareholding guidelines Encourages ownership of shares in the company and alignment with shareholder interests.
Executive directors must build a minimum shareholding of two times base salary within five years of appointment to the Board.
50% of any net vested share awards after sales to meet tax liabilities must be retained until the minimum shareholding requirements are met.
Not applicable Existing grants or entitlements It is the Companys intention to honour all preexisting commitments at the date of this report and to honour all future obligations entered into consistent with the approved remuneration Policy in force at that time.
In the case of internal promotion to the Board the Committee intends to honour any preexisting commitments made prior to becoming a member of the Board including where these differ from the approved remuneration Policy.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Performance measure selection and approach to target setting Annual bonus measures are selected to reflect the Companys shortterm financial and nonfinancial priorities.
At its discretion the Committee may vary these measures at the start of each financial year to maintain close alignment between executive incentives and the annual business plan.
The measures used in the LongTerm Incentive Plan are selected to reflect Smiths prevailing strategy and to reinforce the key drivers of value creation highlighted elsewhere in this Annual Report operating margin cash conversion and delivering sustainable return on capital.
Annual bonus and LTIP targets are reviewed annually and take into account the Companys strategic plan analyst forecasts for Smiths and its sector comparators and external expectations for Smiths key markets.
The Committee sets targets that it considers to be challenging but attainable and aligned to the Companys business objectives over the short term as reflected in the annual business plan and longer term consistent with the strategic plan.
On top of aligning strategy with incentives targets are designed to ensure that participants are aligned with the interests of shareholders.
Difference in policy between executive directors and other employees The reward policy for other senior employees is broadly consistent with that for executive directors and the Company does not currently operate any incentive plans in which only executive directors participate.
The Committee reviews each year the allemployee pay and incentive trends and takes these into account in setting executive director pay levels.
The principles of remuneration packages being market related performance sensitive and driven by business needs are applied at all levels and geographies in the Group.
Pay scenarios The graphs below provide estimates of the potential future reward opportunity for the CEO and the potential mix between the different elements of remuneration under three different performance scenarios Minimum OnTarget and Maximum.
Minimum
OnTarget
Maximum
12% 23% 41% 24% 10% 20% 21% 49% 4841 ANDY REYNOLDS SMITH 000 100% n LTIP n Deferred bonus n Cash bonus n Fixed Pay salary Potential opportunities illustrated above are based on the Policy which will apply in the 2018 financial year applied to the annualised base salary in force from 1 August 2017 for Andy Reynolds Smith.
For the annual bonus the amounts illustrated are those potentially receivable in respect of performance for 2018.
It should be noted that any awards granted under the LTIP in a year do not normally vest until at least the third anniversary of the date of grant.
This illustration is intended to provide further information to shareholders on the relationship between executive pay and performance.
Please note however that actual pay delivered will further be influenced by factors such as share price appreciation or depreciation and the value of dividends paid.
The following assumptions have been made in compiling the above chart CEO Minimum OnTarget Maximum Base salary Annual base salary Pension Company pension allowance Other benefits Taxable value of annual benefits provided Cash bonus 0% of salary 72% of salary 120% of salary Deferred bonus 0% of salary 36% of salary 60% of salary LTIP 0% of salary 75% of salary 300% of salary Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Chairman and nonexecutive directors The policy for the remuneration of the Chairman and nonexecutive directors at Smiths is summarised in the table below Element and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance measures Annual fee To attract motivate and retain nonexecutive directors with the required skills and expertise.
Fees may be paid in cash or a combination of cash and shares and are reviewed annually but not necessarily increased to ensure they compare appropriately to fees payable at companies of similar size and complexity to Smiths.
Additional fees are paid to the chairs of the Remuneration Nomination and Audit Committees and to the Senior Independent Director to reflect the additional time commitment of these roles.
The additional fee paid to the Chairman of the Board is determined by the Committee absent the Chairman while the fees for all nonexecutive directors are agreed by the Chairman and executive directors.
Fees are adjusted according to the outcome of the annual reviews.
The basic fee for non executive directors is subject to the maximum aggregate annual fee of 750000 as approved by shareholders in 2006 in the Companys Articles of Association.
Not applicable.
Other
The Chairman and nonexecutive directors are not eligible for benefits.
The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors are not eligible for bonuses or participation in share schemes or any pension provision.
They are paid an attendance allowance for each overseas meeting attended in addition to the annual fee and are reimbursed for actual expenses incurred transportation hotels etc.
Approach to recruitment remuneration External appointments The Committee approves the remuneration of each executive director on their appointment.
In setting the remuneration during the recruitment of external appointments the Committee will apply the following policy External appointments Pay element Policy on recruitment Salary Salary on recruitment is determined based on the same principles as the annual salary review as outlined in the policy table.
Pension As described in the policy table.
Benefits As described in the policy table.
Annual Bonus As described in the policy table and typically prorated for the proportion of year served.
Maximum annual award opportunity 180% of salary with mandatory deferral of 33% into shares.
LTIP May be considered for an award under the LTIP on similar terms to other executives.
Maximum annual award opportunity 400% of salary.
Other The Committee may make an award in recognition of incentive arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
Any such award will take account of relevant factors including the fair value of awards forfeited any performance conditions attached the likelihood of those conditions being met and the proportion of the vesting period remaining.
For the purposes of making such awards but for no other reason the Committee may avail itself of Listing Rule 9.4.2R.
The Committee may also make payments to cover reasonable expenses in recruitment and relocation and any other miscellaneous expenses including but not limited to housing tax and immigration support.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Internal promotions In cases of appointing a new executive director by way of internal promotion the policy will be consistent with that for external appointees as detailed above.
Any commitments made prior to an individuals promotion will continue to be honoured even if they would not otherwise be consistent with the policy prevailing when the commitment is fulfilled although the Company may where appropriate seek to revise an individuals existing service contract on promotion to ensure it aligns with other executive directors and prevailing market best practice.
Disclosure on the remuneration structure of any new executive director external or internal including details of any exceptional payments will be disclosed in the RNS notification made at the time of appointment and in the Annual Report on Remuneration for the year in which the recruitment occurred.
Nonexecutive directors In recruiting a new nonexecutive director the Committee will use the policy as set out in the table on page 110.
Service contracts The Companys policy is that executive directors are normally employed on terms which include a oneyear rolling period of notice and provision for the payment of a predetermined sum in the event of termination of employment in certain circumstances but excluding circumstances where the Company is entitled to dismiss without compensation.
In addition to payment of basic salary pension allowance and benefits in respect of the unexpired portion of the oneyear notice period the predetermined sum would include annual bonus and share awards only in respect of the period they have served payable following the end of the relevant performance period and subject to the normal performance conditions.
Existing service contracts or other applicable agreements are available for viewing at the Companys Registered Office.
Andy Reynolds Smith Andy Reynolds Smith is employed under a service contract with the Company dated 6 July 2015 and effective from 25 September 2015.
It may be terminated by 12 months notice given by the Company or six months notice given by Andy Reynolds Smith.
The Company may elect to terminate the contract by making a payment in lieu of notice equal to Andy Reynolds Smiths base salary and benefits including pension allowance in respect of any unserved period of notice.
The service contract contains specific provisions enabling a reduction in any phased payments in lieu of notice in the event that Andy Reynolds Smith finds alternative employment during the notice period.
Chris OShea Chris OShea is employed under a service contract with the Company dated 30 April 2015 and effective from 18 September 2015.
It may be terminated by 12 months notice given by the Company or six months notice given by Chris OShea.
The service contract contains specific provisions enabling a reduction in any phased payments in lieu of notice in the event that Chris OShea finds alternative employment during the notice period.
Chris OShea ceased to be a director on 19 May 2017 and will cease to be employed by the Company on 18 November 2017.
Up to that date he will continue to be entitled to base salary 507375 per annum benefits and pension allowance in accordance with terms of existing employment contract.
Bill Seeger Bill Seeger is employed under an extended letter of agreement with the Company dated 22 June 2017 and effective from 19 May 2017 in the role of Chief Financial Officer for an interim period.
It is anticipated that Bill Seeger will return to his NonExecutive Director position at the earlier of the appointment of a new Chief Financial Officer or 1 January 2018.
The agreement can be terminated on one months notice by the Company or by Bill Seeger.
Chairman and nonexecutive directors The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors serve the Company under letters of appointment and do not have contracts of service or contracts for services.
Except where appointed at a general meeting directors stand for election by shareholders at the first AGM following appointment.
Although the Articles of Association only require directors to stand for reelection at every third AGM or such earlier AGM as the Board may determine thereafter under Article 49 the Board has resolved that all directors who are willing to continue in office will stand for reelection by the shareholders each year at the AGM.
Either party can terminate the appointment on one months written notice and no compensation is payable in the event of an appointment being terminated early.
Nonexecutive director Date of appointment Expiry of current term Date of election last reelection Bruno Angelici 1 July 2010 2017 15 November 2016 Sir George Buckley 1 August 2013 2017 15 November 2016 Tanya Fratto 1 July 2012 2017 15 November 2016 Anne Quinn 1 August 2009 2017 15 November 2016 Bill Seeger 12 May 2014 2017 15 November 2016 Mark Seligman 16 May 2016 2017 15 November 2016 Sir Kevin Tebbit 14 June 2006 2017 15 November 2016 Noel Tata 1 January 2017 2018 NA Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Leaving and changeofcontrol provisions For those individuals regarded as bad leavers eg voluntary resignation or dismissals for cause annual bonus awards are forfeited and outstanding matching awards under the CIP and outstanding awards under the LTIP automatically lapse.
A good leaver will typically remain eligible for a prorated annual bonus award to be paid after the end of the financial year and LTIP awards will typically vest at the normal vesting date to the extent that the associated performance conditions are met but will normally be prorated on the basis of actual service within the performance period.
In cases of death or disability individuals are automatically deemed to be good leavers under the plan rules of the LTIP.
All other good leavers will be defined at the discretion of the Committee on a casebycase basis.
In the event of a change of control LTIP awards will vest to the extent that each of the performance conditions is met based on the Committees assessment of performance over the performance period to the date of change of control.
For internal performance measures the Committee may exercise its judgment in determining the outcome based on its assessment of whether or not the performance conditions would have been met to a greater or lesser extent at the end of the full performance period.
Awards will also normally be prorated to reflect the time that has elapsed between the grant of the award and the date of change of control.
The Committee retains discretion to vary these provisions on a casebycase basis.
In connection with the termination of an executive directors contract the Company may make a payment on account of accrued but untaken leave and may pay outplacement and legal fees for support provided to the individual.
External appointments Subject to the overriding requirements of the Company the Committee allows executive directors to accept external appointments where it considers that such appointments will contribute to the directors breadth of knowledge and experience.
Directors are permitted to retain fees associated with such appointments.
Consideration of employment conditions The Committee always takes into account pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company.
We do not consult directly with employees regarding executive director pay.
Each year the Committee is provided with information on pay trends and ratios of the wider employee population across the Group.
Consideration of shareholder views The Committee has actively consulted with major shareholders whenever there have been changes to the remuneration policy in a manner that is receptive to and respectful of shareholder views.
Annual Report on Remuneration
This section of the remuneration report details how our Policy was implemented in the year ended 31 July 2017.
Committee members and meeting attendance in 2017 The members of the Committee are Anne Quinn Chair of the Committee Sir George Buckley Sir Kevin Tebbit Bruno Angelici Tanya Fratto Bill Seeger until he resigned following his appointment as Chief Financial Officer on an interim basis on 19 May 2017 Mark Seligman and Noel Tata from his appointment on 1 January 2017.
Their attendance at meetings held during the year is set out on page 104.
Sir George Buckley is absent when his own remuneration as Chairman of the Company is under consideration.
The Chief Executive attends meetings of the Committee by invitation but he is not involved in the determination of his own remuneration.
Advisers to the Committee During the year the Committee received material assistance and advice from the Chief Executive the HR Director the Group Director of Reward Mercer  Kepler the Committees appointed independent remuneration adviser and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP.
The Company Secretary has been secretary to the Committee since May 2016.
The Company paid a total annual fee of 49950 to Mercer  Kepler in relation to remuneration advice to the Committee during the year.
Fees were determined on the basis of time and expenses.
During 2017 Mercer  Kepler provided the Committee with benchmarking analysis of executive and nonexecutive directors pay information on market trends drafting support for this and last years Directors remuneration report and other relevant assistance on determining directors remuneration.
Kepler was reappointed by the Committee via competitive tender in 2013.
Mercer  Kepler is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and a signatory to its Code of Conduct.
Keplers parent company Mercer provides unrelated services to the Group in the areas of allemployee reward and retirement benefits.
However the Committee is satisfied that the advice provided by Mercer  Kepler is objective and independent and that they do not have connections with the company that may impair their independence.
Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP was appointed by the Company to advise the Group on various legal matters during the year.
Main activities during the year During the year under review the Committees main activities included further aligning remuneration arrangements to the new business strategy consideration of market trends and pay levels for the executive directors and the Chairman the exit arrangements of the Chief Financial Officer review of all senior executive salary and bonus payments target setting for both the Annual Incentive Plan and LongTerm Incentive Plan performance review of the executive directors against the targets for the financial year and other activities including the appointment terms of key senior executive roles.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Summary of shareholder binding vote on Directors Remuneration Policy The resulting voting outcome in 2015 for Directors Remuneration Policy was as follows Votes for % of votes cast for Votes against % of votes cast against Total votes cast Votes withheld abstentions 278345426 96.4% 10397058 3.6% 288742484 22481558 Summary of shareholder advisory vote on Directors Remuneration Report The resulting voting outcome for last years Directors Remuneration Report was as follows Votes for % of votes cast for Votes against % of votes cast against Total votes cast Votes withheld abstentions 269575472 97.8% 6021703 2.2% 275597175 11129864 Directors single figure of annual remuneration auditable Executive directors Salaryfees Benefits Annual bonus
Payments in lieu of pension contribution Other
Andy Reynolds Smith 344 1038   195 163  1112 2320 2964 Chris OShea   101 108  751 1082 1862 Bill Seeger Chairman and nonexecutive directors Salaryfees Benefits Annual bonus
Payments in lieu of pension contribution Other Total Sir George Buckley 423 413 9telSir Kevin Tebbit Anne Quinn Bruno Angelici Tanya Fratto Bill Seeger Mark Seligman Noel Tata 45  18 63 1 Bill Seeger was appointed as Chief Financial Officer on an interim basis on 19 May 2017 having served as a nonexecutive director and chairing the Audit Committee prior to that date.
Sir George Buckleys fee comprised his nonexecutive directors fee an additional fee for being Chairman and his additional fee for chairing the Nomination Committee.
Sir Kevin Tebbits fees comprised his nonexecutive directors fee and his additional fee payable to the Senior Independent Director from November 2015.
Anne Quinns fees comprised her nonexecutive directors fee and her additional fee for Chairing the Remuneration Committee.
Mark Seligmans fees for 2016 are for a part year following his appointment on 16 May 2016.
His fees for 2017 include his additional fee for Chairing the Audit Committee from 19 May.
Benefits for executive directors include car allowance life assurance and private healthcare insurance.
For the Chairman and nonexecutive directors this value relates to reimbursed travelrelated expenses which is grossedup for the UK income tax and National Insurance contributions paid by the company on their behalf.
7 Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea each deferred 33% of their 2017 and 2016 bonus earned into Smiths shares.
The total bonus paid during the year including deferral is captured under annual bonus above.
The deferral is for a threeyear period and is not subject to any further performance conditions.
Other includes the face values of restricted share awards made to Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea to reflect outstanding awards forfeited on their joining Smiths Group and a cash payment made to Andy Reynolds Smith to reflect the prorated 2015 annual bonus foregone in respect of his former employment.
These values also include amounts received from the Companys Sharesave Scheme in 2016.
Full details of the buyout arrangements were disclosed in last years Annual Report on Remuneration.
Incentive outcomes for 2017 auditable 2017 annual bonus outcome for Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea The table below summarises the structure of the 2017 annual bonus our performance and the resulting annual bonus payout for each of the executive directors Director Measure Weighting
Opportunity
Earned bonus Performance Level % of max.
Andy Reynolds Smith EPS 50% 90% Just Below Maximum 98.0% 88.2% 688 Cash Conversion 20% 36% Just Below Maximum 94.0% 33.8% 264 Personal Objectives 30% 54% See below 93.0% 50.2% 392 Total 100% 180% 95.7% 172.3% 1344 Chris OShea EPS 50% 75% Just Below Maximum 98.0% 73.5% 297 Cash Conversion 20% 30% Just Below Maximum 94.0% 28.2% 114 Personal Objectives 30% 45% See below 90.0% 40.5% 164 Total 100% 150% 94.8% 142.2% 575 1 The annual bonus earned by Chris OShea is prorated to 18 May 2017 when he stepped down from the Board.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Personal Objectives Challenging personal objectives are set for each Executive Director to reinforce the Companys annual and strategic plans.
For 2017 these targets included focus on the Groups portfolio shape building organisation and leadership excellence and several targeted financial priorities.
In determining the outcomes of this element of the AIP the Committee took into consideration the following achievements Strong execution of strategic initiatives including portfolio reshaping.
The successful acquisition of Morpho provides global strength in our Detection business and was an important step in growing Smiths and the portfolio has been reshaped further by focussing on attractive market segments and divesting four businesses.
The Group has also successfully introduced a new product innovation process.
Significant implementation of the Smiths Way to clarify the Groups culture vision and values and build the capabilities and bench strength of our senior leadership team Strong execution of financial priorities including reducing working capital to mobilise funds to support growth steady progress during the year in our performance on inventory turns and improvement in quality management.
The Group has also continued to manage its pension liabilities to ensure obligations are met without longterm over funding.
Incentive outcomes for 2016 auditable As disclosed last year the Committee will disclose annual bonus targets at such time as these are considered to be no longer commercially sensitive.
In line with this commitment the table below summarises the financial targets and the Companys actual performance against these for the 2016 annual bonus.
Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea both achieved 92% of their personal objectives after delivering significant improvement in free cash flow and executing on the important acquisition and divestiture strategy.
Andy Reynolds Smith had personal objectives focused on the strategic direction of the Group including bringing greater financial stability and earnings growth as well as driving measurable improvements in commercial and programme management.
Chris OSheas personal objectives focused on building strong functional capability as well as developing plans for improved reporting across the Group in the areas of financial performance and New Product Introduction.
Performance Targets and Actual Performance Measure Threshold Target Maximum Actual EPS 78.9.
Cash Conversion Q1  55%  55% Q2  85%  85% Q3  85%  85% Q4  85%  85% FY  85%  102% 1 Maximum payout requires the meeting or exceeding of all quarterly targets and the full year target.
2014 CIP outcome Matching awards granted under the CIP in 2014 were subject to the following performance condition Vesting schedule Actual performance Measure Weighting Performance period ROCE performance % match ROCE % match Group ROCE 100% 1 August 2014 to 31 July 2017 WACC1% p.
0% WACC3% p.
200% WACC1% p.
100% WACC1% to 3% p.
100% WACC3% p.
200% Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea did not participate in the 2014 CIP.
2014 CIP outcome for past Directors 2014 CIP
Vesting %
Date of vesting
Value
Philip Bowman 51203 100% 51203 Oct 2017 16.11 825 1 Based on the average share price over the three months to 31 July 2017 of 16.11 2 Philip Bowman was formerly the Chief Executive Officer and an executive director of the Company.
He ceased to be an employee on 31 December 2015 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE 2014 LTIP outcome Awards granted under the LTIP in 2014 were subject to the following performance conditions Vesting schedule Actual performance Measure Weighting Performance period Performance % vesting Outturn % vesting Group EPS growth 50% 1 August 2014 to 31 July 2017 4% p.
0% 6.4% p.
23.7% 4% p.
12.5% 12% p.
50.0% Straightline vesting between these points Total Shareholder Return rank vs.
FTSE 100 companies excluding financial services 30% 1 August 2014 to 31 July 2017 Below median 0% Ranked 63rd 18.9% Median 7.5% Upper quartile or above 30.0% Straightline vesting between these points Average cash conversion 20% 1 August 2014 to 31 July 2017 85% 0% 103.1% 20.0% 85% 5.0% 100% 20.0% Straightline vesting between these points Total 62.6% Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea did not participate in the 2014 LTIP.
2014 LTIP outcome for past Directors 2014 LTIP
Interests
Date of vesting
Value
Philip Bowman 200796 62.6% 125697 Oct 2017 16.11 2025 1 Based on the average share price over the three months to 31 July 2017 of 16.11 2 Philip Bowman was formerly the Chief Executive Officer and an executive director of the Company.
He ceased to be an employee on 31 December 2015 and his share awards were preserved as previously disclosed to shareholders Scheme interests awarded in 2017 auditable 2016 LTIP During the year ended 31 July 2017 the executive directors were awarded conditional share awards under the LTIP details of which are summarised in the table below Executive Form of award Date of grant
Face value % of salary Date of vesting Award price Andy Reynolds Smith Conditional shares 8 Nov 2016 167741 13.95 2340 300% Oct 2019 Chris OShea Conditional shares 8 Nov 2016 90927 13.95 1268 250% Oct 2019 1 The closing price on 7 November 2016.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D The performance conditions attached to these 2016 LTIP awards are as follows Vesting schedule Measure Weighting Performance period Performance % vesting Group EPS growth 35% 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2019 3% p.
0% 3% p.
8.75% 12% p.
35.0% Straightline vesting between these points Return on Capital Employed 35% 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2019 15% 0% 15% 8.75% 18% 35.0% Straightline vesting between these points Average cash conversion 30% 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2019 85% 0% 85% 7.5% 100% 30.0% Straightline vesting between these points 2016 Deferred Bonus Award During the year ended 31 July 2017 the executive directors were awarded conditional shares as deferred bonus awards details of which are summarised in the table below.
The only performance condition is continued employment.
Executive Form of award Date of grant
Face value Date of vesting Award price Andy Reynolds Smith Conditional shares 8 Nov 2016 24546 13.95 342 8 Nov 2019 Chris OShea Conditional shares 8 Nov 2016 13519 13.95 186 8 Nov 2019 1 The closing price on 7 November 2016.
SAYE
Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea became participants in the Smiths Group Sharesave Scheme in the year ending in 31 July 2016 and as they chose to participate at the maximum level they did not participate in the scheme in the year ending in 31 July 2017.
Andy
Reynolds Smith has 2078 share options under the scheme and Chris OShea has 3464 share options under the scheme.
Buyout awards As disclosed in last years Annual Report on Remuneration Andy Reynolds Smith and Chris OShea were made certain buyout awards to replicate the structure and fair value of incentives forfeited by each director as a consequence of their joining Smiths Group.
Andy Reynolds Smith received an award of 86893 restricted shares the grant value of which was captured in the 2016 single figure.
30412 shares vested on the 30 June 2016 with the remaining 56481 restricted shares vesting on 30 June 2017 at a share price of 1597p.
Andy Reynolds Smith also received awards of 79806 26602 and 26602 conditional shares which vest subject to performance conditions in October 2018 2019 and 2020 respectively subject to the achievement of performance conditions.
To the extent these awards vest their value will be reflected in the 2018 2019 and 2020 single figures of remuneration for Andy Reynolds Smith.
Chris OShea received 71938 restricted shares the grant value of which was captured in the 2016 single figure.
35969 shares vested on 18 September 2016 at a share price of 1345p and the remaining 35969 shares vested on 18 September 2017 at a share price of 15.91p.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Percentage change in remuneration from 201516 to 201617 Salary Benefits Bonus CEO remuneration 0.0% 0% 29.5% Average of all employees 2.8% 0% 37.3% All employees is defined as the global senior management population of approximately 60 individuals who are eligible to participate in the same incentive arrangements as the Chief Executive.
Relative importance of spend on pay The table below shows shareholder distributions i. years ended 31 July 2016 and 31 July 2017 and the percentage change.
2017 m 2016 m Change Shareholder distributions 167 163 2.5% Employee costs 978 872 12.2% Payments to past directors auditable Other than those disclosed in the single figure of annual remuneration table on page 113 and on page 111 in relation to Chris OShea the only payment is a contribution of 10000 to Chris OSheas legal fees in conjunction with his stepping down arrangements.
Payments for loss of office auditable No exit payments were made during the year ending 31 July 2017.
TSR performance The following graph shows the Companys total shareholder return TSR performance over the past eight years compared to the FTSE 100 Index.
The FTSE 100 Index of which the Company has been a member throughout the period has been selected to reflect the TSR performance of other leading UKlisted companies.
The values of hypothetical 100 investments in the FTSE 100 Index and Smiths Group plc shares were 228.01 and 300.96 respectively.
TOTAL SHAREHOLDER RETURN telteltel 2017 Value of 100 invested on 31 July 2009 n Smiths Group n FTSE100 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D CEO remuneration for the last eight years
P Bowman P Bowman P Bowman P Bowman P Bowman P Bowman P Bowman A Reynolds
A Reynolds
CEO total remuneration 000 3399 4776 5026 3864 3912 4195 1602 2964 2320 Annual bonus outcome % max 95% 64% 79% 39% 43% 80% 88% 89% 96% CIP outcome % max na 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% na na 2007 PSP outcome % max 46% 33% na na na na na na na LTIP outcome % max 18% 17% 18% na na 1 The 2007 PSP outcome shown for 2010 represents the outcome under the EPS element of that award only 23 of the award.
The 2007 PSP outcome shown for 2011 represents the outcome under the TSR element of that award 13 of the award as TSR performance was measured over a threeyear period commencing on the date of the grant.
Note VSP outcome as a percentage of maximum is not shown in table above as award opportunity was uncapped.
Awards received are included in the CEO total remuneration table above and the values are 1453000 for 2011 150694 shares at a price of 9.64 1899000 for 2012 175193 shares at a price of 10.84 and 364000 for 2013 at 25885 shares at a price of 14.06.
Statement of implementation of remuneration policy in 2018 Base salary and benefits Salaries are reviewed but not necessarily increased annually and benchmarked against comparable roles at other FTSE 100 companies of similar market capitalisation revenues and complexity.
Having considered a number of important factors including individuals performance and experience the relative performance of the Company and the remuneration policy within the Company the Committee has determined the following annualised salaries for executive directors for 2018 Executive director 201617 201718 Andy Reynolds Smith 780000 800000 Bill Seeger was appointed Chief Financial Officer on an interim basis on 19 May 2017 after it was announced that Chris OShea would be stepping down.
In this role Bill Seeger is paid a monthly salary of 83333.
Bill Seeger does not receive any pension contribution or allowance in lieu and he is not eligible to participate in the annual bonus or the LTIP.
Pension and benefits Andy Reynolds Smith will continue to receive a cash allowance in lieu of pension of 25% of his base salary and Chris OShea will also continue to do so until he leaves the Company on 18 November 2017.
The executive directors do not have a prospective entitlement to a defined benefit pension.
Annual bonus For 2018 Andy Reynolds Smith will continue to have a maximum bonus opportunity of 180% of salary.
Annual bonus measures and their weightings will remain unchanged from 2017.
33% of any bonus earned will be deferred into shares for three years.
Specific targets cannot be disclosed at this time due to the commercially sensitive nature of these objectives but they will be disclosed at such a time as the Committee deems them to no longer affect the commerciality of the Company likely to be within two years of the end of the performance period.
LongTerm Incentive Plan The LTIP is a conventional share plan under which an award over a capped number of shares will vest if demanding performance conditions are met.
LTIP awards of conditional shares are granted to selected senior executives including the executive directors with face values of up to 400% of salary.
Under the LTIP the normal annual grants are 300% of salary for the Chief Executive and 250% of salary for the Finance Director.
The LTIP award granted to Andy Reynolds Smith in 201718 at the normal annual grant level of 300% of salary will vest on the achievement of the following performance conditions Performance measure Weighting
Maximum performance target full vesting of element 3year EPS growth 35% 3% p.
12% p.
3year average return on capital employed 35% 15% 18% 3year average annual cash conversion 30% 90% 105% This represents no change to the LTIP for the 201718 cycle.
The Committee believes that the current structure provides an appropriate balance between earnings growth returns and cash.
The Committee recognises that this balance of Groups performance measures remains very important for many of our largest shareholders.
As previously stated the scorecard will be reviewed at the start of each future LTIP cycle to ensure it continues to reflect the Groups strategic priorities.
For performance between threshold and maximum awards vest on a straightline sliding scale.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Nonexecutive director fees NED fees paid for 2017 and to be paid in 2018 are shown below 2017 2018 NED base fee 66200 67850 Additional fee payable to the Chairman of the Board 336636 345050 Additional fee payable to the Senior Independent Director 20000 No change Additional fees for Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committee Chairs 20000 No change Attendance allowance for meetings outside the NEDs home continent 3000 per meeting 4000 per meeting Share ownership guidelines Executive directors are required over time to acquire a shareholding with a value equal to at least two years base salary.
Executive directors are required to retain at least 50% of any net vested share awards after sales to meet tax liabilities until those guidelines are achieved.
Bill Seeger is not subject to this requirement reflecting the interim nature of his appointment as CFO.
There is no shareholding policy for nonexecutive directors.
Directors shareholdings auditable The table below shows the shareholding of each director or past director and for executive directors the shareholding against their respective shareholding requirement as at 31 July 2017.
Shareholding requirement % 201617 salary
Shares subject to performance
Shares subject to CIP deferral Save As You Earn SAYE
Guideline met Andy Reynolds Smith 200% 148649 527275 2078 293% Yes Chris OShea 200% 39840 210723 3464 124% No Bruno Angelici 2000 Sir George Buckley 10000 Tanya Fratto 1500 Anne Quinn 1024 Bill Seeger 5000 Mark Seligman 5000 Sir Kevin Tebbit 1000 Noel Tata 0 1 Executive directors have five years from the date of appointment to meet the required personal shareholding.
In accordance with a binding commitment entered into on 19 July 2017 pursuant to which the Chairman purchases Ordinary Shares on a quarterly basis using a fixed proportion 20% of the aftertax fees he receives from the Company Sir George Buckley acquired 431 Ordinary Shares on 1 August 2017.
There have been no other changes in the interests of the directors and their connected persons between 31 July 2017 and the date of this report.
Share scheme dilution limits The Company complies with the guidelines laid down by the Investment Association.
These restrict the issue of new shares under all the Companys share schemes in any 10year period to 10% of the issued ordinary share capital and under the Companys discretionary schemes to 5% in any 10year period.
As at 31 July 2017 the headroom available under these limits was 7.69% and 3.22% respectively.
Auditable part The directors single figure of annual remuneration and accompanying notes on page 113 the incentive outcomes for 2016 and 2017 on pages 113 and 114 the scheme interests awarded in 2017 and accompanying notes on page 115 the payments to past directors and payments for loss of office on page 117 the directors shareholdings on page 119 and the directors share options and longterm plans table on page 120 have been audited.
The Directors remuneration report has been approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by ANNE QUINN CBE CHAIR OF THE REMUNERATION COMMITTEE 21 September 2017 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Directors share options and longterm share plans Auditable Director and Plans
31 July
Options
31 July
Option and award data Awards vested 201617
Exercise price Grant date
Expiry date
Exercise price
Market price at date of exercise Andy Reynolds Smith appointed 25 September 2015 Restricted Share Award 0 56481 na 261115 300617 300617 300617 60360 na 1033.00p 1593.00p Performance Share Award 79806 79806 A na 261115 Oct 2018 26602 26602 na 261115 Oct 2019 26602 26602 na 261115 Oct 2020 LTIP 2015 226524 226524 A na 261115 Oct 2018 167741 0 B na 081116 Oct 2019 Deferred Bonus Award 24546   na 081116 081119 SAYE 2078 2078  866.00p 110516 010819 010220 Chris OShea stepped down 18 May 2017 CFO Restricted Share Award 0 35969 na 261115 180916 300916 37371 na 1033.00p 1453.27p 35969 35969 na 261115 180917 180917 LTIP 2015 119796 119796 A na 261115 Oct 2018 90927 0 B na 081116 Oct 2019 Deferred Bonus Award 13519   na 081116 081119 SAYE 3464 3464  866.00p 110516 010821 010222
CEO Restricted Share Award Under the terms of his contract of employment on joining the Company Andy Reynolds Smith was granted a buyout restricted share award over 86893 shares of which 35% vested on 30 June 2016 and 65% vested on 30 June 2017.
The terms of the award provide that additional shares are awarded on vesting to a value equivalent to the notional dividends that would have been earned on the number of shares that vest.
Andy Reynolds Smith received 3879 additional shares on 30 June 2017 in respect of the notional dividends on the tranche of his award that vested on this date.
Performance Share Award Under the terms of his contract of employment on joining the Company Andy Reynolds Smith was also granted a buyout conditional award over 133010 shares of which up to 60% are expected to vest in October 2018 subject to the performance tests applicable to awards granted under LTIP 2015 in 2015 up to 20% are expected to vest in October 2019 subject to performance tests applicable to awards granted under longterm incentive plans in 2016 and up to 20% are expected to vest in October 2020 subject to the performance tests applicable to awards granted under longterm incentive plans in 2017.
The terms of the award provide that additional shares are awarded on vesting to a value equivalent to the notional dividends that would have been earned on the number of shares that vest.
CFO Restricted Share Award Under the terms of his contract of employment on joining the Company Chris OShea was granted a buyout restricted share award over 71938 shares of which 50% vested on 18 September 2016 or at the end of any closed period in force at the time and subject to Chris OShea remaining an employee of the Company and 50% will vest on 18 September 2017 or at the end of any closed period in force at the time and subject to Chris OShea remaining an employee of the Company.
The terms of the award provide that additional shares are awarded on vesting to a value equivalent to the notional dividends that would have been earned on the number of shares that vest.
Chris OShea received 1402 additional shares on 30 September 2016 in respect of the notional dividends on the tranche of his award that vested on that day.
LTIP 2015 The Smiths Group Long Term Incentive Plan 2015 SAYE The Smiths Group Sharesave Scheme The Vesting Dates shown above in respect of awards made under CIP and the LTIPs are subject to the relevant performance tests being passed.
The Expiry dates shown above apply in normal circumstances.
No Expiry date is shown if the option or award was exercised or vested or lapsed prior to 19 September 2017.
Midmarket closing price of a Smiths share on the business day preceding the date of grant.
Note the exercise price of an option under the SAYE is set at 20% less than the midmarket closing price of a Smiths share on the business day immediately preceding the day on which employees are invited to participate in the grant.
Actual sale price of shares sold on date of exercise of an option or the vesting of an award or the midmarket closing quotation on the date of exercise when no shares are sold.
Performance tests A LTIP 2015 awards  30% subject to revenue growth 30% subject to EPS element 20% subject to cash conversion 20% subject to return on capital employed LTIP 2016 awards 35% subject to EPS element 35% subject to return on capital employed 30% subject to cash conversion There are no performance criteria for the Deferred Bonus Shares awards or SAYE
The high and low market prices of the ordinary shares during the period 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017 were 1238p and 1685p respectively.
The midmarket closing price on 31 July 2016 was 1263p and on 31 July 2017 was 1535p.
The midmarket closing prices of a Smiths share on the dates of the awards made to directors in the 201617 financial year was 1404p 8 November 2016 The options over 5542 shares granted to and held by the directors under SAYE at 31 July 2017 were granted at exercise prices below the market price of a Smiths Group share on 23 September 2016 1420p.
None of the options or awards listed above was subject to any payment on grant No other directors held any options over the Companys shares during the period 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017.
No options or awards have been granted to or exercised by directors or have lapsed during the period 1 August to 19 September 2017.
At 31 July 2017 the trustee of the Employee Share Trust held 766 shares none of the directors had an interest in these shares at 31 July 2017.
The market value of the shares held by the trustee on 31 July 2017 was 11758 and dividends of approximately 324 were waived in the year in respect of the shares held by the trustee during the year.
Special provisions permit early exercise of options and vesting of awards in the event of retirement redundancy death etc.
DI R E C T OR S  R E M U N E R AT I ON R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE DIR EC T OR S R E P OR T
The membership of the Board and biographical details of the directors are given on pages 78 to 81.
The following directors served as directors of the Company throughout the year ended 31 July 2017 Name Role on the Board Sir George Buckley Chairman Andy Reynolds Smith Executive director Bill Seeger Executive director Bruno Angelici Nonexecutive director Tanya Fratto Nonexecutive director Anne Quinn CBE Nonexecutive director Mark Seligman Nonexecutive director Sir Kevin Tebbit KCB CMG Nonexecutive director The following table discloses directorate changes during the year Name Role on the Board Date of appointmentresignation Noel Tata Nonexecutive director Appointed on 1 January 2017 Chris OShea Executive director Resigned on 19 May 2017 Details of directors beneficial and nonbeneficial interests in the shares of the Company are shown on page 119.
In accordance with section 4302B of the Act details of the arrangements made in respect of the retirement of Philip Bowman and the resignation of Chris OShea are available on the Smiths website site.
Appointment and replacement of directors The rules regarding the appointment and replacement of directors are determined by the Companys Articles of Association and the
The Articles of Association can only be amended by a special resolution of the shareholders.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code all the directors apart from Noel Tata will retire voluntarily from office at the 2017 Annual General Meeting AGM and seek reelection by the shareholders.
The directors may appoint a person to be a director but under the Articles of Association they shall only hold office until the next AGM when they shall be eligible for election by the shareholders.
Accordingly Noel Tata will retire and seek election at the 2017 AGM.
Directors interests in contracts Details of the executive directors service contracts are disclosed in the service contracts section of the Directors remuneration report on page 111.
Details of the interests of the executive directors in the Companys share option schemes and plans are shown in the Directors remuneration report on page 120.
Qualifying thirdparty indemnity provisions as defined by section 234 of the Act have remained in force for the directors of the Company and certain other employees in respect of their directorships of some subsidiary companies during the financial year ended 31 July 2017 and at the date of this report are in force for the benefit of the current directors and certain other employees who are directors of some subsidiary companies in relation to certain losses and liabilities which they may incur or may have incurred to third parties in the course of their professional duties for the Company or a subsidiary company as applicable.
Apart from the exceptions referred to above no director had an interest in any significant contract to which the Company or its subsidiaries was a party during the year.
The Strategic report is a requirement of the Companies Act 2006 the Act and can be found on pages 1 to 75.
The Company has chosen in accordance with section 414 C11 of the Act and as noted in this Directors Report to include certain matters in its Strategic report that would otherwise be disclosed in this Directors Report.
Other information that is relevant to the Directors Report and which is incorporated by reference into this report including information required in accordance with the Act and Listing Rule 9.8.4R of the Financial Conduct Authoritys Listing Rules can be located as follows Disclosure Page Likely future business developments 2451 Research and Development activities 3251 Employment of disabled persons and employee involvement 73 Greenhouse gas emissions 70 Financial instruments 55 Independent auditors report 129135 Corporate governance statement The corporate governance statement is on pages 78 to 125 and is incorporated by reference into this Directors Report.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP has reviewed the Companys statements as to compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code to the extent required by the UK Listing Authority Listing
The results of its review are set out in the independent auditors report on pages 129135.
Results and dividends The results for the financial year ended 31 July 2017 are set out in the consolidated income statement.
Revenue for the year amounted to 3280m 2016 2949m.
The profit for the year after taxation and discontinued operations amounted to 564m 2016 An interim dividend of 13.55p per ordinary share of 37.5p ordinary share was paid on 28 April 2017.
The directors recommend for payment on 17 November 2017 a final cash dividend of 29.70p per ordinary share making a total dividend of 43.25p for the financial year.
The Groups dividend policy is described in the Financial review on page 53.
Waiver of dividends The following waived all dividends payable in the year and all future dividends on their shareholdings in the Company Wealth Nominees Limited Smiths Industries Employee Share Trust Reuter File Limited Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Post balance sheet events The 175m private placement 2018 was repaid early in August 2017.
Interests in voting rights As at 31 July 2017 the Company had been notified pursuant to the Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTRs of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA or had received disclosures pursuant to the Act of shareholding interests of the following holdings of voting rights in shares Number of shares Percentage of issued ordinary share capital Date of notification or disclosure Ameriprise Financial 19.5m 4.9% 8 June 2017 BlackRock 27.8m 7.0% 21 September 2016 Dodge and Cox 28.4m 7.2% 12 August 2016 Harris Associates LP 19.1m 4.8% 11 October 2016 Jupiter Asset Management 14.8m 3.8% 22 September 2016 During the period 1 August to 15 September 2017 the Company has received the following notifications or disclosures Number of shares Percentage of issued ordinary share capital Date of notification Dodge and Cox 19.5m 4.9% 24 August 2017 Corporate responsibility The Company operates a Code of Business Ethics and has Group policies on environmental employee and health and safety matters.
The Company seeks to minimise as far as is reasonably practicable any detrimental effects on the environment of its operations and products.
Further information on environmental employee and health and safety matters is contained in the Responsible Business section on pages 68 to 75.
The full Responsible Business report is available online at site
The Company does not operate through any branches.
Some Group subsidiary companies have established branch operations outside the UK.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Share capital As at 31 July 2017 the Companys issued share capital was 395476662 ordinary shares with a nominal value of 148303748.
The ordinary shares are listed and admitted to trading on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
The Company has an American Depositary Receipt ADR programme for which J.
Morgan acts as Depositary and transfer agent.
One ADR equates to one ordinary share and the programme trades overthecounter as a level 1 ADR programme.
As at 31 July 2017 7059489 ordinary shares were held by the nominee of the programme depositary in respect of the same number of ADRs in issue at that time.
The holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive the Companys reports and accounts to attend and speak at general meetings of the Company to appoint proxies and to exercise voting rights.
There are no restrictions on transfer or limitations on the holding of any class of shares.
There are no requirements for prior approval of any transfers.
None of the shares carry any special rights with regards to control of the Company.
There are no restrictions on the voting rights attaching to the ordinary shares other than a 48 hour cutoff for the casting of proxy votes prior to a general meeting.
There are no arrangements of which the directors are aware under which financial rights are held by a person other than the holder of the shares and no known agreements relating to or restrictions on share transfers or voting rights.
Shares acquired through Company share schemes and plans rank pari passu with the shares in issue and have no special rights.
The
Company operates an employee benefit trust with an independent trustee to hold shares pending employees becoming entitled to them under the Companys share schemes and plans.
On 31 July 2017 the trust held 766 ordinary shares in the Company.
The trust waived its dividend entitlement on its holding during the year and the trust abstains from voting the shares at general meetings.
Powers of the directors The powers of the directors are determined by the Act and the Articles of Association of the Company.
The directors have been authorised to issue and allot shares and to buy back shares.
These powers are subject to annual shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting AGM and at the 2017 AGM shareholders will be asked to renew and extend the authority given to the directors at the last AGM to allot shares in the Company or grant rights to subscribe for or to convert any security into shares in the Company for the purposes of section 551 of the Act the Allotment Resolution.
The authority in the first part of the Allotment Resolution will allow the directors to allot new shares in the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares in the Company up to a nominal value which is equivalent to approximately onethird of the total issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
The authority in the second part of the Allotment Resolution will allow the directors to allot new shares in the Company or to grant rights to subscribe for or convert any security into shares in the Company only in connection with a rights issue up to a nominal value which is equivalent to approximately an additional third of the total issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
This is in line with corporate governance guidelines.
There are no present plans to undertake a rights issue or to allot new shares other than in connection with the Companys share schemes and plans.
The directors intend to take note of relevant corporate governance guidelines on the use of such powers in the event that the authority is exercised.
The Company did not repurchase any shares during the financial year ended 31 July 2017.
As at 15 September 2017 the Company had an unexpired authority to repurchase ordinary shares up to a maximum of 39540648.
As at 15 September 2017 the Company did not hold any shares in treasury.
Any ordinary shares purchased may be cancelled or held in treasury.
Change of control The Company has in place credit facility agreements under which a change in control would trigger prepayment clauses.
The
Company also has bonds in issue the terms of which would allow bondholders to exercise put options and require the Company to buy back the bonds at their principal amount plus interest if a rating downgrade occurs at the same time as a change of control takes effect.
The Companys share plans including the buyout awards granted to the executive directors on their appointments contain clauses which may cause options and awards to vest on a change in control in some cases subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions at that time.
The Company is not party to any other significant agreements that would take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control following a takeover.
No director or employee is contractually entitled to compensation for loss of office or employment as a result of a change in control except that provisions in the Companys share schemes may cause options and awards granted to employees under such schemes to vest on a change in control in some cases subject to the satisfaction of performance conditions at that time.
Remuneration policy Details of the Directors remuneration policy as approved at the AGM in 2015 is shown on pages 105 to 108 of the Directors remuneration report.
Under the regulations which now form part of the Act the remuneration policy must be put to a binding shareholder vote at least once every three years.
All payments to former and current directors must comply with the terms of the policy unless specifically approved by shareholders in general meeting.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 DI R E C T OR S  R E P OR T C O N T I N U E D Political donations The Group made contributions to nonEU political parties totaling 58500 46000 during the year.
The political contributions were made on a bipartisan basis in the US in accordance with US state and federal election laws in order to raise awareness and to promote the interests of the Company.
The Group has a number of key manufacturing sites and approximately 8100 employees in the US.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic report on pages 1 to 75.
The financial position of the Company its cashflows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial review on pages 52 to 57.
In addition the notes to the accounts include the Companys objectives policies and processes for managing its capital financial risk management objectives details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposures to credit risk and liquidity risk.
In October 2016 the Company established a 2.5bn Euro Medium Term Note Programme the Programme.
In February 2017 pursuant to the Programme the Company issued 650m of new longterm public debt securities with a maturity in 2027.
On 5 May 2017 the Group repaid 300m debt under longterm public debt securities issued in 2010.
The new issuance and repayment resulted in an increase in the average maturity of gross debt to 5.9 years from 4.5 years at 31 July 2016.
At 31 July 2017 the net debt of the Group was 967m a 11m decrease from 31 July 2016.
At the end of July the Group had available cash and shortterm deposits of 782m.
These liquid resources are immediately available with 98% invested with the Groups global banking partners.
The Group maintains a core US800m committed revolving credit facility from these banks which was undrawn at 31 July 2017.
This committed facility matures in February 2021.
This facility has certain financial covenants however these are not expected to prevent utilisation at the Groups discretion if required.
This financial position and debt maturity profile provides confidence that the Group has sufficient financial resources for the foreseeable future.
As a consequence the directors believe that the Company is well placed to manage its business and its liabilities as they fall due.
In coming to this conclusion the directors have taken account of the Groups risk management process described on pages 60 to 61 and have paid particular attention to the financial and pension funding risks and their mitigation see page 62.
The directors having made appropriate enquiries have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operation for the foreseeable future and for a period of at least 12 months from the date of this report.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the annual accounts of the Company and the Group.
Long term Viability Statement The directors have assessed the longerterm prospects of the Group taking into account the current position of the Group and a range of internal and external factors.
The assessment is described in the Strategic report on page 57.
Disclosure of information to the auditor As at the date of this report as far as each director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware.
Each director has taken all the steps he or she should have taken as a director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
Annual General Meeting AGM The 2017 AGM will be held on Tuesday 14 November 2017 at 1100 am.
The Notice of the AGM will be published on the Companys website site on or around Tuesday 10 October 2017.
Electronic copies of the Annual Report 2017 and the Notice of AGM will be posted on the Companys website.
Further information about the AGM and the Registrar can be found on page 215.
By order of the Board MEL ROWLANDS COMPANY SECRETARY Smiths Group plc 4th Floor 1112 St Jamess Square London SW1Y 4LB 21 September 2017 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 GO VERNANCE Disclosure table pursuant to Listing Rule LR9.8.4R Listing Rule Information to be included Disclosure 9.8.41 Interest capitalised by the Group 2.4m interest was capitalised as part of the costs of development projects.
0.6m of tax relief has been recognised as current tax relief in the period 9.8.42 Unaudited financial information The supplementary US dollar financial statements on pages The Group financial record 20132017 on page 189 9.8.44 Longterm incentive scheme only involving a director No disclosure for the year ended 31 December 2017 9.8.45 Directors waivers of emoluments None 9.8.46 Directors waivers of future emoluments None 9.8.47 Non prorata allotments for cash issuer Shares have been issued and allotted pursuant to the exercise options awarded under shareholderapproved schemes.
See page 184 for more information.
9.8.48 Non prorata allotments for cash major subsidiaries None 9.8.49 Listed company is a subsidiary of another company Not applicable 9.8.410 Contracts of significance involving a a director or b a controlling shareholder a None b Not applicable 9.8.411 Contracts for the provision of services by a controlling shareholder Not applicable 9.8.412 Waivers of dividends See page 121 9.8.413 Waivers of future dividends See page 121 9.8.414 Agreement with a controlling shareholder Not applicable Additional information pursuant to LR9.8.6 Listing Rule Information to be included Disclosure 9.8.61 Directors and their connected persons interests in Smiths shares at yearend and at not more than one month prior to date of the Notice of AGM See page 119 9.8.62 Interests in Smiths shares disclosed under DTR5 at yearend and not more than one month prior to date of the Notice of AGM See pages 122 9.8.63a Directors going concern statement See page 124 9.8.63b Directors assessment of the Companys prospects See page 57 9.8.64a Amount of the authority to purchase own shares available at yearend Authority available in full at yearend 9.8.64b Offmarket purchases of own shares during the year None 9.8.64c Offmarket purchases of own shares post yearend None 9.8.64d Non prorata sales of treasury shares during the year None 9.8.65 Compliance with the main principles of the UK Corporate Governance Code See the Corporate governance statement on page 83 9.8.66b Details of noncompliance with UK Corporate Governance Code and reasons
9.8.67 Re directors proposed for reelection the unexpired term of any directors service contract and a statement about directors with no service contracts Details of the executive directors service contracts are given in the Directors remuneration report on page 111 The Chairman and the nonexecutive directors serve under letters of appointment  see page 111 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 F I NAN C IAL S Statement of directors responsibilities Independent auditors report to the members of Smiths Group plc Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income Consolidated balance sheet Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated cashflow statement Accounting policies Income statement notes Segment information Operating profit Nonstatutory profit measures Net finance costs Earnings per share
Taxation notes
Employee costs notes
Postretirement benefits Employee share schemes Balance sheet notes Intangible assets Impairment testing Property plant and equipment
Trade and other receivables Trade and other payables Financial instruments notes Financial assets Borrowings and net debt Financial risk management Derivative financial instruments Fair value of financial instruments
Provisions notes Provisions and contingent liabilities Reserves notes Share capital
Reserves
Acquisitions and disposals
Discontinued operations and businesses held for sale
Cashflow notes
Other associated notes Nonstatutory capital and metrics Unaudited Group financial record Unaudited US dollar primary statements Unaudited Group US dollar financial record 20132017 Smiths Group plc company accounts 196 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 127 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 S TAT E ME N T O F D IR E C T O R S R E S P O N S IB IL I T IE S The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and Parent Company financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the directors to prepare accounts for each financial year.
Under company law the directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the Company and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these accounts the directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether the consolidated accounts comply with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and the Parent Company accounts comply with applicable UK Accounting Standards subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the accounts and prepare the accounts on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Groups and the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and the Company and enable them to ensure that the accounts and the Directors remuneration report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
Directors responsibility statement The directors consider that the Annual Report taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups position and performance business model and strategy.
Each of the directors who are listed on pages 78 to 81 confirms that to the best of his or her knowledge the Groups financial statements have been prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European Union and give a true and fair view of the Groups assets liabilities and financial position as at 31 July 2017 and of its profit for the financial year then ended and the Group directors report and Strategic report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position and performance of the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that the Group faces.
Signed on behalf of the Board of directors Andy Reynolds Smith Bill Seeger Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer 21 September 2017 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
I N D E P E N D E N T A U D I T O R S  R E P O R T T O T H E M E M B E R S O F S M I T H S G R O U P P L C Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion Smiths Group plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 31 July 2017 and of the Groups profit and cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated balance sheet and Company balance sheet as at 31 July 2017 the consolidated income statement and consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended the consolidated cashflow statement for the year then ended the consolidated statement of changes in equity and the Company statement of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit Committee.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Company.
Other than those disclosed in note 2 to the financial statements we have provided no nonaudit services to the Group or the Company in the period from 1 August 2016 to 31 July 2017.
Our audit approach
Materiality
Group financial statements 20 million 2016 17 million based on 3.5% of headline operating profit.
Company financial statements 18 million 2016 15 million based on 0.5% of total assets.
Audit scope We conducted full scope audits at 22 reporting units across 12 countries.
In addition we performed the audit of specific balances and transactions at 18 reporting units across North America and Canada.
During the year the Group engagement team visited multiple reporting sites in North America and Europe and attended the year end clearance meetings for each division.
Key audit matters Revenue recognition together with accounting for complex programmes and contract accounting in the Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect Divisions Group Acquisition accounting Group Accounting for disposals Group Product litigation provisions for asbestos in John Crane Inc.
Corporation Group Working capital and associated provisions Group Taxation provisions and the recognition of deferred tax assets Group Goodwill and intangible asset impairment assessments Group Defined benefit pension plan net assets and liabilities Group and Company
Audit scope Key audit matters Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 I N D E P E N D E N T A U D I T O R S  R E P O R T T O T H E M E M B E R S O F S M I T H S G R O U P P L C C O N T I N U E D The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Revenue recognition occurrence together with accounting for complex programmes and contract accounting in the Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect Divisions Group Refer also to Accounting Policies We focused on revenue recognition for all divisions in the Group to check that revenue has been appropriately recognised upon fulfilment of obligations.
In the Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect divisions we focused on the accounting for complex programmes and contract accounting.
The recognition of revenue is largely dependent on the terms of the underlying contract with the customer including the nature of separate deliverables within the contract achieving milestones within those contracts and the mechanisms in the contract by which risks and rewards of goods and services are transferred to the customer.
These contracts are usually long term in nature sometimes spanning a number of reporting periods.
This means that the final profitability of a contract which will be based upon forecast revenues and costs to complete can be uncertain during the earlier phases.
Judgement must therefore be applied in order to estimate the profit margins to recognise the revenue that is recorded.
Changes in conditions and circumstances over time can result in variations to the original contract terms or to the overall profitability of the contract.
This can include cost overruns which require further negotiation and settlements resulting in the need for provisions.
For all the divisions we assessed whether the Groups revenue recognition policies complied with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and tested the implementation of those policies.
Specifically we considered whether revenue was recognised based on the transfer of the risks and rewards of ownership of goods to the customer or the accounting period in which services were rendered by testing a sample of revenue items to contract and shipping documents with a specific focus particularly on major programmes where revenue was recorded close to the yearend.
Where appropriate we evaluated the relevant IT systems and tested the operating effectiveness of the internal controls over the recording of revenue in the correct period.
We also tested journal entries posted to revenue accounts to identify any unusual or irregular items and the reconciliations between the systems used by the Group and its financial ledgers.
In the case of the Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect divisions for a sample of contracts we read extracts of the relevant customer agreements and tested the accounting for separate deliverables and contractual milestones.
This testing included evaluating customer acceptance of the work done to establish whether contractual milestones had been achieved assessing the impact of any ongoing disputes and assessing the reasonableness of the directors estimates of costs to complete the contract by comparing them to actual historical costs incurred on comparable contracts.
We did not identify any material exceptions from the audit work performed and we found estimates to be in line with our expectations.
Acquisition accounting Group Refer also to note 26 and 27 The Group completed its acquisition of Morpho Detection from Safran SA on the 6th April 2017 resulting in the recognition of 240m of acquired intangibles 210m of goodwill and 140m of net assets. business being classified as a discontinued business.
Judgement was required in identifying and valuing these acquired intangibles and goodwill determining the valuation of the other assets and liabilities acquired and the classification of the Trace business.
In addition the disclosure requirements in respect of acquisitions are extensive.
Due to the quantum and complexity of the judgements we focussed on this area.
We obtained and read the Morpho Sale and Purchase Agreement SPA to gain an understanding of the key terms of the acquisition.
In testing this acquisition and related Trace disposal we considered whether the identified intangible assets were appropriate by reference to the SPA due diligence reports and other supporting documentation.
We obtained the calculation of the fair value of intangible assets acquired and where material assessed the methodology employed involving experts and corroborated the inputs and assumptions to supporting evidence.
We noted no exceptions through performing these procedures.
We also checked that the material fair value adjustments to the net assets were consistent with the accounting standard requirements.
Based on the evidence obtained we did not identify any indications that the fair value adjustments identified by management were inappropriate.
We read the disclosures in the financial statements to satisfy ourselves that they are in line with the requirements of the relevant accounting standards.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Accounting for disposals Group Refer also to note 28 We focussed on this area as the Group recorded significant profit on disposals 175m following the divestment of its Artificial lift Interconnect Power and Microwave Telecoms businesses during the year along with its Wallace product line disclosed in note 28 to the financial statements Judgement arose in determining the value of goodwill allocated to the Wallace product line.
In addition the calculation of the disposal gains was complex particularly around the recycling of accumulated currency translation reserves.
We obtained and read the relevant clauses within all the related sale and purchase agreements SPAs to obtain an understanding of the perimeter and requirements of the disposal.
We assessed the recycling of the currency reserve tested the allocation of Wallace assets including goodwill and verified the mathematical accuracy of the disposal calculation.
We also tested the consideration received to supporting evidence Finally we read the disclosures within the financial statements to ensure these met the presentation requirements of the relevant accounting standards.
We noted no exceptions through performing these procedures.
Product litigation provisions for asbestos in John Crane Inc.
Refer also to note 22 John Crane Inc. manufactured which contained asbestos.
A provision of 237m has been made for the future defence costs which the Group is expected to incur and the expected costs of future adverse judgments against John Crane Inc.
Titeflex Corporation another US based subsidiary of the Group has received a number of claims from insurance companies seeking recompense on a subrogated basis for the effects of damage allegedly caused by lightning strikes in relation to its flexible gas piping product.
It has also received a number of product liability claims regarding this product some in the form of purported class actions.
A provision of 84m has been made for the costs which the Group is expected to incur in respect of these claims.
We focused on these areas because there is significant judgement involved in the assumptions used to estimate the provisions in particular those relating to the US litigation environment such as the future level of claims and the cost of defence.
As a result the provision may be subject to potentially material revisions from time to time.
In John Crane Inc. defence cost provisions.
This included an examination of the model maintained by managements valuation expert and evaluation of the work of the expert by considering the appropriateness of the methodology used the reasonableness of assumptions including the use of a rolling 10 year horizon and considering alternative outcomes particularly the sensitivity calculations performed.
In addition we tested the mathematical accuracy of the underlying calculations and agreed input data to source documents.
We challenged managements underlying assumptions supporting its Titeflex provision.
This included an evaluation of the valuation model by testing the mathematical accuracy of the underlying calculations and the input data such as the average amount of settlements the number of future settlements and the period over which expenditure can be reasonably estimated by testing them to historic claims.
We also discussed these matters with the Companys internal legal counsel obtained letters from external counsel and evaluated the appropriateness of the disclosures made in the Group financial statements.
We found the assumptions to be consistent and in line with historical claims.
We read the disclosures and found them to be consistent with the information we have obtained during the course of our audit.
Working capital and associated provisions Group Refer also to notes 13 and 14 We focused on this area because inventory provisions include subjective estimates and are influenced by assumptions concerning future selling prices and the level of sales activity and the Group also has material levels of trade receivables that are overdue and not impaired as disclosed in note 14 to the financial statements.
We focused in particular on inventory levels in those parts of the business experiencing challenging trading environments.
We also focused on divisions with inherent judgements associated with large programmes and complex contractual terms.
The key associated risks were recoverability of billed and unbilled trade receivables and the valuation of inventory.
Where appropriate we evaluated the directors forecasted sales for each significant category of slow moving inventory by comparing them to historical sales and orders for future sales.
We compared the historical provision for bad debts to the actual amounts written off to determine whether the directors estimation techniques were reasonable and considered the adequacy of provisions for bad debts for significant customers at reporting unit level taking into account specific credit risk assessments.
We did not identify any material exceptions from our audit work.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Taxation provisions and the recognition of deferred tax assets Group Refer also to note 6 The Group has recognised 272m deferred tax assets on the balance sheet the recognition of which involves judgement by management as to the likelihood of the realisation of these deferred tax assets.
The expectation that the benefit of these assets will be realised is dependent on a number of factors including appropriate taxable temporary timing differences and whether there will be sufficient taxable profits in future periods to support recognition.
In the current year the Group recognised a 69 million deferred tax asset in the UK in respect of past losses following a reassessment of the future profitability of the Groups activities in the UK.
The Group has recognised provisions against uncertain tax positions the valuation of which is an inherently judgemental area.
The Group has a wide geographic footprint and is subject to tax laws in a number of jurisdictions.
We evaluated the directors assessment as to whether there will be sufficient taxable profits in future periods to support the recognition of deferred tax assets by evaluating the directors future cash flow forecasts and the process by which they were drawn up including testing the underlying calculations and comparing the forecasts to historical performance.
We also used our tax specialists to assess managements assumptions underlying the provisions for uncertain tax positions.
We discussed with management the known uncertain tax positions and read communications from taxation authorities to identify uncertain tax positions.
We did not identify any material exceptions from our audit work.
Goodwill and intangible asset impairment assessments Group Refer also to notes 10 and 11 The Group holds significant amounts of goodwill and intangible assets on the balance sheet as detailed in note 10 to the financial statements.
The risk is that these balances are overstated.
Goodwill must be tested for impairment on at least an annual basis.
The determination of recoverable amount being the higher of value inuse and fair value less costs to dispose requires judgement in both identifying and then valuing the relevant cash generating units CGUs.
The impairment assessment for these assets involves subjective judgements about future business performance with key assumptions including cash flows the overall longterm growth rates discount rates used and to the extent relevant the fair value less costs to dispose.
The Group also holds capitalised development costs where the risk of inappropriate capitalisation or impairment may arise.
The key judgements relate to the commercial viability of the products under development and related assumptions used within the related impairment assessments.
We evaluated the directors future cash flow forecasts and the process by which they were drawn up including testing the underlying calculations and comparing them to the latest Board approved divisional budgets.
We challenged the directors key assumptions for long term growth rates in the forecasts by comparing them to historical results and economic and industry forecasts and the discount rate by assessing the cost of capital for the Group.
We evaluated the reasonableness of the directors forecast performance by performing a sensitivity analysis around the key drivers of the cash flow forecasts.
We found the assumptions to be consistent and in line with our expectations.
We also tested the directors assessment of the fair value less costs of disposal by comparing it to external analyst valuations.
We evaluated the appropriateness of the related disclosures in note 11 of the financial statements including sensitivities provided with respect to the Morpho Detection CGU.
To address the risks around capitalised development costs we assessed the business cases supporting commercial viability tested key assumptions within the impairment assessments and performed sensitivity analysis.
We did not identify any material exceptions from our audit work.
Defined benefit pension plan net assets and liabilities Group and Company Refer also to note 8 The Group has defined benefit pension plans with net postretirement assets of 390m and net postretirement liabilities of 166m which are significant in the context of the overall balance sheet of the Group and Company.
The valuation of the pension liabilities requires some judgement and technical expertise in choosing appropriate assumptions.
A number of the key assumptions including salary increases inflation discount rates and mortality can have a material impact on the calculation of the liability.
The pension assets include significant pension asset investments and the fair value measurement of which includes judgement.
The recognition of postretirement plan net assets for accounting purposes is dependent on the rights of the employers to recover the surplus at the end of the life of the scheme.
We evaluated the directors assessment of the assumptions made in relation to the valuations of the liabilities and assets in the pension plans and the assumptions around salary increases and mortality rates by comparing them to national and industry averages.
We also focussed on the valuation of pension plan liabilities and the pension assets as follows We agreed the discount and inflation rates used in the valuation of the pension liability to our internally developed benchmarks.
We obtained third party confirmations on ownership and valuation of pension assets.
We checked that the recognition of post retirement plan net assets complies with the Groups investment principles.
Where there was no new census data in the year we assessed the assumptions used by the actuaries.
We tested the basis of recognition of the UK pension surplus through the reading of scheme rules.
We did not identify any material exceptions from our audit work.
I N D E P E N D E N T A U D I T O R S  R E P O R T T O T H E M E M B E R S O F S M I T H S G R O U P P L C C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group is organised into five divisions John Crane Smiths Medical Smiths Detection Smiths Interconnect and FlexTek and is a consolidation of over 250 units.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the reporting units by us as the Group Engagement team or component auditors within PwC UK and from other PwC network firms operating under our instruction.
Where the work was performed by component auditors we determined the level of involvement we needed to have in the audit work at those reporting units to be able to conclude whether sufficient appropriate audit evidence had been obtained as a basis for our opinion on the financial statements as a whole.
The Groups operating reporting units vary significantly in size and we identified 22 reporting units that in our view required an audit of their complete financial information due to their size or risk characteristics.
Specific audit procedures over certain balances and transactions were performed at a further 18 reporting units to give appropriate coverage of material balances at both divisional and Group levels.
Of these one reporting unit has been determined to be financially significant based on its contribution to Group revenue or headline operating profit.
We conducted work in 12 countries and the Group engagement team visited reporting sites in North America and Europe and participated in each of the divisional audit clearance meetings.
Together the reporting units subject to audit procedures accounted for 75% 2016 75% of the Groups revenues and 78% 2016 79% of the Groups headline operating profit.
Further specific audit procedures over IT controls central functions such as treasury and areas of judgement including the accounting for acquisitions and disposals taxation goodwill postretirement benefits and material litigation were performed at the local headquarters of each of the divisions and at the Groups Head Office.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall materiality 20 million 2016 17 million.
18 million 2016 15 million.
How we determined it 3.5% of headline operating profit.
0.5% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Consistent with last year we applied this benchmark because in our view this is the metric against which the performance of the Group is most commonly measured Consistent with last year we applied this benchmark because in our view we consider a net asset measure to reflect the nature of the Company which primarily acts as a holding company for the Groups investments and holds certain liabilities on the balance sheet.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.5 million and 18 million.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 1 million Group audit 2016 0.5 million and 1 million Company audit 2016 0.5 million as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We have nothing to report.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Group directors report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Group directors report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Group directors report for the year ended 31 July 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Group directors report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 61 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 57 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and the statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when The statement given by the directors on page 97 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and Company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on pages 97 and 98 describing the work of the Audit Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee.
The directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of directors responsibilities set out on page 128 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
I N D E P E N D E N T A U D I T O R S  R E P O R T T O T H E M E M B E R S O F S M I T H S G R O U P P L C C O N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the Company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the Audit Committee we were appointed by the members on 19 November 1996 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 31 July 1997 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 21 years covering the years ended 31 July 1997 to 31 July 2017.
Andrew Kemp Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
21 September 2017 The maintenance and integrity of the Smiths Group plc website is the responsibility of the directors the work carried out by the auditors does not involve consideration of these matters and accordingly the auditors accept no responsibility for any changes that may have occurred to the financial statements since they were initially presented on the website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C O N S O L ID AT E D IN C O ME S TAT E ME N T Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016
Headline
Non headline note 3
Headline
Non headline note 3
Continuing operations Revenue 1 3280 3280 2949 2949 Cost of sales 1755 1755 1600 1600 Gross profit 1525 1525 1349 1349 Sales and distribution costs 449 449 403 403 Administrative expenses 487 90 577 436 139 575 Other operating income 16 16 Profit on business disposal 28 175 175 Operating profit  123 387 Interest receivable Interest payable 66 66 62 62 Other financing lossesgains 14 14 15 15 Other finance income  retirement benefits Finance costs 4 61 12 73 59 18 41 Continuing operations  Profit before taxation 105 346 Continuing operations  Profit for the year 38tel77 261 Discontinued operations Lossprofit  discontinued operations 27 8 8 Profit for the year 38tel77 261 Profit for the year attributable to Smiths Group shareholders  continuing operations 38tel77 259 Smiths Group shareholders  discontinued operations 8 8 Noncontrolling interests in respect of continuing operations 2 2 2 tel338 77 261 Earnings per share 5 Basic 142.1p 65.6p Basic  continuing 144.1p 65.6p Diluted 140.3p 64.9p Diluted  continuing 142.3p 64.9p References in the consolidated income statement consolidated statement of comprehensive income consolidated balance sheet consolidated statement of changes in equity and consolidated cashflow statement relate to notes on pages 141 to 188 which form an integral part of the consolidated accounts.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
C ON S OL I D AT E D S TAT E M E N T OF C OM P R E H E N S I V E I NC OM E
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Profit for the period 564 261 Other comprehensive income Actuarial gainslosses on retirement benefits 8 55 40 Taxation recognised on actuarial movements 6 13 10 Other comprehensive income and expenditure which will not be reclassified to the consolidated income statement 42 30 Other comprehensive income which will be reclassified and reclassifications Exchange gains 25 420 Cumulative exchange gains recycled on business disposals 41 Fair value gainslosses and reclassification adjustments deferred on available for sale financial assets 1 2 reclassified to income statement on available for sale financial assets 4 19 deferred in the period on cashflow and net investment hedges 14 238 reclassified to income statement on cashflow and net investment hedges 25 Taxation recognised on fair value gains 6 1 Total other comprehensive income 37 131 Total comprehensive income 601 392 Attributable to Smiths Group shareholders 600 386 Noncontrolling interests Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C ON S OL I D AT E D B A L A NC E S H E E T
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 10 2015 1742 Property plant and equipment 12 315 315 Financial assets  other investments 16 21 9 Retirement benefit assets 8 390 328 Deferred tax assets 6 272 246 Trade and other receivables 14 57 51 Financial derivatives 19 56 29 3126 2720 Current assets Inventories 13 452 478 Current tax receivable 6 62 62 Trade and other receivables 14 722 745 Cash and cash equivalents 17 782 431 Financial derivatives 19 13 13 2031 1729 Assets of business held for sale 27 24 Total assets 5157 4473 Noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities borrowings 17 1598 1139 financial derivatives 19 2 1 Provisions for liabilities and charges 22 283 305 Retirement benefit obligations 8 166 248 Deferred tax liabilities 6 111 95 Trade and other payables 15 26 29 2186 1817 Current liabilities Financial liabilities borrowings 17 151 270 financial derivatives 19 10 19 Provisions for liabilities and charges 22 85 94 Trade and other payables 15 576 536 Current tax payable 6 45 72 Liabilities of business held for sale 27 5 Total liabilities 3053 2813 Net assets 2104 1660 Shareholders equity Share capital 23 148 148 Share premium account 355 352 Capital redemption reserve 6 6 Revaluation reserve 1 1 Merger reserve 235 235 Retained earnings 1634 1205 Hedge reserve 25 290 301 Total shareholders equity 2089 1646 Noncontrolling interest equity 15 14 Total equity 2104 1660 The accounts on pages 136 to 188 were approved by the Board of Directors on 21 September 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Andy Reynolds Smith Bill Seeger Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
C O N S O L I D AT E D S TAT E M E N T O F C H A N G E S I N E Q U I T Y
Share capital and share premium
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Interest
Total equity At 31 July tel1205 301 1646 14 1660 Profit for the period Other comprehensive income Actuarial gains on retirement benefits and related tax 42 42 42 Exchange losses 15 15 1 16 Fair value gainslosses and related tax 11 11 11 Total comprehensive income for the period Transactions relating to ownership interests Exercises of share options Taxation recognised on share options Purchase of own shares 25 10 10 10
Sharebased payment At 31 July tel1634 290 2089 15 2104
Share capital and share premium
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Interest
Total equity At 31 July tel743 63 1419 9 1428 Profit for the year Other comprehensive income Actuarial losses on retirement benefits and related tax 30 30 30 Exchange gains Fair value losses 21 238 259 259 Total comprehensive income for the year 624 238 386 6 392 Transactions relating to ownership interests Exercises of share options Purchase of own shares 25 8 8 8
Sharebased payment At 31 July tel1205 301 1646 14 1660 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 C ON S OL I D AT E D C A S HF L O W S TAT E M E N T
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Net cash inflow from operating activities 29 479 358 Cashflows from investing activities Expenditure on capitalised development 37 23 Expenditure on other intangible assets 10 8 11 Purchases of property plant and equipment 12 62 74 Disposals of property plant and equipment 9 1 Investment in financial assets 16 27 18 9 Acquisition of businesses 26 580 8 Disposals of businesses  continuing operations 28 399 Disposals of businesses  discontinued operations 27 63 Net cashflow used in investing activities 234 124 Cashflows from financing activities Proceeds from exercise of share options 23 3 3 Purchase of own shares 25 10 8 Dividends paid to equity shareholders 24 167 163 Cash inflowoutflow from matured derivative financial instruments 14 Increase in new borrowings 17 546 1 Reduction and repayment of borrowings 17 256 151 Net cashflow used in financing activities 116 332 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 361 98 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 430 495 Exchange differences 10 33 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 17 781 430 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year comprise cash at bank and in hand 226 161 shortterm deposits 556 270 bank overdrafts 1 1 Included in cash and cash equivalents per the balance sheet 782 431 Included in overdrafts per the balance sheet 1 1 Reconciliation of net cashflow to movement in net debt
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Net debt at start of year 17 978 818 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 361 98 Increase in borrowings 546 1 Reduction and repayment of borrowings 256 151 Movement in net debt resulting from cashflows 71 52 Capitalisation interest accruals and unwind of capitalisation fees 4 2 Movement from fair value hedging 5 23 Exchange differences 61 187 Movement in net debt in the year 11 160 Net debt at end of year 17 967 978 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
ACCO U N T I N G P O L I C I E S Basis of preparation The accounts have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations as adopted by the European Union on a going concern basis and under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation of certain financial instruments share options and pension assets and liabilities held at fair value as described below.
The accounting policies adopted are consistent with those of the previous financial year.
Significant judgements key assumptions and estimates The preparation of the accounts in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the accounts and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The key estimates and assumptions used in these consolidated financial statements are set out below.
Revenue recognition The timing of revenue recognition on contracts depends on the assessed stage of completion of contract activity at the balance sheet date.
This assessment requires the expected total contract revenues and costs to be estimated based on the current progress of the contract.
Revenue of 24m 2016 42m has been recognised in the period in respect of contracts in progress at the period end with a total expected value of 48m 2016 175m and cumulative revenue recognised to date of 36m 2016 137m.
A 5% reduction in the proportion of the contract activity recognised in the current period would have reduced operating profit by less than 1m for both Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect 2016 less than 1m.
Smiths Detection also has multiyear contractual arrangements for the sale of goods and services.
Where these contracts have separately identifiable components with distinct patterns of delivery and customer acceptance revenue is accounted for separately for each identifiable component.
Judgement is applied in the identification of the components of the contract and the allocation of contract revenue to each component.
Smiths Medical has rebate arrangements in place with some distributors in respect of sales to end customers where sales prices have been negotiated by Smiths Medical.
Rebates are estimated based on the level of discount derived from sales data from distributors the amount of inventory held by distributors and the time lag between the initial sale to the distributor and the rebate being claimed.
The rebate accrual at 31 July 2017 was 27m 2016 28m.
Contract profitability Smiths Detection has multiyear contractual arrangements for the sale of goods and services.
Margins achieved on these contracts can reflect the impact of commercial decisions made in different economic circumstances.
In addition contract delivery is subject to commercial and technical risks which can affect the outcome of the contract.
At 31 July 2017 there was nil 2016 4m balance sheet liability in respect of ongoing onerous contracts and no other contracts had been assessed as at significant risk of becoming onerous.
Taxation
The Group has recognised deferred tax assets of 129m 2016 87m relating to losses and 112m 2016 120m relating to the John Crane Inc. and Titeflex Corporation litigation provisions.
The recognition of assets pertaining to these items involves judgement by management as to the likelihood of realisation of these deferred tax assets.
This is based on a number of factors which seek to assess the expectation that the benefit of these assets will be realised including expected future levels of operating profit expenditure on litigation pension contributions and the timing of the unwind of other tax positions.
It has been concluded that there are sufficient taxable profits in future periods to support recognition.
A 5% reduction in expected future operating profits would reduce the level of deferred tax recognised by 8m 2016 9m and a 5% increase in expected future operating profits would increase the level of deferred tax recognised by 11m 2016 11m.
Further detail on the Groups deferred taxation position is included in note 6.
Retirement benefits The consolidated financial statements include costs in relation to and provision for retirement benefit obligations.
The costs and the present value of any related pension assets and liabilities depend on such factors as life expectancy of the members the returns that plan assets generate and the discount rate used to calculate the present value of the liabilities.
The Group uses previous experience and independent actuarial advice to select the values of critical estimates.
The estimates and the effect of variances in key estimates are disclosed in note 8.
At 31 July 2017 there is a retirement benefit asset of 390m 2016 328m principally relating to UK schemes which arises from the rights of the employers to recover the surplus at the end of the life of the scheme.
If the pension schemes were wound up while they still had members the schemes would need to buy out the benefits of all members.
The buyouts would cost significantly more than the present value of the scheme liabilities calculated in accordance with IAS 19 Employee benefits.
Receivables provisions If the carrying value of any receivable is higher than the fair value the Group makes provisions writing down the balance to its fair value.
The fair value of receivables is considered individually for each customer and incorporates past experience and progress with collecting receivables.
At 31 July 2017 the gross value of receivables partly provided for or more than three months overdue was 73m 2016 83m and there were provisions of 33m 2016 31m against these receivables.
Consequently these receivables were carried at a net value of 40m 2016 52m.
See note 14 for disclosures on credit risk and ageing of trade receivables.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Inventory provisions The calculation of inventory provisions requires judgement by management of the expected value of future sales.
If the carrying value of inventory is higher than the expected recoverable value the Group makes provisions writing inventory down to its net recoverable value.
Inventory is initially assessed for impairment by comparing inventory levels to recent utilisation rates and carrying values to historical selling prices.
A detailed review is completed for inventory lines identified in the initial assessment considering sales activity order flow customer contracts and current selling prices.
At 31 July 2017 there were provisions of 55m 2016 70m against gross inventory of 507m 2016 548m.
See note 13 for a breakdown of inventory.
A 10% increase in the proportion of raw materials provided for would increase the provision by 17m 2016 20m and a 10% increase in the proportion of finished goods provided for would increase the provision by 22m 2016 23m.
Impairment
Goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment and other assets including intangible assets acquired in business combinations are tested if there are any indications of impairment in accordance with the accounting policy set out below.
The recoverable amounts of cash generating units and assets are determined based on value in use calculations unless future trading projections cannot be adjusted to eliminate the impact of a major restructuring.
The value in use calculations require the use of estimates including projected future cashflows and other future events.
See note 11 for details of the critical assumptions made including the forecast earnings and valuation multiples for Morpho Detection and disclosures on the sensitivity of the impairment testing to these key assumptions including details of the changes in assumptions which would be required to trigger an impairment in Morpho Detection.
Provisions for liabilities and charges As previously reported John Crane Inc.
JCI a subsidiary of the Group is currently one of many codefendants in litigation relating to products previously manufactured which contained asbestos.
Provision of 237m 2016 252m has been made for the future defence costs which the Group is expected to incur and the expected costs of future adverse judgments against JCI.
Whilst wellestablished incidence curves can be used to estimate the likely future pattern of asbestos related disease JCIs claims experience is significantly impacted by other factors which influence the US litigation environment.
These can include changing approaches on the part of the plaintiffs bar changing attitudes amongst the judiciary at both trial and appellate levels and legislative and procedural changes in both the state and federal court systems.
Therefore because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of asbestos claims and of the costs arising out of the related litigation there can be no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred.
JCI takes account of the advice of an expert in asbestos liability estimation in quantifying the expected costs.
The following judgements were made in preparing the provision calculation the period over which the expenditure can be reliably estimated is judged to be ten years based on past experience regarding significant changes in the litigation environment that have occurred every few years and on the amount of time taken in the past for some of those changes to impact the broader asbestos litigation environment.
See note 22 for a sensitivity showing the impact on the provision of reducing or increasing this time horizon the future trend of legal costs the rate of future claims filed the rate of successful resolution of claims and the average amount of judgments awarded have been projected based on the past history of JCI claims and wellestablished tables of asbestos incidence projections since this is the best available evidence.
Claims history from other defendants is not used to calculate the provision because JCIs defence strategy generates a significantly different pattern of legal costs and settlement expenses.
See note 22 for a sensitivity showing the range of expected future spend.
As previously reported Titeflex Corporation a subsidiary of the Group in the FlexTek division has received a number of claims from insurance companies seeking recompense on a subrogated basis for the effects of damage allegedly caused by lightning strikes in relation to its flexible gas piping product.
It has also received a number of product liability claims regarding this product some in the form of purported class actions.
Titeflex Corporation believes that its products are a safe and effective means of delivering gas when installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and local and national codes however some claims have been settled on an individual basis without admission of liability.
Provision of 84m 2016 94m has been made for the costs which the Group is expected to incur in respect of these claims.
In preparing the provision calculation judgements were made about the impact of safe installation initiatives on the level of future claims.
See note 22 for a sensitivity showing the impact on the provision of reducing or increasing the expected impact.
However because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of claims there can be no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred.
The Group has on occasion been required to take legal action to protect its intellectual property and other rights against infringement.
It has also had to defend itself against proceedings brought by other parties including product liability and insurance subrogation claims.
Provision is made for any expected costs and liabilities in relation to these proceedings where appropriate though there can be no guarantee that such provisions which may be subject to potentially material revision from time to time will accurately predict the actual costs and liabilities that may be incurred.
All provisions may be subject to potentially material revisions from time to time if new information becomes available as a result of future events.
A C C O U NTI N G P O LI C I E S C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Presentation of results Nonstatutory performance measures described as headline are presented to give a clear and consistent presentation of the performance of the Groups ongoing trading activity.
These measures are used by management to measure and monitor performance.
Headline measures exclude amounts relating to costs of acquisitions and disposals amortisation of acquisition fair value adjustments including the recognition of acquired intangibles impairments legacy liabilities significant restructuring material oneoff items and certain remeasurements.
Smiths Group plc presents its results in the income statements with items excluded from headline measures in a separate column.
See note 1 for divisional headline operating profit note 3 for a breakdown of the items excluded from headline operating profit and headline finance costs and note 30 for information on the calculation of return on capital employed and credit metrics.
In addition the Group reports underlying growth rates for sales and profit measures which exclude the impact of acquisitions and divestments and the effects of foreign exchange translation by making the following adjustments Retranslate the comparative to current year exchange rates before calculating growth measures Exclude acquisitions from the current period for the first 12 months of ownership and Exclude the divested businesses performance after the date of disposal from comparative period.
For the convenience of users supplementary primary financial statements translated into US dollars have been presented after the Group financial record.
Assets and liabilities have been translated into US dollars at the exchange rate at the date of that balance sheet and income expenses and cashflows are translated at average exchange rates for the period.
Accounting policies Basis of consolidation The consolidated accounts incorporate the financial statements of Smiths Group plc the Company and its subsidiary undertakings together with the Groups share of the results of its associates.
A list of the subsidiaries of Smiths Group plc is provided on pages 207 to 214.
Subsidiaries are all entities controlled by the Company.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is obtained by the Company to the date that control ceases.
Associates are entities over which the Group has significant influence but does not control generally accompanied by a share of between 20% and 50% of the voting rights.
Investments in associates are accounted for using the equity method.
Foreign currencies The Companys presentational currency is sterling.
The financial position of all subsidiaries and associates that have a functional currency different from sterling are translated into sterling at the rate of exchange at the date of that balance sheet and the income and expenses are translated at average exchange rates for the period.
All resulting exchange differences are recognised as a separate component of equity.
On consolidation exchange differences arising from the translation of the net investment in foreign entities and of borrowings and other currency instruments designated as hedges of such investments are taken to shareholders equity.
When a foreign operation is sold the cumulative amount of such exchange differences is recognised in the income statement as part of the gain or loss on sale.
Exchange differences arising on transactions are recognised in the income statement.
Those arising on trading are taken to operating profit those arising on borrowings are classified as finance income or cost.
Revenue
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received net of trade discounts including distributor rebates and sales taxes.
Revenue is discounted only where the impact of discounting is material.
When the Group enters into complex contracts with multiple separately identifiable components the terms of the contract are reviewed to determine whether or not the elements of the contract should be accounted for separately.
If a contract is being split into multiple components the contract revenue is allocated to the different components at the start of the contract.
The basis of allocation depends on the substance of the contract.
The Group considers relative standalone selling prices contractual prices and relative cost when allocating revenue.
Sale of goods Revenue from the sale of goods is recognised when the risks and rewards of ownership have been transferred to the customer the amount of revenue can be measured reliably and recovery of the consideration is probable.
For established products with simple installation requirements revenue is recognised when the product is delivered to the customer in accordance with the agreed delivery terms.
For products which are technically innovative highly customised or require complex installation revenue is recognised when the customer has completed its acceptance procedures.
Services
Revenue from services is recognised in accounting periods in which the services are rendered by reference to completion of the specific transaction assessed on the basis of the actual service provided as a proportion of the total services to be provided.
Depending on the nature of the contract revenue will be recognised on the basis of the proportion of the contract term completed the proportion of the contract costs incurred or the specific services provided to date.
Construction contracts Contracts for the construction of substantial assets are accounted for as construction contracts if the customer specifies major structural elements of the design including the ability to amend the design during the construction process.
These projects normally involve installing customised systems with sitespecific integration requirements.
Where the outcome of a construction contract can be estimated reliably revenue and costs are recognised by reference to the stage of completion of the contract activity at the balance sheet date.
The Group uses the percentage of completion method to determine the appropriate amount to recognise in a given period.
The assessment of the stage of completion is dependent on the nature of the contract but will generally be based on the estimated proportion of the total contract costs which have been incurred to date.
If a contract is expected to be lossmaking a provision is recognised for the entire loss.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Payments made under operating leases are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Taxation
The charge for taxation is based on profits for the year and takes into account taxation deferred because of temporary differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes.
Current income tax assets and liabilities are measured at the amount expected to be recovered from or paid to taxation authorities.
Tax benefits are not recognised unless it is likely that the tax positions are sustainable.
Once considered to be likely tax benefits are reviewed to assess whether a provision should be made based on prevailing circumstances.
Tax provisions are included in current tax liabilities including any anticipated interest and penalties.
The tax rates and tax laws used to compute the amount are those that are enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date in the countries where the Group operates and generates taxable income.
Deferred tax is provided in full using the balance sheet liability method.
A deferred tax asset is recognised where it is probable that future taxable income will be sufficient to utilise the available relief.
Tax is charged or credited to the income statement except when it relates to items charged or credited directly to equity in which case the tax is also dealt with in equity.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries and associates except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary differences is controlled by the Company and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax liabilities and assets are not discounted.
Employee benefits Sharebased compensation The fair value of the shares or share options granted is recognised as an expense over the vesting period to reflect the value of the employee services received.
The fair value of options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions is calculated using established option pricing models principally binomial models.
The probability of meeting nonmarket vesting conditions which include profitability targets is used to estimate the number of share options which are likely to vest.
For cashsettled sharebased payment a liability is recognised based on the fair value of the payment earned by the balance sheet date.
For equitysettled sharebased payment the corresponding credit is recognised directly in reserves.
Pension obligations and postretirement benefits The Group has defined benefit plans defined contribution plans and postretirement healthcare schemes.
For defined benefit plans and postretirement healthcare schemes the liability for each scheme recognised in the balance sheet is the present value of the obligation at the balance sheet date less the fair value of any plan assets.
The obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of AArated corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related liability.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in full in the period in which they occur outside of the income statement and are presented in the statement of comprehensive income.
Past service costs are recognised immediately in the income statement.
For defined contribution plans the Group pays contributions to publicly or privately administered pension insurance plans on a mandatory contractual or voluntary basis.
Contributions are expensed as incurred.
Intangible assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets of the acquired subsidiary at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill arising from acquisitions of subsidiaries after 1 August 1998 is included in intangible assets tested annually for impairment and carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Goodwill arising from acquisitions of subsidiaries before 1 August 1998 was set against reserves in the year of acquisition.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Subsequent reversals of impairment losses for goodwill are not recognised.
Research and development Expenditure on research and development is charged to the income statement in the year in which it is incurred with the exception of amounts recoverable from third parties and expenditure incurred in respect of the development of major new products where the outcome of those projects is assessed as being reasonably certain as regards viability and technical feasibility.
Such expenditure is capitalised and amortised over the estimated period of sale for each product commencing in the year that sales of the product are first made.
Amortisation is charged straight line or based on the units produced depending on the nature of the product and the availability of reliable estimates of production volumes.
The cost of development projects which are expected to take a substantial period of time to complete includes attributable borrowing costs.
A C C O U NTI N G P O LI C I E S C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Intangible assets acquired in business combinations The identifiable net assets acquired as a result of a business combination may include intangible assets other than goodwill.
Any such intangible assets are amortised straight line over their expected useful lives as follows Patents licences and trademarks up to 20 years Technology up to 13 years Customer relationships up to 11 years The assets useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Software patents and intellectual property The estimated useful lives are as follows Software up to 7 years Patents and intellectual property shorter of the economic life and the period the right is legally enforceable The assets useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment losses.
Land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is provided on other assets estimated to write off the depreciable amount of relevant assets by equal annual instalments over their estimated useful lives.
In general the rates used are Freehold and long leasehold buildings  2% Short leasehold property  over the period of the lease Plant machinery etc.
10% to 20% Fixtures fittings tools and other equipment 10% to 33%.
The cost of any assets which are expected to take a substantial period of time to complete includes attributable borrowing costs.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
An assets carrying amount is written down immediately to its recoverable amount if the assets carrying amount is greater than its estimated recoverable amount.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is determined using the firstin firstout FIFO method.
The cost of finished goods and work in progress comprises raw materials direct labour other direct costs and related production overheads based on normal operating capacity.
The cost of items of inventory which take a substantial period of time to complete includes attributable borrowing costs.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less applicable variable selling expenses.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently measured at amortised cost less any appropriate provision for estimated irrecoverable amounts.
A provision is established for irrecoverable amounts when there is objective evidence that amounts due under the original payment terms will not be collected.
Provisions
Provisions for warranties and product liability disposal indemnities restructuring costs vacant leasehold property and legal claims are recognised when the Company has a legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are discounted where the time value of money is material.
Where there are a number of similar obligations for example where a warranty has been given the likelihood that an outflow will be required in settlement is determined by considering the class of obligations as a whole.
A provision is recognised even if the likelihood of an outflow with respect to any one item included in the same class of obligations may be small.
Assets and businesses held for sale Assets and businesses classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
Impairment losses on initial classification as held for sale and gains or losses on subsequent remeasurements are included in the income statement.
No depreciation is charged on assets and businesses classified as held for sale.
Assets and businesses are classified as held for sale if their carrying amount will be recovered or settled principally through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
The asset or business must be available for immediate sale and the sale must be highly probable within one year.
Discontinued operations A discontinued operation is either a component of the Groups business that represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operations that has been disposed of has been abandoned or meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale or a business acquired solely for the purpose of selling it.
Discontinued operations are presented on the income statement as a separate line and are shown net of tax.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include cash at bank and in hand and highly liquid interestbearing securities with maturities of three months or less.
In the cashflow statement cash and cash equivalents are shown net of bank overdrafts which are included as current borrowings in liabilities on the balance sheet.
Financial assets The classification of financial assets depends on the purpose for which the assets were acquired.
Management determines the classification of an asset at initial recognition and reevaluates the designation at each reporting date.
Financial assets are classified as loans and receivables available for sale financial assets or financial assets where changes in fair value are charged or credited to the income statement.
Financial assets are initially recognised at transaction price when the Group becomes party to contractual obligations.
The transaction price used includes transaction costs unless the asset is being fair valued through the income statement.
The subsequent measurement of financial assets depends on their classification.
Loans and receivables are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
Available for sale financial assets are subsequently measured at fair value with unrealised gains and losses being recognised in other comprehensive income.
Financial assets where changes in fair value are charged or credited to the income statement are subsequently measured at fair value.
Realised and unrealised gains and losses arising from changes in the fair value of the financial assets at fair value through the income statement category are included in the income statement in the period in which they arise.
Financial assets are derecognised when the right to receive cashflows from the assets has expired or has been transferred and the Company has transferred substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership.
When securities classified as available for sale are sold or impaired the accumulated fair value adjustments previously taken to reserves are included in the income statement.
Financial assets are classified as current if they are expected to be realised within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Financial liabilities Borrowings are initially recognised at the fair value of the proceeds net of related transaction costs.
These transaction costs and any discount or premium on issue are subsequently amortised under the effective interest rate method through the income statement as interest over the life of the loan and added to the liability disclosed in the balance sheet.
Related accrued interest is included in the borrowings figure.
Borrowings are classified as current liabilities unless the Group has an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least one year after the balance sheet date.
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value on the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured at their fair value.
The method of recognising any resulting gain or loss depends on whether the derivative is designated as a hedging instrument and if so the nature of the item being hedged.
Changes in the fair value of any derivative instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recognised immediately in the income statement.
Fair value hedge Changes in the fair values of derivatives that are designated and qualify as fair value hedges are recorded in the income statement together with any changes in the fair values of the hedged assets or liabilities that are attributable to the hedged risk.
Net investment hedge Hedges of net investments in foreign operations are accounted for similarly to cashflow hedges.
Any gain or loss on the hedging instrument relating to the effective portion of the hedge is recognised in other comprehensive income the gain or loss relating to any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
When a foreign operation is disposed of gains and losses accumulated in equity related to that operation are included in the income statement.
Cashflow hedge The effective portions of changes in the fair values of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cashflow hedges are recognised in equity.
The gain or loss relating to any ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Amounts accumulated in the hedge reserve are recycled in the income statement in the periods when the hedged items will affect profit or loss for instance when the forecast sale that is hedged takes place.
If a forecast transaction that is hedged results in the recognition of a nonfinancial asset for example inventory or a liability the gains and losses previously deferred in the hedge reserve are transferred from the reserve and included in the initial measurement of the cost of the asset or liability.
When a hedging instrument expires or is sold or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting any cumulative gain or loss existing in the hedge reserve at that time remains in the reserve and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in the income statement.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was reported in other comprehensive income is immediately transferred to the income statement.
A C C O U NTI N G P O LI C I E S C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Fair value of financial assets and liabilities The fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities are the amounts at which the instrument could be exchanged in a current transaction between willing parties other than in a forced or liquidation sale.
IFRS 13 Fair value measurement requires fair value measurements to be classified according to the following hierarchy level 1  quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities level 2  valuations in which all inputs are observable either directly ie as prices or indirectly ie derived from prices and level 3  valuations in which one or more inputs that are significant to the resulting value are not based on observable market data.
See note 20 for information on the methods the Group uses to estimate the fair values of its financial instruments.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are authorised.
The interim dividend is recognised when it is paid and the final dividend is recognised when it has been approved by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
Recent accounting developments The following standards and interpretations have been issued by the IASB and will affect future annual reports and accounts.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 16 Leases A review of the impact of these standards and interpretations is being undertaken and the impact of adopting them will be determined once this review has been completed.
Smiths will adopt IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 on 1 August 2018 and IFRS 16 on 1 August 2019 unless developments in the relationship between the UK and the EU change the reporting requirements for UK companies.
IFRS 9 Financial instruments Adopting IFRS 9 will impact hedge accounting and receivables provisioning.
The basis of documentation and effectiveness testing of hedges under the new standard will be linked more closely to the risk management objectives which may generate different levels of ineffectiveness than the current testing under IAS 39.
Receivables provisioning will move from an incurred to an expected loss model.
The Groups largest exposure is trade receivables which had a gross value of 716m at 31 July 2017.
No impact is anticipated for high credit quality balances settled on agreed terms.
However the new model will impact the timing and value of provision recognition on higher risk balances.
Under the current methodology provisions of 33m have been recognised on 73m of receivables which are more than three months overdue or considered to be high risk.
IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers The review of the impact of IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers requires an assessment at contract level to confirm the full impact of adopting this standard.
Based on the analysis completed to date we consider that the new standard is unlikely to have a material impact on revenue recognition for the following business activities which had revenue of circa 1.7bn this year Smiths branded products sold under basic PO terms Customer specific products where the Group is manufacturing at risk with no contractual rights to recovery Smiths Interconnect military contracts accounted for on a percentage of completion basis using proportion of costs incurred Smiths Detection programmes currently accounted for as multielement contracts with consideration allocated on the relative fair value of the components and Spares and ad hoc service callouts to repair or replace equipment.
The basis of revenue recognition may change for the following revenue streams Customer specific products where the contractual terms include rights to payment for work performed to date.
Revenue for most of these contracts is expected to be recognised rateably over the manufacturing period depending on the specific rights in the contract Product development contracts where revenue is recognised on reaching development milestones.
Revenue for recognition for some of these contracts is expected to move to a percentage of completion basis using proportion of costs incurred and John Crane has service contracts which include bonuses and penalties based on the performance of the asset being maintained.
Depending on the evidence available to estimate the levels of performance achieved bonuses may be recognised earlier under IFRS 15.
IFRS 16 Leases The review of this standard is at an early stage.
This standard will require a lease liability and corresponding asset to be recognised on the balance sheet for leases currently classified as operating leases and not recognised on the balance sheet.
IFRS 16 can require changes to the valuation of lease liabilities.
However preliminary work has not identified any material leases with contingent rentals.
The total value of operating lease commitments at 31 July 2017 was 140m 2016 146m.
Parent Company The ultimate parent company of the Group is Smiths Group plc a company incorporated in England and Wales and listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The accounts of the Parent Company Smiths Group plc have been prepared in accordance with UK GAAP applying Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
The Company accounts are presented in separate financial statements on pages 196 to 206.
The principal subsidiaries of the Parent Company are listed in the above accounts.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 1 Segment information Analysis by operating segment The Group is organised into five divisions John Crane Smiths Medical Smiths Detection Smiths Interconnect and FlexTek.
These divisions design manufacture and support the following products John Crane  mechanical seals seal support systems engineered bearings power transmission couplings and specialised filtration systems Smiths Medical  infusion systems vascular access products including safety needles patient airway and temperature management equipment and specialised devices in areas of diagnostics and emergency patient transport Smiths Detection  sensors and systems that detect and identify explosives narcotics weapons chemical agents biohazards and contraband Smiths Interconnect  specialised electronic and radio frequency boardlevel and waveguide devices connectors cables test sockets and subsystems used in highspeed high reliability secure connectivity applications FlexTek  engineered components flexible hosing and rigid tubing that heat and move fluids and gases.
The position and performance of each division is reported at each Board meeting to the Board of Directors.
This information is prepared using the same accounting policies as the consolidated financial information except that the Group uses headline operating profit to monitor divisional results and operating assets to monitor divisional position.
See note 3 for an explanation of which items are excluded from headline measures.
Intersegment sales and transfers are charged at arms length prices.
Segment trading performance Year ended 31 July 2017 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate costs
Revenue 88tel338 3280 Divisional headline operating profit Corporate headline operating costs 48 48 Headline operating profitloss  48 589 Items excluded from headline measures note 3 17 23 33 4 3 16 90 Profit on disposal of businesses Operating profitloss  64 674 Year ended 31 July 2016 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate costs
Revenue 83tel284 2949 Divisional headline operating profit Corporate headline operating costs 35 35 Headline operating profitloss  35 510 Items excluded from headline measures note 3 30 21 6 31 14 21 123 Operating profitloss  56 387 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Divisional headline operating profit is stated after charging the following items Year ended 31 July 2017 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Reconciling items
Depreciation
Amortisation of capitalised development 14 13 27 Amortisation of software patents and intellectual property Amortisation of acquired intangibles 17 17 Sharebased payment Year ended 31 July 2016 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Reconciling items
Depreciation
Amortisation of capitalised development 14 12 26 Amortisation of software patents and intellectual property Amortisation of acquired intangibles 15 15 Impairment of goodwill 23 23 Impairment of trade investments 2 2 Impairment of property plant and equipment 6 6 Sharebased payment The reconciling items are central costs and charges that are treated as nonheadline see note 3.
Segment assets and liabilities Segment assets 31 July 2017 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate and nonheadline
Property plant equipment development projects other intangibles and investments Inventory trade and other receivables 33tel104 27 1231 Segment assets 43tel139 47 1762 31 July 2016 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate and nonheadline
Property plant equipment development projects other intangibles and investments Inventory trade and other receivables 36tel99 26 1274 Segment assets 46tel132 41 1784 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 1 Segment information continued Analysis by operating segment continued Segment assets and liabilities continued Segment liabilities 31 July 2017 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate and nonheadline
Divisional liabilities 124 120 246 48 39 577 Corporate and nonheadline liabilities 393 393 Segment liabilities 124 120 246 48 39 393 970 31 July 2016 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Corporate and nonheadline
Divisional liabilities 124 121 196 78 37 556 Corporate and nonheadline liabilities 408 408 Segment liabilities 124 121 196 78 37 408 964 Nonheadline liabilities comprise provisions and accruals relating to nonheadline items acquisitions and disposals.
Reconciliation of segment assets and liabilities to statutory assets and liabilities Assets Liabilities 31 July 31 July 31 July 31 July Segment assets and liabilities 1762 1784 970 964 Goodwill and acquired intangibles 1820 1556 Derivatives 69 42 12 20 Current and deferred tax 334 308 156 167 Retirement benefit assets and obligations 390 328 166 248 Cash and borrowings 782 431 1749 1409 Assets and liabilities of business held for sale 24 5 Statutory assets and liabilities 5157 4473 3053 2813 Segment capital expenditure The capital expenditure on property plant and equipment capitalised development and other intangible assets for each division is John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Reconciling items
Capital expenditure year ended 31 July Capital expenditure year ended 31 July The reconciling items include corporate capital expenditure through Smiths Business Information Services on IT equipment and software.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Segment capital employed Capital employed is a nonstatutory measure of invested resources.
It comprises statutory net assets adjusted to add goodwill recognised directly in reserves in respect of subsidiaries acquired before 1 August 1998 of 787m 31 July 2016 815m and eliminate postretirement benefit assets and liabilities and litigation provisions relating to nonheadline items both net of related tax and net debt.
See note 30 for a reconciliation of net assets to capital employed.
The 12month rolling average capital employed by division which Smiths use to calculate divisional return on capital employed is 31 July 2017 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Total
Average divisional capital employed 890 125tel3641 Average corporate capital employed 2 Average total capital employed 3639 31 July 2016 John Crane
Medical
Smiths
Detection
Smiths
Interconnect
FlexTek
Total
Average divisional capital employed 895 119tel3374 Average corporate capital employed 50 Average total capital employed 3324 Analysis of revenue The revenue for the main product and service lines for each division is John Crane
Aftermarket
Total
Revenue year ended 31 July tel885 Revenue year ended 31 July tel830 John Crane original equipment revenue was previously described as First Fit.
This has been changed to provide a description relevant to a broader range of end markets as John Crane expands its nonoil and gas revenues.
Smiths Medical
Vascular access Vital care
Total
Revenue year ended 31 July tel273 58 951 Revenue year ended 31 July tel240 72 874 Smiths Detection
Ports and borders
Urban security
Revenue year ended 31 July tel94 138 687 Revenue year ended 31 July Smiths Detection previously reported its air transportation revenue as transportation.
The description has been expanded to avoid any confusion with the Transportation market discussed on page 29 since Smiths Detection operates in the Security and defence market.
Smiths Detection previously reported its urban security revenue as critical infrastructure.
This has been changed to reflect the range of opportunities developing in this area.
Smiths Interconnect
Microwave
Power
Total
Revenue year ended 31 July tel47 419 Revenue year ended 31 July tel88 435
Fluid
Management
Flexible
Solutions
Heat
Solutions
Construction
Products
Total
Revenue year ended 31 July Revenue year ended 31 July Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 1 Segment information continued Analysis of revenue continued The Groups statutory revenue is analysed as follows Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Sale of goods 2865 2607 Services 394 312 Contracts qualifying as construction contracts 21 30 3280 2949 Analysis by geographical areas The Groups revenue by destination and noncurrent operating assets by location are shown below
Intangible assets and property plant and equipment Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 United Kingdom Germany 16telFrance Other European Total European 72telUnited States of America 1531 1396 1627 1349 Canada Other North American Total North American 1678 1535 1652 1373 Japan China excluding Hong Kong Rest of the World 280 2949 2330 2057 2 Operating profit is stated after charging Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Research and development expense 98 87 Operating leases land and buildings 34 30 other 8 8 Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Audit services Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the Companys annual financial statements 4 3 Fees payable to the Companys auditors and its associates for other services the audit of the Companys subsidiaries All other services 1 Other services comprise auditrelated assurance services 0.2m 2016 0.1m tax advisory services 0.1m 2016 0.1m oneoff IT and consulting projects 0.2m 2016 nil and other services nil 2016 0.1m.
Total fees for nonaudit services comprise 8% 2016 6% of audit fees.
Auditrelated assurance services include the review of the Interim Report.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
3 Nonstatutory profit measures Headline profit measures The Company seeks to present a measure of trading performance which is not impacted by material nonrecurring items or items considered nonoperational in nature.
This measure is described as headline and used by management to measure and monitor performance.
See the disclosures on presentation of results in accounting policies for an explanation of the excluded items which are referred to as nonheadline.
Headline revenue The agreement to sell Smiths Medicals Wallace product line included an obligation to continue manufacturing products for the acquirer for 12 months after the date of disposal.
In the Interim results to 31 January 2017 revenue arising from this activity was treated as nonheadline because it was not expected to contribute to Smiths Medicals ongoing business.
This treatment was reviewed in response to developments in the commercial relationship with CooperSurgical Inc. and the activity is now being reported within headline activity.
Headline operating profit The nonheadline items included in statutory operating profit are as follows
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Restructuring programmes 37 37 Acquisition costs 19 6 Provision for Titeflex Corporation subrogation claims 22 4 11 Provision for John Crane Inc.
Cost recovery for John Crane Inc.
Postretirement benefits changes to schemes and administration costs 8 9 16 Impairment of goodwill property plant and equipment and trade investments 31 Amortisation of acquired intangible assets 10 17 15 Unwind of fair value uplift of inventory on the acquisition balance sheet 3 Profit on disposal of businesses 28 175 Nonheadline items in operating profit 85 123 Items for the year ended 31 July 2017 Restructuring costs include 33m in respect of Fuel for Growth.
This programme which involves redundancy relocation and consolidation of manufacturing is considered a material nonrecurring item by virtue of its size.
No further costs are expected in respect of this program.
In addition there are 4m of initial costs in respect of the integration of Morpho Detection and the existing Smiths Detection business.
The integration is expected to take two years.
The total costs over the two years are projected to be material and nonrecurring.
Acquisition costs have been treated as nonheadline because they depend on the level of acquisition activity in the year.
Only incremental costs directly linked to the transaction are reported as nonheadline.
They do not include the costs of the employees working on transactions.
See note 22 for details of the costs and cost recoveries relating to Titeflex Corporation subrogation claims and John Crane Inc asbestos litigation.
These costs and recoveries have been treated as nonheadline because the provision were treated as nonheadline when they were originally recognised and the subrogation claims and litigation relate to products that the Group no longer sells in these markets.
Postretirement benefit changes and costs relate to closed schemes so the costs are a legacy of previous employee pension arrangements.
The impacts of business combination fair value adjustments including amortisation of intangible assets impairment or unwinding have been excluded from headline measures on the basis that these charges result from acquisition accounting and do not relate to current trading activity.
See note 28 for a breakdown of the profit by transaction.
It is nonheadline since the profit and cash impact is material and nonrecurring.
Items for the year ended 31 July 2016 Restructuring costs comprise 37m in respect of Fuel for Growth.
This programme which involves redundancy relocation and consolidation of manufacturing is considered a material nonrecurring item by virtue of its size.
The 9m charge relating to postretirement benefits comprises the 10m settlement cost for the buyout of retiree liabilities completed by the US pension scheme on 14 August 2015 net of a 1m settlement gain on closing a small scheme in Holland.
Impairments comprise 23m goodwill writedowns see note 11 6m on property plant and equipment and 2m on trade investments.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 3 Nonstatutory profit measures continued Headline profit measures continued Headline finance costs The nonheadline items included in finance costs are as follows
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Adjustment to discounted provisions 22 6 5 Fair value gain realised on contributing government bonds to Smiths Industries Pension Scheme 4 19 Other financing lossesgains 8 1 Other finance income  retirement benefits 8 2 3 Nonheadline lossesgains in finance costs 12 18 The unwind of discounting on provisions has been excluded from headline finance costs because these provisions were originally recognised as nonheadline and this treatment has been maintained for ongoing costs and credits.
The fair value gain realised on contributing government bonds to Smiths Industries Pension Scheme was excluded from headline finance costs because it was a large oneoff item relating to funding previous employee pension arrangements.
Other financing gains and losses represent the potentially volatile gains and losses on derivatives loans inside the group and other financial instruments which are not hedge accounted under IAS 39.
They have been excluded from headline finance costs because they do not accurately reflect the aggregate risks of the group since offsetting gains have been recognised in reserves or deferred in assets and liabilities which are not held at fair value.
Financing credits relating to retirement benefits are excluded from headline finance costs because the ongoing costs and credits are a legacy of previous employee pension arrangements.
4 Net finance costs
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Interest receivable 5 3 Interest payable bank loans and overdrafts including associated fees 9 8 other loans 57 54 Interest payable 66 62 Other financing gainslosses fair value gainslosses on hedged debt 6 23 fair value on lossesgains fair value hedges 6 23 fair value gain realised on contributing government bonds to Smiths Industries Pension Scheme 19 net foreign exchange lossesgains 8 1 adjustment to discounted provisions 6 5 Other financing lossesgains 14 15 Net interest income on retirement benefit obligations 8 2 3 Net finance costs 73 41 The government bonds contributed to the Smiths Industries Pension Scheme in December 2015 were accounted for as available for sale financial assets and cumulative fair value gains of 19m on these assets were recycled from other comprehensive income to the income statement.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
5 Earnings per share Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing the profit for the year attributable to equity shareholders of the Parent Company by the average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Profit attributable to equity shareholders for the year continuing 570 259 total 562 259 Average number of shares in issue during the year 395422421 395095591 Diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the profit attributable to ordinary shareholders by 400518049 2016 398957837 ordinary shares being the average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year adjusted by the dilutive effect of employee share schemes.
For the year ended 31 July 2017 zero options 2016 223993 were excluded from this calculation because their effect was antidilutive for continuing operations.
A reconciliation of basic and headline earnings per share  continuing is as follows Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016
EPS
Profit attributable to equity shareholders of the Parent Company 570 144.1 259 65.6
Nonheadline items and related tax 184 46.5 77 19.6 Headline profit attributable to equity shareholders for the year 386 97.6 336 85.2 Statutory earnings per share  diluted p 142.3 64.9 Headline earnings per share  diluted p 96.3 84.3 6 Taxation The Groups approach to taxation is set out in the Financial review.
This note only provides information about corporate income taxes under IFRS.
Smiths companies operate in over 50 countries across the world.
They pay and collect many different taxes in addition to corporate income taxes including payroll taxes value added and sales taxes property taxes productspecific taxes and environmental taxes.
The costs associated with these other taxes are included in profit before tax.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 The taxation charge in the consolidated income statement for the year comprises Continuing operations current income tax charge 58 56 current tax adjustments in respect of prior periods 3 Current taxation 61 56 deferred taxation 32 29 Total taxation expense  continuing operations 29 85 Discontinued operations current income tax credit 9 deferred taxation 6 Total taxation expense in the consolidated income statement 26 85 Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Tax on items chargedcredited to equity Deferred tax chargecredit retirement benefit schemes 13 10 cash flow hedge accounting 1 share options 3 The net retirement benefit charge to equity includes 6m 2016 4m credit relating to UK schemes and 5m 2016 4m credit relating to US schemes.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 6 Taxation continued Reconciliation of the tax charge The tax expense on the profit for the year for continuing operations is different from the standard rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.7% 2016 20.0%.
The difference is reconciled as follows Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Profit before taxation 602 346 Notional taxation expense at UK rate of 19.7% 2016 20.0% 118 69 Different tax rates on nonUK profits and losses 55 24 Nondeductible expenses 14 16 Tax credits and nontaxable income 15 11 Nonheadline recognition of UK deferred tax 69 Other adjustments to unrecognised deferred tax 23 2 Current and deferred benefits from closed financing arrangement 19 15 Effect of nontaxable profits on business disposals 35 Prior year trueup 3 Tax on discontinued activities 3
Taxation expense in the consolidated income statement 26 85 The head office of Smiths Group is domiciled in the UK so the tax charge has been reconciled to UK tax rates.
In recent years Smiths has made substantial payments to its UK defined benefit pension plans which generated significant UK tax losses.
This resulted in the nonrecognition of deferred tax on UK losses and other temporary differences.
The current position of the UK pension schemes has significantly improved and the pension contributions envisaged going forwards are significantly reduced.
Reduced pension contributions and increased trading and investing profits have made the UK tax group structurally profitable resulting in the recognition of all UK deferred tax assets and generating a nonheadline credit of 69m in the current year.
Included in other adjustments to unrecognised deferred tax is recognition of 17m deferred tax following the reorganisation of a US business.
As a result of changes in tax legislation and the reorganisation of finance activities the credit for closed financing arrangements will not be repeated in future years.
Current taxation Current tax At 1 August 2015 20 Foreign exchange gains and losses 4 Chargecredit to income statement 56 Tax paid 62 At 31 July 2016 10 Foreign exchange gains and losses 2 Chargecredit to income statement  continuing 61 Chargecredit to income statement  discontinued 9 Business combinations 1 Business disposals 4 Tax paid 82 At 31 July 2017 17 Current tax receivable 62 Current tax payable 45 At 31 July 2017 17 Provisions included in current tax liabilities are established based on reasonable estimates for the possible consequences of tax authority audits in the various countries in which the Group operates.
Management judgement is used to determine the amount of such provisions based on an understanding of the relevant local tax law taking into account the differences of interpretation that can arise on a wide variety of issues depending on the prevailing circumstances including the nature of current tax audits and the experience of previous enquiries.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Deferred taxation
Employment benefits
Provisions
Other
Total
At 1 August 2015 116 Creditcharge to income statement 7 72 53 10 7 29 Creditcharge to equity 10 10 Business combinations 1 1 Exchange adjustments 21 At 31 July 2016 145 Deferred tax assets 24 Deferred tax liabilities 121 3 6 17 95 At 31 July 2016 145 Reallocation 4 4 Chargecredit to income statement  continuing 11 9 43 7 6 32 Chargecredit to income statement  discontinued 6 6 Creditcharge to equity 10 1 11 Business combinations 6 2 4 Business disposals 3 3 Exchange adjustments 1 1 1 1 2 At 31 July 2017 148 10 Deferred tax assets 4 10 Deferred tax liabilities 144 2 5 26 111 At 31 July 2017 148 10 The deferred tax asset relating to losses carried forward has been recognised on the basis that evidence demonstrates a consistent pattern of improving results and the Group has implemented plans to support continuing improvements or the losses relate to specific identified nonrecurring events.
In 2012 UK deferred tax was written off as a deteriorating position in legacy pension plans made UK activities structurally loss making.
As a result of an improvement in the UK pension position and restructuring financing activities the UK is now expected to earn taxable profits and a 69m deferred tax asset has been recognised as a nonheadline gain in the period.
The closing deferred tax balance related to UK activities at 31 July 2017 including the benefit of losses brought forward and deferred tax liabilities on UK pension schemes amounted to 64m.
Deferred tax relating to provisions includes 79m 2016 84m relating to the John Crane Inc. relating to Titeflex Corporation.
See note 22 for additional information on provisions and Included in other deferred tax balances above is a deferred tax asset of 14m 2016 25m relating to inventory where current tax relief is only available when the inventory is sold.
The Group has unrecognised deferred tax relating to deductible temporary differences in the UK amounting to nil 2016 402m and nonUK losses amounting to 68m 2016 93m.
The expiry date of operating losses carried forward is dependent upon the law of the various territories in which the losses arise.
A summary of expiry dates for losses in respect of which deferred tax has not been recognised is set out below.
Restricted losses Expiry of losses Expiry of losses
Americas 36 20192036 Asia 12 20182024 11 20172023 Total restricted losses 12 47 Unrestricted losses operating losses 55 No expiry 211 No expiry Total 67 258 Franked Investment Income Group Litigation Order Smiths Group is one of the companies enrolled in the FII GLO litigation against HMRC.
The court cases and appeals are nearing the end and some claimants with different fact patterns have received payments.
Smiths claims amount to around 30m after deducting 45% withholding tax.
However there are further relevant legal actions that could impact the claims.
The benefit of this claim has not been recognised in the current or previous financial statements due to the uncertainty of the eventual outcome.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 7 Employees Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Staff costs during the period Wages and salaries 833 745 Social security 94 84 Sharebased payment note 9 15 10 Pension costs including defined contribution schemes note 8 The average number of persons employed rounded to the nearest 50 employees was Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 John Crane 6050 6550 Smiths Medical 7700 7600 Smiths Detection 2450 2050 Smiths Interconnect 3250 3400 FlexTek 2100 2050 Corporate 350 350 21900 22000 Key management The key management of the Group comprises Smiths Group plc Board directors and Executive Committee members.
Their aggregate compensation is shown below.
Details of directors remuneration are contained in the report of the Remuneration Committee on pages 103 to 120.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Key management compensation Salaries and shortterm employee benefits 13.2 12.8 Cost of postretirement benefits 0.1 0.1 Cost of sharebased incentive plans 5.3 4.5 No member of key management had any material interest during the period in a contract of significance other than a service contract or a qualifying thirdparty indemnity provision with the Company or any of its subsidiaries.
Options and awards held at the end of the period by key management in respect of the Companys sharebased incentive plans were Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Number of instruments
Number of instruments
SEP 134 LTIP 1041 1185 Restricted stock 254 261 Related party transactions The only related party transactions in the year ended 31 July 2017 were key management compensation 31 July 2016 key management compensation.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
8 Postretirement benefits Smiths provides postretirement benefits to employees in a number of countries.
This includes defined benefit and defined contribution plans and mainly in the United Kingdom UK and United States of America US postretirement healthcare.
Defined contribution plans The Group operates a number of defined contribution plans across many countries.
In the UK a defined contribution plan has been offered since the closure of the UK defined benefit pension plans.
In the US a 401k defined contribution plan operates.
The total expense recognised in the consolidated income statement in respect of all these plans was 33m 2016 30m.
Defined benefit and postretirement healthcare plans The principal defined benefit pension plans are in the UK and in the US and these have been closed so that no future benefits are accrued.
For all schemes pension costs are assessed in accordance with the advice of independent professionally qualified actuaries.
These valuations have been updated by independent qualified actuaries in order to assess the liabilities of the schemes as at 31 July 2017.
Scheme assets are stated at their market values.
Contributions to the schemes are made on the advice of the actuaries in accordance with local funding requirements.
The changes in the present value of the net pension asset in the period were Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 At beginning of period 80 108 Exchange adjustment 6 31 Reclassification of small unfunded obligations Current service cost 4 3 Scheme administration costs 7 7 Past service cost curtailments settlements 1 9 Finance income  retirement benefits 2 3 Contributions by employer 105 275 Actuarial gainloss 55 40 Net retirement benefit asset 224 80 UK pension schemes Smiths funded UK pension schemes are subject to a statutory funding objective as set out in UK pension legislation.
Scheme trustees need to obtain regular actuarial valuations to assess the scheme against this funding objective.
The trustees and sponsoring companies need to agree funding plans to improve the position of a scheme when it is below the acceptable funding level.
The UK Pensions Regulator has extensive powers to protect the benefits of members promote good administration and reduce the risk of situations arising which may require compensation to be paid from the Pension Protection Fund.
These powers include imposing a schedule of contributions or the calculation of the technical provisions where a trustee and company fail to agree appropriate calculations.
Smiths Industries Pension Scheme SIPS This scheme was closed to future accrual effective 1 November 2009.
SIPS provides indexlinked pension benefits based on final earnings at date of closure.
SIPS is governed by a corporate trustee SI Trustee Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of Smiths Group plc.
The board of trustee directors comprises five companynominated trustees and four membernominated trustees with an independent chairman selected by Smiths Group plc.
Trustee Directors are responsible for the management administration funding and investment strategy of the scheme.
The most recent actuarial valuation of this scheme has been performed using the Projected Unit Method as at 31 March 2015 and experience gains and losses identified during this valuation have been incorporated into the IAS 19 valuation.
Under the funding plan for SIPS agreed in November 2015 Smiths pays cash contributions of 2m a month until June 2020.
As part of this agreement Smiths contributed the indexlinked gilts previously held in an escrow account.
Under the governing documentation of the SIPS any future surplus would be returnable to Smiths Group plc by refund assuming gradual settlement of the liabilities over the lifetime of the scheme.
SIPS will implement Guaranteed Minimum Pensions equalisation in respect of members contracted out of the State Earnings Related Pensions Scheme prior to 6 April 1997 once the government has completed its consultations and confirmed an approach.
It is not yet possible to reliably quantify the impact of this adjustment.
The duration of the SIPS liabilities is around 23 years 2016 23 years for active deferred members 22 years 2016 24 years for deferred members and 11 years 2016 12 years for pensioners and dependants.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 8 Postretirement benefits continued UK pension schemes continued TI Group Pension Scheme TIGPS This scheme was closed to future accrual effective 1 November 2009.
TIGPS provides indexlinked pension benefits based on final earnings at the date of closure.
TIGPS is governed by a corporate trustee TI Pension Trustee Limited an independent company.
The board of trustee directors comprises five companynominated trustees and four membernominated trustees with an independent trustee director selected by the Trustee.
The Trustee is responsible for the management administration funding and investment strategy of the scheme.
The most recent actuarial valuation of this scheme has been performed using the Projected Unit Method as at 5 April 2015.
Under the funding plan for TIGPS agreed in March 2016 Smiths pays cash contributions of 3m a year until April 2018.
Under the governing documentation of the TIGPS any future surplus would be returnable to Smiths Group plc by refund assuming gradual settlement of the liabilities over the lifetime of the scheme.
TIGPS will implement Guaranteed Minimum Pensions equalisation in respect of members contracted out of the State Earnings Related Pensions Scheme prior to 6 April 1997 once the government has completed its consultations and confirmed an approach.
It is not yet possible to reliably quantify the impact of this adjustment.
The duration of the TIGPS liabilities is around 24 years 2016 25 years for active deferred members 22 years 2016 24 years for deferred members and 11 years 2016 11 years for pensioners and dependants.
US pension plans The most recent valuations of the principal US pension and postretirement healthcare plans were performed at 1 January 2017.
The pension plans were closed with effect from 30 April 2009 and benefits were calculated as at that date and are not revalued.
Governance of the US pension plans is managed by a Settlor Committee appointed by Smiths Group Services Corp a wholly owned subsidiary.
The duration of the liabilities for the largest US plan is around 19 years 2016 20 years for active deferred members 19 years 2016 20 years for deferred members and 12 years 2016 12 years for pensioners and dependants.
Last year the US funded plans completed a buyout of retiree liabilities for 527m transferring the obligation to pay pensions to Voya Retirement Insurance and Annuity Company.
A settlement loss of 10m was recognised on this transaction see note 3.
Risk management
The pensions schemes are exposed to risks that investment returns are below expectations leaving the scheme with insufficient assets in future to pay all its pension obligations members and dependants live longer than expected increasing the value of the pensions the scheme has to pay inflation rates are higher than expected so amounts payable under indexlinked pensions are higher than expected and increased contributions may be required to meet regulatory funding targets if lower interest rates increase the current value of liabilities.
These risks are managed separately for each pension scheme.
However Smiths has adopted a common approach of closing defined benefit schemes to cap members entitlements and supporting trustees in adopting investment strategies which match assets to future obligations after allowing for the funding position of the scheme.
TI Group Pension Scheme TIGPS TIGPS with a mature member profile and a strong funding position has been able to progress its matching strategy to the point where roughly 50% of liabilities are covered by matching annuities eliminating investment return longevity inflation and funding risks.
Smiths Industries Pension Scheme SIPS In August 2014 SIPS adjusted the scheme investment strategy.
The scheme has investments in diversified growth funds and a portfolio of exchange traded equity index futures managed by BlackRock.
The risk and return characteristics of equity index futures are similar to physical equities but provide the scheme with improved liquidity.
As at 31 July 2017 the SIPS portfolio of exchange traded equity index futures generated a 73m 2016 163m exposure to equities.
Following the company contribution of 152m UK government bonds to SIPS in December 2015 and the resulting improvement in the funding position the trustees have adopted a leveraged liability matching strategy.
The scheme uses repurchase arrangements total return swaps inflation swaps and interest rate swaps to hedge the interest and inflation risks of the scheme liabilities.
Repurchase agreements exchange government bonds held by the scheme for cash with an obligation to buy back the asset at a fixed future date and price.
The cash is invested in liability matching assets reducing funding risk.
A total return swap exchanges the return on a specified asset for example an indexlinked bond and an interest payment fixed or floating.
Contracts are spread across a panel of banks.
To minimise the risk that counterparties fail to settle obligations positions are collateralised.
For repurchase agreements collateral is the difference between the present value of the repurchase obligation and the value of the asset exchanged.
For swaps collateral is based on market values.
At 31 July 2017 scheme assets were net of 773m 2016 720m repurchase obligations and nominal exposure from interest rate swaps of 340m 2016 293m inflation swaps of 293m 2016 263m and total return swaps of 14m 2016 14m.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
The principal assumptions used in updating the valuations are set out below
US
Other
UK
US
Other
Rate of increase in salaries na na 2.8% na na 2.8% Rate of increase for active deferred members 4.1% na na 3.6% na na Rate of increase in pensions in payment 3.2% na 1.5% 2.7% na 1.6% Rate of increase in deferred pensions 3.2% na 0.1% 2.7% na 0.1% Discount rate 2.6% 3.85% 2.6% 2.3% 3.45% 2.8% Inflation rate 3.2% na 2.2% 2.7% na 2.3% Healthcare cost increases 4.2% na 1.8% 4.2% na 1.4% The assumptions used in calculating the costs and obligations of the Groups defined benefit pension plans are set by Smiths after consultation with independent professionally qualified actuaries.
The assumptions used are estimates chosen from a range of possible actuarial assumptions which due to the timescale covered may not necessarily occur in practice.
For countries outside the UK and USA assumptions are disclosed as a weighted average.
Discount rate assumptions The UK schemes use a discount rate based on the yield on the iBOXX over 15year AArated corporate bond index adjusted if necessary to better reflect the shape of the yield curve considering the Aon Hewitt GBP Select AA curve.
For the USA the discount rate is based on the Towers Watson cashflow matching models and set with reference to Moodys Aa annualised yield the Citigroup High Grade Index and the Merrill Lynch 15 years High Quality Index.
Mortality assumptions The mortality assumptions used in the principal UK schemes are based on the new SAPS S2 All Birth year tables with relevant scaling factors based on the recent experience of the schemes.
The assumption allows for future improvements in life expectancy in line with the 2016 CMI projections blended to a longterm rate of 1.25%.
The mortality assumptions used in the principal US schemes are based on the RP2014 table adjusted backward to 2006 with MP2014 and projected forward using MP2016 as of 31 July 2017.
The table selected allows for future mortality improvements and applies an adjustment for job classification blue collar versus white collar.
Expected further years of life UK schemes US schemes
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Member who retires next year at age Member currently 45 when they retire in 20 years time Sensitivity Sensitivities in respect of the key assumptions used to measure the principal pension schemes as at 31 July 2017 are set out below.
These sensitivities show the hypothetical impact of a change in each of the listed assumptions in isolation with the exception of the sensitivity to inflation which incorporates the impact of certain correlating assumptions.
In practice such assumptions rarely change in isolation.
Profit before tax for year ended 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2017 Profit before tax for year ended 31 July 2016
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Rate of mortality  1 year increase in life expectancy 3 67 177 3 53 183 Rate of mortality  1 year decrease in life expectancy 3 66 177 3 53 183 Rate of inflation  0.25% increase 2 20 97 2 16 119 Discount rate  0.25% increase 4 27 151 4 19 168 Market value of scheme assets  2.5% increase The effect on profit before tax reflects the impact of current service cost and net interest cost.
The value of the scheme assets is affected by changes in mortality rates inflation and discounting because they affect the carrying value of the insurance assets.
Asset valuation Liquidity funds equities and bonds are valued using quoted market prices in active markets.
Exchange traded equity index futures are valued at market prices.
Total return interest and inflation swaps are bilateral agreements between counterparties and do not have observable market prices.
These derivative contracts are valued using observable market inputs.
Insured liabilities comprise annuity policies matching the scheme obligation to identified groups of pensioners.
These assets are valued at the actuarial valuation of the corresponding liability reflecting this matching relationship.
Property is valued by specialists applying recognised property valuation methods incorporating current market data on rental yields and transaction prices.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 8 Postretirement benefits continued Retirementbenefit plan assets 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
US schemes
UK schemes
Other
Cash and cash equivalents cash liquidity funds  cash collateral and liquidity funds held to support exchange traded futures Equities UK funds  North American funds 124 2 126 other regions and global funds Government bonds indexlinked bonds 1298 1298 1410 1410 fixedinterest bonds Corporate bonds 1048 184 1011 Insured liabilities 1050 1 1Property Other diversified growth funds and scheme receivables  repurchase obligations 773 773 720 720 Total market value 3959 266 34 4259 4034 216 62 4312 SIPS has a portfolio of exchange traded equity index futures which are valued at market prices.
These futures increase leverage in SIPS creating additional asset exposure.
At 31 July 2017 the gross equity exposure generated by these exchange traded futures was 73m 2016 163m.
At 31 July 2017 the aggregate value of this strategy including cash received as collateral was 3m 2016 9m.
The scheme was holding 10m 2016 44m in liquidity funds to meet potential future obligations to collateralise equity index futures.
UK other investments at 31 July 2017 included 70m 2016 162m of investments in diversified growth funds held by SIPS 184m 2016 107m of investments in leveraged index linked UK government bond funds held by TIGPS and 12m 2016 9m SIPS interest and inflation swaps.
At 31 July 2017 SIPS assets were net of 773m 2016 720m repurchase obligations and included 4m 2016 11m gains on interest rate swaps 8m gains 2016 2m losses on inflation swaps and 1m gains 2016 nil on total return swaps.
See risk management disclosures on page 160 for information on how the scheme is using repurchase arrangements and swap contracts to match the interest rate and inflation exposures of its assets to the interest rate and inflation exposures of the scheme liabilities.
The scheme was holding 1m 2016 45m in liquidity funds to meet potential future obligations to collateralise repurchase arrangements or swap agreements.
The scheme assets do not include any property occupied by or other assets used by the Group.
Equities include investments in broadbased equity indices some of which hold ordinary equity shares in Smiths Group plc.
Present value of funded scheme liabilities and assets for the main UK and US schemes 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 SIPS TIGPS
US schemes Present value of funded scheme liabilities Active deferred members 81 92 101 82 82 124 Deferred members 891 625 160 881 688 175 Pensioners 1053 809 31 1086 869 16 Present value of funded scheme liabilities 2025 1526 292 2049 1639 315 Market value of scheme assets 2238 1703 266 2227 1787 216 Surplusdeficit 213 177 26 178 148 99 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Net retirement benefit obligations 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
US schemes
UK schemes
Other
Market value of scheme assets 3959 266 34 4259 4034 216 62 4312 Present value of funded scheme liabilities 3571 292 42 3905 3709 315 70 4094 Surplusdeficit 388 26 8 354 325 99 8 218 Unfunded pension plans 55 8 48 111 56 8 52 116 Postretirement healthcare 6 11 2 19 8 12 1 21 Present value of unfunded obligations 61 19 50 130 64 20 53 137 Unrecognised asset due to surplus restriction 1 1 Net pension assetliability 327 45 58 224 261 119 62 80 Postretirement assets Postretirement liabilities 63 45 58 166 66 119 63 248 Net pension assetliability 327 45 58 224 261 119 62 80 Where any individual scheme shows a recoverable surplus under IAS 19 this is disclosed on the balance sheet as a retirement benefit asset.
The IAS 19 surplus of any one scheme is not available to fund the IAS 19 deficit of another scheme.
The retirement benefit asset disclosed arises from the rights of the employers to recover the surplus at the end of the life of the scheme.
Amounts recognised in the consolidated income statement Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Amounts charged to operating profit Current service cost 4 3 Settlement loss 1 9 Scheme administration costs The operating cost is charged as follows Cost of sales 1 1 Sales and distribution costs 1 1 Headline administrative expenses 2 1 Nonheadline administrative expenses Amounts credited to finance costs Net interest income 2 3 Amounts recognised directly in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Actuarial gainslosses Difference between interest credit and return on assets 31 395 Experience gains on scheme liabilities 22 58 Actuarial gains arising from changes in demographic assumptions 69 47 Actuarial losses arising from changes in financial assumptions 6 539 Movements in surplus restriction 1 1 55 40 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 8 Postretirement benefits continued Changes in present value of funded scheme assets 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
US schemes
UK schemes
Other
At beginning of period 4034 216 62 4312 3523 445 49 4017 Interest on assets Actuarial lossgain on scheme assets 15 14 2 31 Employer contributions Assets distributed on settlement 32 32 360 360 Scheme administration costs 5 2 7 4 3 7 Exchange adjustments 1 Benefits paid 173 9 3 185 180 14 3 197 At end of period 3959 266 34 4259 4034 216 62 4312 Changes in present value of funded defined benefit obligations 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
US schemes
UK schemes
Other
At beginning of period 3709 315 70 4094 3385 568 57 4010 Current service cost 2 2 1 1 Interest on obligations 83 11 3 97 115 12 2 129 Actuarial gainloss on liabilities 389 31 3 423 Liabilities extinguished on settlement Exchange adjustments 2 2 4 68 11 79 Benefits paid At end of period 3571 292 42 3905 3709 315 70 4094 Changes in present value of unfunded defined benefit pensions and postretirement healthcare plans Assets Obligations Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 At beginning of period 137 115 Reclassification of small unfunded obligations Current service cost 2 2 Interest on obligations 3 4 Actuarial gainloss 9 11 Employer contributions 6 6 Exchange adjustments 3 11 Benefits paid 6 6 6 6 At end of period 130 137 Cash contributions Company contributions to the defined benefit pension plans and postretirement healthcare plans for 2017 totalled 105m 2016 275m.
This comprised regular contributions to funded schemes of 24m 2016 32m to SIPS 3m 2016 11m to TIGPS 67m 2016 34m to funded US Schemes 2m to other schemes and additional contributions of 3m to fund the closure of a scheme in Canada.
In addition 6m 2016 6m was spent on providing benefits under unfunded defined benefit pension and postretirement healthcare plans.
In 2018 the cash contributions to the Groups principal funded defined benefit schemes are expected to total about 50m including 24m to SIPS and 3m to TIGPS with the balance relating mainly to the US scheme.
Group contributions in respect of the unfunded schemes and postretirement healthcare are expected to be in line with 2017.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
9 Employee share schemes The Group operates share schemes and plans for the benefit of employees.
The nature of the principal schemes and plans including general conditions is set out below LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP The LTIP is a share plan under which an award over a capped number of shares will vest after the end of the threeyear performance period if performance conditions are met.
LTIP awards are made to selected senior executives including the executive directors.
Awards made prior to 2016 were made with different targets for corporate executives and divisional executives.
Since 2016 all LTIP awards have had one set of targets.
LTIP performance conditions Each performance condition has a threshold below which no shares vest and a maximum performance target at or above which the award vests in full.
For performance between threshold and maximum awards vest on a straightline sliding scale.
The performance conditions are assessed separately so performance on one condition does not affect the vesting of the other elements of the award.
To the extent that the performance targets are not met over the threeyear performance period awards will lapse.
There is no retesting of the performance conditions.
Group LTIP awards have performance conditions relating to underlying revenue growth growth in headline EPS adjusted to exclude tax ROCE cash conversion and for awards made before 2015 TSR relative to the FTSE 100 excluding financial services companies.
Divisional LTIP awards have performance conditions relating to divisional performance against headline KPIs including underlying revenue and operating profit growth operating margins ROCE operating cash conversion employee engagement and quality metrics.
Smiths Group CoInvestment Plan CIP and Smiths Share Matching Plan SMP In 2015 the CIP was replaced by the SMP.
Under the CIP and SMP participants are required to invest between 25% and 50% of their posttax bonus purchasing the Companys shares at the prevailing market price.
At the end of a threeyear period if the executive is still in office and provided the performance test is passed matching shares will be awarded in respect of any invested shares retained for that period.
The number of matching shares to be awarded is determined by the Remuneration Committee at the end of the year in which the bonus is earned by reference to annual bonus and other corporate financial criteria.
The maximum award will not exceed the value before tax of the bonus or salary invested in shares by the executive.
For the CIP vesting of matching shares will occur and the matching shares will be released at the end of the threeyear period if the Groups Return on Capital Employed ROCE over the performance period exceeds the Groups weighted average cost of capital WACC over the performance period by an average margin of at least 1% per annum.
If ROCE exceeds WACC by an average margin of 3% per annum the enhanced performance condition is met and a second matching share will be issued for every purchased share.
For the SMP vesting of matching shares will occur and the matching shares will be released at the end of the threeyear period depending on the performance of the Group LTIP issued for the same performance period.
The first matching share is awarded if the Group LTIP vests under any performance condition.
No future awards will be made under the CIP or SMP.
Smiths Excellence Plan SEP In September 2016 the Smiths Excellence plan SEP was introduced.
The SEP is designed to reinforce value creation over the medium term by focusing on specific objectives in key areas of operational performance.
Awards vest after two years depending on performance on the operational objectives during the first year and continued employment with the Group.
There is no retesting of performance.
However the Remuneration Committee has discretion to adjust vesting rates if material misstatements in reported performance are subsequently identified and awards are subject to clawback provisions in the event of misconduct.
Directors are not eligible to participate in the SEP.
Restricted stock The restricted stock is used by the Remuneration Committee as a part of the recruitment strategy to make awards in recognition of incentive arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
If an award is considered appropriate the award will take account of relevant factors including the fair value of awards forfeited any performance conditions attached the likelihood of those conditions being met and the proportion of the vesting period remaining.
SEP
CIP and
Longterm incentive plans
Other share schemes Total
Ordinary shares under option 000 1 August 2015 1369 2649 1494 5512 2.57 Granted 635 1628 303 329 2895 0.99 Exercised 530 199 30 380 1139 2.95 31 July 2016 1439 3354 273 1221 6287 1.83 Granted 817 1581 58 218 2674 1.06 Lapsed 69 174 939 7 70 1259 0.51 31 July tel3798 205 1110 6787 1.64 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 9 Employee share schemes continued Options were exercised on an irregular basis during the period.
The average closing share price over the financial year was 1499.95p 2016 1049.61p.
There has been no change to the effective option price of any of the outstanding options during the period.
Range of exercise prices Total shares under option at 31 July 2017
31 July 2017 months Total shares under option at 31 July 2016
31 July 2016 months
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 0.00  2.00 5677 17 5066 18 For the purposes of valuing options to arrive at the sharebased payment charge the Binomial optionpricing model has been used for most schemes and the Monte Carlo method is used for schemes with total shareholder return performance targets.
The key assumptions used in the models for 2017 and 2016 are volatility of 20% to 25% 2016 25% to 30% and dividend yield of 3.50% 2016 3.75% based on historical data for the period corresponding with the vesting period of the option.
These generated a weighted average fair value for SEP of 12.86p 2016 no grant LTIP of 12.68 2016 10.33 and restricted stock of 12.59 2016 10.03.
Included within staff costs is an expense arising from sharebased payment transactions of 15m 2016 10m of which 14m 2016 9m relates to equitysettled sharebased payment.
10 Intangible assets
Development costs
Software patents and intellectual property
Cost
At 1 August 2015 142tel2238 Exchange adjustments Business combinations 5 3 8 Additions 25 11 36 Disposals 3 6 9 At 31 July 2016 167tel2657 Exchange adjustments 23 4 2 1 26 Business combinations note 26 Additions 39 8 47 Disposals 15 5 20 Business disposals note 28 254 141 3 398 At 31 July 2017 165tel2768
At 1 August tel358 126 720 Exchange adjustments Charge for the year Impairment charge 23 23 Disposals 3 5 8 At 31 July tel438 149 915 Exchange adjustments Charge for the year Disposals 15 5 20 Business disposals note 28 79 140 2 221 At 31 July 2017 8tel753 Net book value at 31 July 2017 1015 Net book value at 31 July 2016 1742 Net book value at 1 August 2015 1518 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
In addition to goodwill the acquired intangible assets comprise
Technology
Customer relationships
Cost
At 1 August 2015 7telExchange adjustments Business combinations 3 3 At 31 July 2016 8telExchange adjustments 2 3 1 2 Business combinations note 26 103 137 240 Business disposals note 28 30 49 62 141 At 31 July 2017 5telAmortisation At 1 August 2015 4telExchange adjustments Charge for the year At 31 July 2016 6telExchange adjustments Charge for the year Business disposals note 28 29 49 62 140 At 31 July 2017 3telNet book value at 31 July 2017 2telNet book value at 31 July Net book value at 1 August Impairment testing
Goodwill is not amortised but is tested for impairment at least annually.
Value in use or fair value less cost to sell calculations are used to determine the recoverable amount of goodwill held allocated to each group of cash generating units CGU.
Value in use is calculated as the net present value of the projected riskadjusted cashflows of the CGU.
These forecast cashflows are based on the 2018 budget the fiveyear strategic plan approved by the Board and detailed divisional strategic projections where these have been prepared and approved by the Board.
Fair value less cost to sell is calculated using available information on past and expected future profitability valuation multiples for comparable quoted companies and similar transactions adjusted as required for significant differences and information on costs of similar transactions.
Fair value less costs to sell models are used when trading projections in the strategic plan cannot be adjusted to eliminate the impact of a major restructuring.
Goodwill is allocated by division as follows Number of
Number of
John Crane Smiths Medical Smiths Detection Smiths Interconnect FlexTek 570 8 1517 12 Following the disposal of the John Crane Artificial Lift business see note 28 and a restructuring to integrate China into the global John Crane management structure John Crane is now a single CGU.
Impairment testing has been completed on this basis for 2017.
Morpho Detection was acquired in April 2017 see note 26.
At 31 July 2017 a single management team was in place covering Continuing Smiths Detection and Morpho Detection.
However the integration of the two businesses was not sufficiently advanced to support treating them as a single CGU for impairment testing.
Based on the current integration plan it is anticipated that there will be a single CGU in 2018.
Following the disposal of Smiths Interconnect Power and Smiths Interconnect Microwave Telecoms see note 28 and the integration of Smiths Interconnect Connectors and Smiths Interconnect Microwave Components Smiths Interconnect now has two CGUs Smiths Interconnect Connectors and Components and Smiths Interconnect Microwave Subsystems.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 11 Impairment testing continued Goodwill continued Impairment testing assumptions John Crane and Smiths Medical have strong aftermarket and consumables businesses with consistent sales trends.
Smiths Detection and Smiths Interconnect have greater sales and margin volatility due to lower levels of recurring revenue and involvement in governmentfunded programmes particularly defence and customerled technology innovation.
The key assumptions used in value in use calculations are Sales projected sales are built up with reference to markets and product categories.
They incorporate past performance historical growth rates and projections of developments in key markets.
Margins projected margins reflect historical performance and the impact of all completed projects to improve operational efficiency and leverage scale.
The projections do not include the impact of future restructuring projects to which the Group is not yet committed.
Discount rate the discount rates have been calculated based on the Groups weighted average cost of capital and risks specific to the CGU being tested.
The discount rates disclosed incorporate risk adjustments where the projected sales and margins are affected by significant delivery risks.
Pretax rates of 12.2% to 16.9% 2016 11.0% to 14.3% have been used for the impairment testing.
Longterm growth rates as required by IAS 36 growth rates for the period after the detailed forecasts are based on the longterm GDP projections of the primary market for the CGU.
The average growth rate used in the testing was 2.1% 2016 2.2%.
These rates do not reflect the longterm assumptions used by the Group for investment planning.
The assumptions used in the impairment testing of significant CGUs are as follows Year ended 31 July 2017 John Crane Smiths Medical Smiths Detection Smiths Interconnect
Smiths
Detection
Morpho
Detection
Microwave
Subsystems
Connectors and
Net book value of goodwill m 11tel75 167 Basis of valuation Value in use Value in use Value in use Fair value less costs to sell Value in use Value in use Discount rate 14.9% 12.2% 14.1% na 12.2% 16.9% Period covered by management projections 5 years 5 years 5 years 1 year 5 years 5 years Longterm growth rates 2.2% 2.1% 2.0% na 2.2% 2.1% The discount rate for Smiths Interconnect Connectors and Components includes a risk adjustment.
Year ended 31 July 2016 John Crane Smith Medical
Detection Smiths Interconnect Core Rotating
Original
Smiths
Detection
Microwave
Subsystems Connectors Power Net book value of goodwill m Basis of valuation Value in use Value in use Value in use Value in use Value in use Value in use Discount rate 13.4% 11.0% 13.9% 11.8% 13.5% 11.7% Period covered by management projections 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years 5 years Longterm growth rates 2.3% 2.1% 2.0% 2.3% 2.0% 2.3% The remaining balance of the goodwill represents smaller individual amounts which have been allocated to smaller CGUs.
Sensitivity analysis Morpho Detection explosive detection business Morpho Detections fair value less costs to sell exceeds its carrying value by 38m.
Fair value was calculated using a level 3 valuation model.
Sensitivity analysis performed around the base case assumptions has indicated that for Morpho Detection the following changes in assumptions in isolation would cause the fair value less costs to sell to fall below the carrying value.
The business was acquired in the year so there are no comparatives.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Change required to trigger impairment Forecast earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation 8% reduction in EBITDA Valuation multiple 0.9 reduction in multiple Forecast earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation have been projected using expected future sales based on orders projected sales under framework agreements sales opportunities and current contract win rates current cost structure and production capacity and adjustments to profit which a market participant would normally make in assessing a business of this nature including market participant synergies.
The valuation multiple has been estimated using current share prices for similar listed companies multiples paid in recent transactions and advice on current market pricing.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Other CGUs For the other CGUs sensitivity analysis performed around the base case assumptions has indicated that no reasonable changes in key assumptions would cause the carrying amount of any of the CGUs to exceed their respective recoverable amounts.
Goodwill impairment No impairment charges have been incurred 2016 23m.
In 2016 the following goodwill impairments were recognised 5m for John Crane Production Solutions 7m for Smiths Interconnect Microwave Components and 11m for Smiths Interconnect Microwave
All three of these businesses were sold in the current year see note 28.
Other intangible assets The Group has no indefinite life intangible assets other than goodwill.
During the year impairment tests were carried out for development projects which have not yet started to be amortised and acquired intangibles where there were indications of impairment.
Value in use calculations were used to determine the recoverable values of these assets.
No impairment charges have been incurred 2016 nil.
Property plant and equipment Impairment charges of 5m for John Crane Production Solutions principally relating to property and 1m for sites affected by the Fuel for Growth restructuring were recognised in 2016.
12 Property plant and equipment Land and buildings Plant and machinery
Total
Cost or valuation At 1 August tel199 916 Exchange adjustments Additions Disposals 2 35 21 58 Transfers to disposal group held for sale at the year end 6 3 1 10 At 31 July tel220 1074 Exchange adjustments Business combinations note 26 7 1 8 Additions Disposals 24 42 24 90 Business disposals note 28 6 15 5 26 At 31 July tel209 1048
At 1 August 2015 9telExchange adjustments Charge for the year Impairments note 11 5 1 6 Disposals 1 34 20 55 Transfers to disposal group held for sale at the year end 6 3 1 10 At 31 July tel174 759 Exchange adjustments Charge for the year Disposals 18 36 23 77 Business disposals note 28 5 11 4 20 At 31 July tel165 733 Net book value at 31 July Net book value at 31 July tel46 315 Net book value at 1 August  Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 13 Inventories 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Inventories comprise Raw materials and consumables 148 174 Work in progress 86 102 Finished goods 21telThe Group consumed 1470m 2016 1319m of inventories during the period.
In the year to 31 July 2017 17m 2016 16m was charged for the writedown of inventory and 6m 2016 4m was released from inventory provisions no longer required.
Inventory provisioning 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Gross inventory carried at full value 414 436 Gross value of inventory partly or fully provided for 9telInventory provision 55 70 Inventory after provisions 452 478 14 Trade and other receivables 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
Trade receivables 41 31 Accrued income 2 3 Prepayments 1 Other receivables Current Trade receivables 642 665 Accrued income 11 18 Prepayments 28 21 Other receivables Trade receivables include balances not yet due of 75m 2016 47m relating to multiyear Smiths Detection contracts where revenue recognition does not align with the agreed payment schedule.
The Group also has cash received of 78m 2016 41m deferred in trade and other payables relating to Smiths Detection contracts.
Trade receivables do not carry interest.
Management considers that the carrying value of trade and other receivables approximates to the fair value.
Trade and other receivables including prepayments accrued income and other receivables qualifying as financial instruments are classified as loans and receivables.
The maximum credit exposure arising from these financial assets is 720m 2016 745m.
Trade receivables are disclosed net of provisions for bad and doubtful debts.
The provisions for bad and doubtful debts are based on specific risk assessment and reference to past default experience.
Credit risk is managed separately for each customer and where appropriate a credit limit is set for the customer based on previous experience of the customer and third party credit ratings.
The Group has no significant concentration of credit risk with exposure spread over a large number of customers.
The largest single customer is the US Federal Government representing less than 5% 2016 less than 5% of Group revenue.
Ageing of trade receivables 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Trade receivables which are not impaired and not yet due 539 535 Trade receivables which are not impaired and less than three months overdue 104 109 Trade receivables which are not impaired and more than three months overdue 30 45 Gross value of partially and fully provided receivables Provision for bad and doubtful debts 33 31 Trade receivables 683 696 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
15 Trade and other payables 31 July 2017 31 July 2016
Other payables 26 29
Trade payables 202 202 Other payables 17 11 Other taxation and social security costs 27 25 Accruals 247 231 Deferred income Trade and other payables including accrued expenses and other payables qualifying as financial instruments are accounted for at amortised cost and are categorised as other financial liabilities.
16 Financial assets At 31 July 2017 11m 2016 nil was held on deposit with banks as security for liabilities or letters of credit.
The Group invests in early stage businesses that are developing or commercialising related technology.
In 2016 2m was invested in Detection businesses.
17 Borrowings and net debt This note sets out the calculation of net debt an important measure in explaining our financing position.
The net debt figure includes accrued interest and the fair value adjustments relating to hedge accounting.
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Cash and cash equivalents Net cash and deposits 782 431 Shortterm borrowings Bank overdrafts 1 1 300m 4.125% Eurobond 2017 255 175m 7.37% US Private placement 2018 133 Bank and other loans 1 1 Interest accrual 16 13 Longterm borrowings 175m 7.37% US Private placement 2018 132 250m 7.20% US Guaranteed notes 2019 189 189 400m 3.625% US Guaranteed notes 2022 301 304 600m 1.25% Eurobond 2023 533 512 650m 2.00% Eurobond 2027 574 Bank and other loans 1 2 1598 1139 Borrowings 1749 1409 Net debt 967 978 The 175m 7.37% US Private placement 2018 was repaid early in August 2017.
Cash and cash equivalents include highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less.
Borrowings are accounted for at amortised cost and are categorised as other financial liabilities.
See note 18 for a maturity analysis of borrowings.
Interest of 45m 2016 47m was charged to the consolidated income statement in this period in respect of public bonds.
Secured loans Loans amounting to 2m 2016 3m were secured on plant and equipment with a book value of 3m 2016 3m.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 17 Borrowings and net debt continued Net cash and cash equivalents 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Cash at bank and in hand 226 161 Shortterm deposits 556 270 Cash and cash equivalents 782 431 Bank overdrafts 1 1 Net cash and cash equivalents 781 430
Cash and overdraft balances in interest compensation cash pooling systems are reported gross on the balance sheet.
The cash pooling agreements incorporate a legally enforceable right of net settlement.
However there is no intention to settle the balances net so these arrangements do not qualify for net presentation.
At 31 July 2017 the total value of overdrafts on accounts in interest compensation cash pooling systems was nil 2016 less than 1m.
The balances held in zero balancing cash pooling arrangements have daily settlement of balances so netting is not relevant.
Movements in net debt Net cash and cash equivalents
Longterm borrowings Net debt At 31 July 2016 430 269 1139 978 Foreign exchange gains and losses 10 5 56 61 Net cash inflow 361 361 Repayment of borrowings 256 256 Drawdown of borrowings 546 546 Capitalisation interest accruals and unwind of capitalised fees 3 1 4 Fair value movement from interest rate hedging 1 4 5 Change in maturity analysis 140 140 At 31 July 2017 781 150 1598 967 18 Financial risk management The Groups international operations and debt financing expose it to financial risks which include the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates changes in debt market prices interest rates credit risks and liquidity risks.
Treasury and risk management policies are set by the Board.
The policy sets out specific guidelines to manage foreign exchange risk interest rate risk credit risk and the use of financial instruments to manage risk.
The instruments and techniques used to manage exposures include foreign currency derivatives debt and other interest rate derivatives.
The central treasury function monitors financial risks and compliance with risk management policies.
The management of operational credit risk is discussed in note 14.
Transactional currency exposure The Group is exposed to foreign currency risks arising from sales or purchases by businesses in currencies other than their functional currency.
It is Group policy that when the net foreign exchange exposure to known future sales and purchases is material this exposure is hedged using forward foreign exchange contracts.
The net exposure is calculated by adjusting the expected cashflow for payments or receipts in the same currency linked to the sale or purchase.
This policy minimises the risk that the profits generated from the transaction will be affected by foreign exchange movements which occur after the price has been determined.
Hedge accounting documentation and effectiveness testing are only undertaken if it is cost effective.
The following table shows the currency of financial instruments.
It excludes loans and derivatives designated as net investment hedges.
At 31 July 2017
US
Euro
Other
Total
Financial assets and liabilities Financial instruments included in trade and other receivables 5tel720 Financial instruments included in trade and other payables 57 214 69 72 412 Cash and cash equivalents Borrowings not designated as net investment hedges 1 12 275 2 288 Exclude balances held in operations with the same functional currency 5 220 102 195 522 Exposure arising from intragroup loans 352 85 83 520 Impact of fair value hedging of exchange exposure 269 269 Forward foreign exchange contracts 88 19 50 19 358 84 11 22 241 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
At 31 July 2016
US
Euro
Other
Total
Financial assets and liabilities Financial instruments included in trade and other receivables 3tel745 Financial instruments included in trade and other payables 48 203 72 79 402 Cash and cash equivalents Borrowings not designated as net investment hedges 1 12 5 1 17 Exclude balances held in operations with the same functional currency 180 188 101 167 636 Exposure arising from intragroup loans 165 70 77 312 Forward foreign exchange contracts 286 112 119 55 Financial instruments included in trade and other receivables comprise trade receivables accrued income and other receivables which qualify as financial instruments.
Similarly financial instruments included in trade and other payables comprise trade payables accrued expenses and other payables that qualify as financial instruments.
Based on the assets and liabilities held at the yearend if the specified currencies were to strengthen 10% while all other market rates remained constant the change in the fair value of financial instruments not designated as net investment hedges would have the following effect Impact on profit for the year 31 July 2017
31 July 2017 Impact on profit for the year 31 July 2016
31 July 2016 US dollar 5 5 3 2 Euro 3 2 6 3 Sterling 1 1 16 2 These sensitivities were calculated before adjusting for tax and exclude the effect of quasiequity intragroup loans.
Cashflow hedging The Group uses foreign currency contracts to hedge future foreign currency sales and purchases.
At 31 July 2017 contracts with a nominal value of 407m 2016 393m were designated as hedging instruments.
In addition the Group had outstanding foreign currency contracts with a nominal value of 243m 2016 529m which were being used to manage transactional foreign exchange exposures but were not accounted for as cashflow hedges.
The fair value of the contracts is disclosed in note 19.
The majority of hedged transactions will be recognised in the consolidated income statement in the same period that the cash flows are expected to occur with the only differences arising because of normal commercial credit terms on sales and purchases.
Of the foreign exchange contracts designated as hedging instruments 86% are for periods of 12 months or less 2016 91%.
The movements in the cashflow hedge reserve during the period are summarised in the table below Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Brought forward cashflow hedge reserve at start of year 7 3 Gainslosses on effective cashflow hedges recognised in equity 3 10 Amounts removed from the hedge reserve and recognised in the following lines on the income statement revenue 9 1 cost of sales 4 1 Carried forward cashflow hedge reserve at end of year 1 7 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 18 Financial risk management continued a Foreign exchange risk continued Translational currency exposure The Group has significant investments in overseas operations particularly in the United States and Europe.
As a result the sterling value of the Groups balance sheet can be significantly affected by movements in exchange rates.
The Group seeks to mitigate the effect of these translational currency exposures by matching the net investment in overseas operations with borrowings denominated in their functional currencies except where significant adverse interest differentials or other factors would render the cost of such hedging activity uneconomic.
This is achieved by borrowing primarily in the relevant currency or in some cases indirectly using forward foreign exchange contracts and crosscurrency swaps.
Net investment hedges The table below sets out the currency of loans and swap contracts designated as net investment hedges At 31 July 2017
US
Euro
Other
Total
Loans designated as net investment hedges 621 840 1461 Crosscurrency swap contracts 254 568 359 45 Currency swap contracts 109 109 363 1189 481 109 1416 At 31 July 2016
US
Euro
Other
Total
Loans designated as net investment hedges 625 767 1392 Crosscurrency swap contracts 358 373 15 Currency swap contracts 111 111 At 31 July 2017 swap contracts hedged the Groups exposure to Canadian dollars Japanese yen and Chinese renminbi 31 July 2016 Canadian dollars Japanese yen and Chinese renminbi.
All the currency swap contracts designated as net investment hedges are current 2016 current.
The crosscurrency swap contracts are noncurrent.
Swaps generating 327m of the US dollar exposure 2016 358m will mature in April 2023 and swaps generating 241m of the US dollar exposure 2016 nil will mature in February 2027.
The gains and losses that have been deferred in the net investment hedge reserve and recycled in the period are shown in the table below Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Brought forward net investment hedge reserve at start of year 294 66 Amounts removed from the hedge reserve and recognised in the income statement 20 Amounts deferred in the period on effective net investment hedges 17 228 Carried forward net investment hedge reserve at end of year 291 294 The fair values of these net investment hedges are subject to exchange rate movements.
Based on the hedging instruments in place at the yearend if the specified currencies were to strengthen 10% while all other market rates remained constant it would have the following effect
31 July 2017
31 July 2016 US dollar 132 98 Euro 53 35 These movements would be fully offset by an opposite movement on the retranslation of the net assets of the overseas subsidiaries.
These sensitivities were calculated before adjusting for tax.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
The Group operates an interest rate policy designed to optimise interest cost and reduce volatility in reported earnings.
The Groups current policy is to require interest rates to be fixed for greater than 70% of the level of gross debt.
This is achieved through fixed rate borrowings and interest rate swaps.
At 31 July 2017 57% 2016 59% of the Groups gross borrowings were at fixed interest rates after adjusting for interest rate swaps and the impact of short maturity derivatives designated as net investment hedges.
The Group monitors its fixed rate risk profile against both gross and net debt.
For mediumterm planning it now focuses on gross debt to eliminate the fluctuations of variable cash levels over the cycle.
The weighted average interest rate on borrowings and crosscurrency swaps at 31 July 2017 after interest rate swaps is 3.52% 2016 3.68%.
Interest rate profile of financial assets and liabilities and the fair value of borrowings The following table shows the interest rate risk exposure of investments cash and borrowings with the borrowings adjusted for the impact of interest rate hedging.
The other financial assets and liabilities do not earn or bear interest and for all financial instruments except for borrowings the carrying value is not materially different from their fair value.
Available for sale investments 31 July 2017 Cash and cash equivalents 31 July 2017
31 July 2017 Fair value of borrowings 31 July 2017
31 July 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Fair value of borrowings 31 July 2016 Fixed interest Less than one year 134 140 153 158 Between one and five years 190 206 322 362 Greater than five years 672 693 353 362 Total fixed interest financial assetsliabilities 996 1039 828 882 Floating rate interest financial assetsliabilities 6 711 753 753 390 581 581 Total interestbearing financial assetsliabilities 6 711 1749 1792 390 1409 1463 Noninterestbearing assetsliabilities in the same category Total 21 782 1749 1792 9 431 1409 1463 Interest rate hedging At 31 July 2017 and 31 July 2016 the Group has designated the following hedges against variability in the fair value of borrowings arising from fluctuations in base rates US150m interest rate swap which matures on 12 October 2022 partially hedging the US 2022 Guaranteed notes and the fixedfloating element of 400m of US interest rate swaps which mature on 28 April 2023 partially hedging the 2023 Eurobond.
At 31 July 2017 the Group has designated the following hedge against variability in the fair value of borrowings arising from fluctuations in base rates and exchange rates the fixedfloating and  exchange exposure of 300m of US interest rate swaps which mature on 23 February 2027 partially hedging the  2027 Eurobond.
The fair values of the hedging instruments are disclosed in note 19.
The effect of the swaps is to convert 741m 2016 552m debt from fixed rate to floating rate.
Sensitivity of interest charges to interest rate movements The Group has exposure to sterling US dollar and euro interest rates.
However the Group does not have a significant exposure to interest rate movements for any individual currency.
Based on the composition of net debt and investments at 31 July 2017 and taking into consideration all fixed rate borrowings and interest rate swaps in place a one percentage point 100 basis points change in average floating interest rates for all three currencies would have less than 1m impact 2016 impact of 2m on the Groups profit before tax.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 18 Financial risk management continued c Financial credit risk The Group is exposed to creditrelated losses in the event of nonperformance by counterparties to financial instruments but does not currently expect any counterparties to fail to meet their obligations.
Credit risk is mitigated by the Boardapproved policy of only placing cash deposits with highly rated relationship bank counterparties within counterparty limits established by reference to their Standard and Poors longterm debt rating.
In the normal course of business the Group operates cash pooling systems where a legal right of setoff applies.
The maximum credit risk exposure in the event of other parties failing to perform their obligations under financial assets excluding trade and other receivables and derivatives totals 803m at 31 July 2017 2016 440m.
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Cash in AAA liquidity funds 376 Cash at banks with at least a AA credit rating 226 215 Cash at banks with a A credit rating 98 126 Cash at other banks 82 90 Investments in bank deposits 11 Other investments At 31 July 2017 the maximum exposure with a single bank for deposits and cash is 126m 2016 97m whilst the maximum mark to market exposure for derivatives is 20m 2016 10m.
These banks have AA and AA credit rating respectively 2016 AA and AA.
Borrowing facilities The Board policy specifies the maintenance of unused committed credit facilities of at least 200m at all times to ensure it has sufficient available funds for operations and planned development which is provided by a multicurrency revolving credit facility.
Smiths has a 800m Revolving Credit Facility that matures on 19 February 2021.
At the balance sheet date the Group had the following undrawn credit facilities 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Expiring within one year Expiring between one and two years Expiring after more than two years 60telCash deposits As at 31 July 2017 556m 2016 270m of cash and cash equivalents was on deposit with various banks of which 83m 2016 119m was on deposit with UK banks 375m 2016 nil was in liquidity funds and 11m 2016 nil of investments comprised bank deposits held to secure liabilities and letters of credit.
Gross contractual cashflows for borrowings
Note 17 31 July 2017 Fair value adjustments 31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
Note 17 31 July 2016 Fair value adjustments 31 July 2016
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Less than one year 151 1 38 188 270 2 39 307 Between one and two years 190 43 233 133 41 174 Between two and three years 29 29 190 1 32 223 Between three and four years 29 29 18 18 Between four and five years 29 29 18 18 Greater than five years 1408 1 71 1480 816 8 30 838 Total 1749 239 1988 1409 9 178 1578 The figures presented in the borrowings column include the noncash adjustments which are highlighted in the adjacent column.
The contractual interest reported for borrowings is before the effect of interest rate swaps.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Gross contractual cashflows for derivative financial instruments
31 July 2017
31 July 2017 Net cash flow 31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Net cash flow 31 July 2016
Less than one year 315 310 5 425 415 10 Greater than one year 710 642 68 378 374 4
Less than one year 279 287 8 467 485 18 Greater than one year 51 54 3 28 29 1 Total 1355 1293 62 1298 1303 5 This table presents the undiscounted future contractual cashflows for all derivative financial instruments.
For this disclosure cash flows in foreign currencies are translated using the spot rates at the balance sheet date.
The fair values of these financial instruments are presented in note 19.
Gross contractual cashflows for other financial liabilities The contractual cashflows for financial liabilities included in trade and other payables are 400m 2016 388m due in less than one year 8m 2016 9m due between one and five years and 4m 2016 5m due after more than five years.
19 Derivative financial instruments The tables below set out the nominal amount and fair value of derivative contracts held by the Group identifying the derivative contracts which qualify for hedge accounting treatment At 31 July 2017 Fair value Contract or underlying nominal amount
Liabilities
Net
Foreign exchange contracts cashflow hedges 407 11 10 1 Foreign exchange contracts not hedge accounted 243 2 1 1 Total foreign exchange contracts 650 13 11 2 Currency swaps net investment hedges 109 Cross currency swaps fair value and net investment hedges 569 56 56 Interest rate swaps fair value hedges 113 1 1 Total financial derivatives 1441 69 12 57 Balance sheet entries Noncurrent 745 56 2 54 Current 696 13 10 3 Total financial derivatives 1441 69 12 57 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 19 Derivative financial instruments continued At 31 July 2016 Fair value Contract or underlying nominal amount
Liabilities
Net
Foreign exchange contracts cashflow hedges 393 8 15 7 Foreign exchange contracts not hedge accounted 529 3 4 1 Total foreign exchange contracts 922 11 19 8 Currency swaps net investment hedges 111 1 1 Cross currency swaps fair value and net investment hedges 326 25 25 Interest rate swaps fair value hedges 214 6 6 Total financial derivatives 1573 42 20 22 Balance sheet entries Noncurrent 473 29 1 28 Current 1100 13 19 6 Total financial derivatives 1573 42 20 22 Currency swaps not hedge accounted These contracts comprise derivatives which were previously part of the net investment hedging programme and matching contracts to eliminate this exposure.
There is no further net exposure arising from these contracts.
Accounting for other derivative contracts Any foreign exchange contracts which are not formally designated as hedges and tested are classified as held for trading and not hedge accounted.
Netting
International Swaps and Derivatives Association ISDA master netting agreements are in place with derivative counterparties except for contracts traded on a dedicated international electronic trading platform used for operational foreign exchange hedging.
Under these agreements if a credit event occurs all outstanding transactions under the ISDA are terminated and only a single net amount per counterparty is payable in settlement of all transactions.
The ISDA agreements do not meet the criteria for offsetting since the offsetting is enforceable only if specific events occur in the future and there is no intention to settle the contracts on a net basis.
Assets
31 July 2017
31 July 2017
31 July 2016
31 July 2016 Gross value of assets and liabilities 69 12 42 20 Related assets and liabilities subject to master netting agreements 1 1 2 2 Net exposure 68 11 40 18 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
20 Fair value of financial instruments
Carrying value 31 July 2017 Fair value 31 July 2017
31 July 2016 Fair value 31 July 2016 Level 2 valuations Financial assets  other investments 16 11 11 Financial derivatives  assets Borrowings 17 1749 1792 1409 1463 Financial derivatives  liabilities 19 12 12 20 20 Level 3 valuations Financial assets  other investments Investments in bank deposits are valued at the bank balance adjusted for accrued interest.
Derivatives including forward exchange contracts currency swaps interest rate instruments and embedded derivatives are valued at the net present value of the future cashflows calculated using market data at the balance sheet date principally exchange rates and yield curves.
Borrowings are valued at the net present value of the future cashflows using credit spreads and yield curves derived from market data.
Borrowings are carried on the balance sheet at amortised cost adjusted for fair value interest rate hedging.
The fair value of fixed rate borrowings is only used for supplementary disclosures.
Cash trade receivables and trade payables are excluded from this table because carrying value is a reasonable approximation to fair value for all these assets and liabilities.
21 Commitments Operating lease commitments  minimum lease payments The minimum uncancellable lease payments which the Group is committed to make are 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Land and buildings
Land and buildings
Payments due not later than one year  later than one year and not later than five years  later than five years Other commitments At 31 July 2017 commitments comprising bonds and guarantees arising in the normal course of business amounted to 186m 2016 174m including pension commitments of 54m 2016 54m.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 22 Provisions and contingent liabilities Trading Nonheadline and legacy Total John Crane
Titeflex
Corporation litigation
Current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities At 31 July Exchange adjustments Business combinations note 26 2 2 Provision charged Provision released 9 1 13 2 25 Unwind of provision discount 4 2 6 Utilisation 14 24 8 11 57 Business disposals 2 2 At 31 July Current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities At 31 July The John Crane Inc. and Titeflex Corporation litigation provisions are the only provisions that are discounted.
Trading
Warranty provision and product liability At 31 July 2017 there are warranty and product liability provisions of 28m 2016 29m.
Warranties over the Groups products typically cover periods of between one and three years.
Provision is made for the likely cost of aftersales support based on the recent past experience of individual businesses.
Commercial disputes and litigation in respect of ongoing business activities The Group has on occasion been required to take legal action to protect its intellectual property and other rights against infringement.
It has also had to defend itself against proceedings brought by other parties including product liability and insurance subrogation claims.
Provision is made for any expected costs and liabilities in relation to these proceedings where appropriate though there can be no guarantee that such provisions which may be subject to potentially material revision from time to time will accurately predict the actual costs and liabilities that may be incurred.
Contingent liabilities In the ordinary course of its business the Group is subject to commercial disputes and litigation such as government price audits product liability claims employee disputes and other kinds of lawsuits and faces different types of legal issues in different jurisdictions.
The high level of activity in the US for example exposes the Group to the likelihood of various types of litigation commonplace in that country such as mass tort and class action litigation legal challenges to the scope and validity of patents and product liability and insurance subrogation claims.
These types of proceedings or the threat of them are also used to create pressure to encourage negotiated settlement of disputes.
Any claim brought against the Group with or without merit could be costly to defend.
These matters are inherently difficult to quantify.
In appropriate cases a provision is recognised based on best estimates and management judgement but there can be no guarantee that these provisions which may be subject to potentially material revision from time to time will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs and liabilities that may be incurred.
There are also contingent liabilities in respect of litigation for which no provisions are made.
The Group operates in some markets where the risk of unethical or corrupt behaviour is material and has procedures including an employee Ethics Alertline to help it identify potential issues.
Such procedures will from time to time give rise to internal investigations sometimes conducted with external support to ensure that Smiths Group properly understands risks and concerns and can take steps both to manage immediate issues and to improve its practices and procedures for the future.
The Group also cooperates with relevant authorities in investigating business conduct issues whenever requested to.
The Group is not aware of any issues which are expected to generate material financial exposures.
Nonheadline and legacy John Crane Inc.
John Crane Inc.
JCI is one of many codefendants in numerous lawsuits pending in the United States in which plaintiffs are claiming damages arising from alleged exposure to or use of products previously manufactured which contained asbestos.
Until 2006 the awards the related interest and all material defence costs were met directly by insurers.
In 2007 JCI secured the commutation of certain insurance policies in respect of product liability.
Provision is made in respect of the expected costs of defending known and predicted future claims and of adverse judgments in relation thereto to the extent that such costs can be reliably estimated.
The JCI products generally referred to in these cases consist of industrial sealing product primarily packing and gaskets.
The asbestos was encapsulated within these products in such a manner that causes JCI to believe based on tests conducted on its behalf that the products were safe.
JCI ceased manufacturing products containing asbestos in 1985.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
JCI continues to actively monitor the conduct and effect of its current and expected asbestos litigation including the most efficacious presentation of its safe product defence and intends to continue to resist these asbestos claims based upon this defence.
The table below summarises the JCI claims experience over the last 38 years since the start of this litigation Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Year ended 31 July 2015 Year ended 31 July 2014 Year ended 31 July 2013 JCI claims experience Claims against JCI that have been dismissed 273000 247000 242000 235000 230000 Claims JCI is currently a defendant in 50000 74000 76000 80000 81000 Cumulative final judgments after appeals against JCI since tel133 131 121 Cumulative value of awards m since tel153 149 120 The number of claims outstanding at 31 July 2017 reflects the benefit of 26000 claims being dismissed in the year.
JCI has also incurred significant additional defence costs.
The litigation involves claims for a number of allegedly asbestos related diseases with awards when made for mesothelioma tending to be larger than those for the other diseases.
JCIs ability to defend mesothelioma cases successfully is therefore likely to have a significant impact on its annual aggregate adverse judgment and defence costs.
John Crane Inc.
The provision is based on past history of JCI claims and wellestablished tables of asbestosrelated disease incidence projections.
The provision is determined using advice from asbestos valuation experts Bates White LLC.
The assumptions made in assessing the appropriate level of provision include the period over which the expenditure can be reliably estimated the future trend of legal costs the rate of future claims filed the rate of successful resolution of claims and the average amount of judgments awarded.
Established incidence curves can be used to estimate the likely future pattern of asbestos related disease.
However JCIs claims experience is also significantly impacted by other factors which influence the US litigation environment.
These can include changing approaches on the part of the plaintiffs bar changing attitudes amongst the judiciary at both trial and appellate levels in specific jurisdictions which move the balance of risk and opportunity for claimants and legislative and procedural changes in both the state and federal court systems.
The buildup of assets in trusts established by asbestos defendants in Chapter 11 restructuring 524g trusts will increase the influence of these trusts on the behaviour of claimants.
Developments in the Garlock Sealing Technologies LLC Chapter 11 proceedings have provided additional data on plaintiff claims to 524 g trusts.
Given the evidence that emerged of inconsistent duplicate claims there is a significant likelihood that this will lead to changes in the pattern of claims made in the future and the costs arising from claims.
The projections use a limited time horizon on the basis that Bates White LLC consider that there is substantial uncertainty in the asbestos litigation environment so probable expenditures are not reasonably estimable beyond this time horizon.
Asbestos is the longest running mass tort litigation in American history which is constantly evolving in ways that cannot be anticipated.
JCIs defence strategy also generates a significantly different pattern of legal costs and settlement expenses from other defendants so JCI is in an extremely rare position and evidence from other litigation cannot be used to improve the reliability of the projections.
A ten year 2016 ten years time horizon has been used based on past experience regarding significant changes in the litigation environment that have occurred every few years and on the amount of time taken in the past for some of those changes to impact the broader asbestos litigation environment and recent events like the Garlock Sealing Technologies LLC Chapter 11 proceedings which may lead to further major changes.
The rate of future claims filed has been estimated using wellestablished tables of asbestos incidence projections to determine the likely population of potential claimants and JCIs past experience to determine what proportion of this population will make a claim against
The JCI products generally referred to in claims had industrial and marine applications.
As a result the incidence curve used for JCI projections excludes construction workers and is a composite of the curves that predict asbestos exposurerelated disease from shipyards and other occupations.
This is consistent with JCIs litigation history.
The rate of successful resolution of claims and the average amount of any judgments awarded are projected based on the past history of JCI claims since this is the best available evidence given JCIs unusual strategy of defending all claims.
The future trend of legal costs is estimated based on JCIs past experience adjusted to reflect the assumed levels of claims and trial activity since the number of trials is a key driver of legal costs.
John Crane Inc.
While JCI has excess liability insurance the availability of such insurance and scope of the cover are currently the subject of litigation in the United States.
Pending the outcome of that litigation JCI has met defence costs directly.
The calculation of the provision does not take account of any potential recoveries from insurers.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 22 Provisions and contingent liabilities continued Nonheadline and legacy continued John Crane Inc.
John Crane Inc.
The JCI asbestos litigation provision has developed over the last five years as follows Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Year ended 31 July 2015 Year ended 31 July 2014 Year ended 31 July 2013 John Crane Inc.
Gross provision 26tel233 Discount 23 15 20 23 23 Discounted provision 23tel210 Operating profit chargecredit Increased provisions for adverse judgments and legal defence costs Change in US risk free rates 13 7 1 2 9 Litigation management legal fees in connection with litigation against insurers and defence strategy Recoveries from insurers 6 16 Operating profit charge
Provision utilisation 24 22 24 36 27 John Crane Inc.
The reduction in 2017 is due to increasing US dollar discount rates with no material movement in the gross provision.
The significant increase in the provision in 2016 is primarily due to the weakening of Smiths reporting currency against the US dollar 39m increase in the provision and lower US discount rates 7m charge to the income statement.
The operating charge for John Crane Inc.
11m 2016 8m costs for litigation management defence strategy and legal fees in connection with litigation against insurers.
In the year ended 31 July 2016 JCI recognised the recovery of 16m through a settlement with an insurer.
This agreement does not provide any cover for future costs so there is no material impact on the closing litigation provision.
A further settlement was agreed in the current year.
John Crane Inc.
The provision may be subject to potentially material revision from time to time if new information becomes available as a result of future events.
There can be no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of asbestos claims and of the costs arising out of related litigation.
Statistical reliability of projections over the ten year time horizon In order to evaluate the statistical reliability of the projections a population of outcomes is modelled using randomised verdict outcomes.
This generated a distribution of outcomes with future spend at the 5th percentile of 231m and future spend at the 95th percentile of 304m 2016 236m and 311m respectively.
Statistical analysis of the distribution of these outcomes indicates that there is a 50% probability that the total future spend will fall between 243m and 272m 2016 between 250m and 280m compared to the gross provision value of 260m 2016 267m.
Sensitivity of the projections to changes in the time horizon used If the asbestos litigation environment becomes more volatile and uncertain for example if defendants are successful in legal cases against plaintiff law firms and this impacts the nature of claims filed the time horizon over which the provision can be calculated may reduce.
Conversely if the environment became more stable or JCI changed approach and committed to long term settlement arrangements the time period covered by the provision might be extended.
The projections use a 10 year time horizon.
Reducing the time horizon by one year would reduce the provision by 17m 2016 18m and reducing it by five years would reduce the provision by 98m 2016 107m.
We consider after obtaining advice from Bates White LLC that to forecast beyond ten years requires that the litigation environment remains largely unchanged with respect to the historical experience used for estimating future asbestos expenditures.
Historically the asbestos litigation environment has undergone significant changes more often than every ten years.
If one assumed that the asbestos litigation environment would remain unchanged for longer and extended the time horizon by one year it would increase the provision by 14m 2016 16m and extending it by five years would increase the provision by 58m 2016 67m.
However there are also reasonable scenarios that given certain recent events in the US asbestos litigation environment would result in no additional asbestos litigation for JCI beyond ten years.
At this time how the asbestos litigation environment may evolve beyond 10 years is not reasonably estimable.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
John Crane Inc.
Provision has been made for future defence costs and the cost of adverse judgments expected to occur.
JCIs claims experience is significantly impacted by other factors which influence the US litigation environment.
These can include changing approaches on the part of the plaintiffs bar changing attitudes amongst the judiciary at both trial and appellate levels and legislative and procedural changes in both the state and federal court systems.
As a result whilst the Group anticipates that asbestos litigation will continue beyond the period covered by the provision the uncertainty surrounding the US litigation environment beyond this point is such that the costs cannot be reliably estimated.
Although the methodology used to calculate the JCI litigation provision can in theory be applied to show claims and costs for longer periods the Directors consider based on advice from Bates White LLC that the level of uncertainty regarding the factors used in estimating future costs is too great to provide for reasonable estimation of the numbers of future claims the nature of such claims or the cost to resolve them for years beyond the 10 year time horizon.
Titeflex Corporation In recent years Titeflex Corporation a subsidiary of the Group in the FlexTek division has received a number of claims from insurance companies seeking recompense on a subrogated basis for the effects of damage allegedly caused by lightning strikes in relation to its flexible gas piping product.
It has also received a number of product liability claims regarding this product some in the form of purported class actions.
Titeflex Corporation believes that its products are a safe and effective means of delivering gas when installed in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and local and national codes however some claims have been settled on an individual basis without admission of liability.
Equivalent thirdparty products in the US marketplace face similar challenges.
Titeflex Corporation litigation provision The continuing progress of claims and the pattern of settlement together with the recent market place activity provide sufficient evidence to recognise a liability in the accounts.
Therefore provision has been made for the costs which the Group is expected to incur in respect of future claims to the extent that such costs can be reliably estimated.
Titeflex Corporation sells flexible gas piping with extensive installation and safety guidance revised in 2008 designed to assure the safety of the product and minimise the risk of damage associated with lightning strikes.
The assumptions made in assessing the appropriate level of provision which are based on past experience include the period over which expenditure can be reliably estimated the number of future settlements the average amount of settlements and the impact of statutes of repose and safe installation initiatives on the expected number of future claims.
The provision of 84m 2016 94m is a discounted pretax provision using discount rates being the riskfree rate on US debt instruments for the appropriate period.
The deferred tax asset related to this provision is shown within the deferred tax balance note 6.
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Gross provision 136 140 Discount 52 46 Discounted pretax provision 84 94 Deferred tax 33 36 Discounted posttax provision 51 58 Titeflex Corporation litigation provision history An additional provision of 8m 2016 12m has been recognised by Titeflex Corporation in respect of changes to the estimated cost of future claims from insurance companies seeking recompense for damage allegedly caused by lightning strikes.
The offsetting provision release of 13m is principally due to increasing discount rates.
In 2016 a 1m overprovision for the costs of settling claims was released generating a net charge for the year of 11m.
Titeflex Corporation litigation provision sensitivities However because of the significant uncertainty associated with the future level of claims and of the costs arising out of related litigation there can be no guarantee that the assumptions used to estimate the provision will result in an accurate prediction of the actual costs that may be incurred and as a result the provision may be subject to potentially material revision from time to time if new information becomes available as a result of future events.
The projections incorporate a longterm assumption about the impact of safe installation initiatives on the level of future claims.
If the assumed annual benefit of bonding and grounding initiatives was 0.5% higher the provision would be 5m 2016 6m lower and if the benefit was 0.5% lower the provision would increase by 5m 2016 7m.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 22 Provisions and contingent liabilities continued Nonheadline and legacy continued Other nonheadline and legacy Legacy provisions comprise provisions relating to former business activities and properties no longer used by Smiths.
Nonheadline provisions comprise all provisions that were disclosed as nonheadline items when they were charged to the consolidated income statement.
These provisions cover nonheadline reorganisation vacant properties disposal indemnities and litigation in respect of old products and discontinued business activities.
Reorganisation and property At 31 July 2017 there were provisions of 8m 2016 11m related to Fuel for Growth 3m 2016 3m related to onerous leases and dilapidations provisions and 2m 2016 2m related to actual and potential environmental issues for sites which were no longer occupied by Smiths operations.
The Fuel for Growth provisions are expected to be utilised in 2018.
Disposal
Other provisions include disposal provisions of 3m 2016 3m relating to warranties and other obligations in respect of the disposal of the Marine Systems and Aerospace businesses.
Most of the balance is expected to be utilised within the next five years.
23 Share capital Number of shares
Consideration
Ordinary shares of 37.5p each Total share capital at 31 July 2015 394860004 148 Exercise of share options 363068 3 Total share capital at 31 July 2016 395223072 148 Exercise of share options 253590 3 Total share capital at 31 July 2017 395476662 148 At 31 July 2017 all of the issued share capital was in free issue.
All issued shares are fully paid.
24 Dividends The following dividends were declared and paid in the period Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Ordinary final dividend of 28.75p for 2016 2015 28.00p paid 18 November telOrdinary interim dividend of 13.55p for 2017 2016 13.25p paid 28 April The final dividend for the year ended 31 July 2017 of 29.70p per share was recommended by the Board on 21 September 2017 and will be paid to shareholders on 17 November 2017 subject to approval by the shareholders.
This dividend has not been included as a liability in these accounts and is payable to all shareholders on the register of Members at close of business on 20 October 2017.
25 Reserves Retained earnings include the value of Smiths Group plc shares held by the Smiths Industries Employee Benefit Trust.
In the year the Company issued nil 2016 nil shares to the Trust and the Trust purchased 658217 shares 2016 760218 shares in the market for a consideration of 10m 2016 8m.
At 31 July 2017 the Trust held 766 2016 852 ordinary shares.
The capital redemption reserve revaluation reserve and merger reserve arose from share repurchases revaluations of property plant and equipment and merger accounting for business combinations before the adoption of IFRS respectively.
Capital management Capital employed comprises total equity adjusted for goodwill recognised directly in reserves net postretirement benefit related assets and liabilities net litigation provisions relating to nonheadline items and net debt.
The efficiency of the allocation of the capital to the divisions is monitored through the return on capital employed ROCE.
This ratio is calculated over a rolling 12month period and is the percentage that headline operating profit comprises of monthly average capital employed.
The ROCE was 16.2% 2016 15.3% see note 30.
The capital structure is based on the directors judgement of the balance required to maintain flexibility while achieving an efficient cost of capital.
The ratio of net debt to headline EBITDA of 1.4 2016 1.6 is within the Groups stated policy of 2.0 or less over the medium term.
The
Groups robust balance sheet and record of strong cash generation is more than able to fund the immediate investment needs and other legacy obligations.
See note 30 for the definition of headline EBITDA and the calculation of this ratio.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
As part of its capital management the Group strategy is to maintain a solid investment grade credit rating to ensure access to the widest possible sources of financing and to minimise the resulting cost of capital.
At 31 July 2017 the Group had a credit rating of BBBBaa2 2016 BBBBaa2 with Standard and Poors and Moodys respectively.
The Board has a progressive dividend policy for future payouts with the aim of increasing dividends in line with the longterm underlying growth in earnings.
In setting the level of dividend payments the Board will take into account prevailing economic conditions and future investment plans along with the objective to maintain minimum dividend cover of around 2.0.
Hedge reserve 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 The hedge reserve on the balance sheet comprises cashflow hedge reserve 1 7 net investment hedge reserve 291 294 See transactional currency exposure risk management disclosures in note 18 for additional details of cashflow hedges and translational currency exposure risk management disclosure also in note 18 for additional details of net investment hedges.
26 Acquisitions The Group acquired the Morpho Detection business from Safran S.
A. on 6 April 2017.
The terms of the competition clearance for this transaction required the Group to sell the Morpho Detection explosive trace detection business.
Consequently the Morpho Detection explosive trace detection business was treated as a business acquired for resale and the trading result during the period of ownership and the loss on disposal have been reported in discontinued operations see note 27.
The intangible assets recognised on this acquisition comprise technology in process research and development customer and service relationships and the order book on acquisition.
Goodwill represents the potential future technology developments and the cost savings that can be realised by integrating Morpho Detection with the continuing Smiths Detection business.
The goodwill recognised is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
From the date of acquisition to 31 July 2017 Morpho Detection excluding its explosive trace detection business contributed 62m to revenue 5m to headline profit before taxation and a loss of 24m to profit before taxation due to the unwind of inventory fair value adjustments 3m the amortisation of acquired intangible assets 8m and integration and acquisition costs 18m.
If Smiths had acquired Morpho Detection at the beginning of the financial period the acquisition excluding its explosive trace detection business would have contributed 184m to revenue 19m to headline profit before taxation and a loss of 22m to profit before taxation.
The provisional balance sheet of Morpho Detection on the date of acquisition is
Detection
Noncurrent assets acquired intangible assets 240 software 6 plant and equipment 8 Current assets inventory 50 trade and other receivables 49 cash and cash equivalent 12 Morpho Detection explosive trace detection business 68 Noncurrent liabilities deferred taxation 5 Current liabilities other current liabilities 48 Net assets acquired 380 Goodwill on current year acquisitions 210 Total consideration 590 Cash paid during the year 592 Recycling of cashflow hedging on consideration 2 Total consideration 590 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 27 Discontinued operations and businesses held for sale The Group acquired the Morpho Detection explosive trace detection business on 6 April 2017 after making commitments to the European Commission and the US Department of Justice to sell this business to an approved purchaser.
The Group began marketing this business for sale once the terms of the competition clearance were known.
Consequently this business was treated as a business acquired for resale and the assets and liabilities were classified as held for sale during the period the business was owned by the Group.
The sale was completed on 7 July 2017 for a cash consideration of 63m.
A loss after tax of 8m 2016 nil was generated by discontinued operations giving a loss per share from discontinued operations basic and diluted of 2.0p 2016 nil.
Cash invested in financial assets includes 7m 2016 nil relating to discontinued operations.
There were no assets or businesses held for sale at 31 July 2017.
At 31 July 2016 the assets and liabilities of the John Crane Artificial lift business were disclosed as held for sale.
No impairment loss was recognised on writing these assets down to fair value less disposal costs although impairments were recognised earlier in the year relating to this business see note 11.
31 July 2016 Current assets Inventories 17 Trade and other receivables 7 Total assets of business held for sale 24 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 5 Total liabilities of business held for sale 5 28 Disposals In the year the Group has sold the John Crane Artificial Lift business US 31 October 2016 Romania 23 November 2016 Smiths Medicals Wallace product line 7 November 2016 the Smiths Interconnect Power business 25 January 2017 and Smiths Interconnect Microwave Telecoms 28 April 2017.
Smiths Medicals Wallace product line was fully integrated so products will continue to be manufactured on behalf of the acquirer under a Manufacturing Transition Services Agreement while the acquirer is setting up their manufacturing capacity.
This activity has been treated as ongoing trading activity.
John Crane Artificial lift
Medical
Wallace
Smiths
Interconnect
Power
Smiths
Interconnect
Microwave
Telecoms
Other
Total
Consideration
Less transaction costs 1 2 6 6 15 Net consideration received Net assets disposed of intangible assets 32 134 12 178 property plant and equipment 2 4 6 inventory 17 12 16 45 trade and other receivables 11 19 20 1 51 tax 1 3 3 7 cash and cash equivalents 5 6 11 liabilities Net assets 24 32 157 41 1 255 Recycling of foreign exchange 1 15 6 20 Profit on disposals 1 175 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
29 Cashflow Cashflow from operating activities Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016
Non headline
Headline
Non headline
Operating profit 123 387 Amortisation of intangible assets Impairment of intangible assets 23 23 Impairment of trade investments 2 2 Depreciation of property plant and equipment Impairment of property plant and equipment 6 6 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment Profit on disposal of business 175 175 Sharebased payment expense Retirement benefits 1 94 93 1 104 103 Decrease in inventories Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 31 8 39 21 16 37 Increasedecrease in trade and other payables DecreaseIncrease in provisions 6 34 40 1 3 2 Cash generated from operations 793 183 610 627 194 433 Interest paid 65 65 61 61 Interest received Tax paid 82 82 62 62 Net cash inflow from operating activities 651 172 479 507 149 358 Interest received in the period includes 6m 2016 Interest received includes 41m cash inflows on foreign exchange contracts hedging exposures on intragroup loans and 5m exchange gains 2016 4m exchange gains realised on internal interest.
The split of tax payments between headline and nonheadline only considers the nature of payments made.
No adjustment has been made for reductions in tax payments due to tax relief received on nonheadline items.
Retirement benefit contributions in 2016 included cash contributions of 123m and a noncash transaction where 152m of financial assets were contributed to the Smiths Industries Pension Scheme Headline cash measures The Group measure of headline operating cash excludes interest and tax and includes capital expenditure supporting organic growth.
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016
Non headline
Headline
Non headline
Net cash inflow from operating activities 651 172 479 507 149 358
Expenditure on capitalised development other intangible assets and property plant and equipment 107 107 108 108 Disposals of property plant and equipment Investment in financial assets relating to operating activities and pensions financing 5 6 11 8 8 Free cashflow 548 178 370 400 157 243
Investment in financial assets relating to operating activities and pensions financing outstanding at the balance sheet 5 6 11 Interest paid Interest received 5 11 16 3 45 48 Tax paid Headline operating cashflow 695 183 512 520 202 318 Reconciliation of headline free cashflow to total movement in cash and cashequivalents Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Free cashflow 370 243 Investment in other financial assets 7 1 Acquisition of businesses 580 8 Disposal of businesses and discontinued operations 462 Net cashflow used in financing activities 116 332 Net increasedecrease cash and cash equivalents 361 98 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 N O TE S T O TH E A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D 30 Nonstatutory capital and credit metrics In addition to the nonstatutory profit measures explained in note 3 the Company calculates credit metrics and return on capital employed incorporating the same adjustments.
See the disclosures on presentation of results in accounting policies for an explanation of the excluded items.
Return on capital employed ROCE Smiths ROCE is calculated over a rolling 12month period and is the percentage that headline operating profit comprises of monthly average capital employed.
See note 1 for the divisional headline operating profit and average divisional capital employed used to calculate divisional ROCE.
Capital employed Capital employed is a nonstatutory measure of invested resources.
It comprises statutory net assets adjusted to add goodwill recognised directly in reserves in respect of subsidiaries acquired before 1 August 1998 of 787m 31 July 2016 815m and eliminate postretirement benefit assets and liabilities and litigation provisions relating to nonheadline items both net of related tax and net debt.
Notes
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Net assets 2104 1660 Adjust for Goodwill recognised directly in reserves 787 815 Postretirement benefit assets and liabilities 8 224 80 Tax related to post retirement benefit assets and liabilities 22 4 John Crane Inc.
Titeflex Corporation litigation provisions and related tax 22 51 58 Net debt 17 967 978 Capital employed 3865 3595 Return on capital employed
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Headline operating profit for previous twelve months 589 510 Average capital employed 1 3639 3324 ROCE 16.2% 15.3% Credit metrics Smiths Group monitors the ratio of net debt to Headline EBITDA as part of its management of credit ratings see note 25 for details.
This ratio is calculated as follows.
Headline earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Headline EBITDA
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Headline operating profit 589 510
Headline EBITDA 690 606 1m of software amortisation was charged to restructuring projects so treated as a nonheadline cost.
Ratio of net debt to headline EBITDA
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Headline EBITDA 690 606 Net debt 17 967 978 Ratio of net debt to headline EBITDA 1.4 1.6 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Year ended 31 July 2015 Year ended 31 July 2014 Year ended 31 July 2013 Income statement metrics  headline Revenue 3280 2949 2897 2952 3109 Headline operating profit 58tel560 Headline profit before tax 52tel498 Income statement metrics  statutory Operating profit 67tel487 Profit before taxation 60tel396 Profit after taxation 57tel317 Balance sheet metrics Net borrowings 967 978 818 804 744 Shareholders equity 2089 1646 1419 1237 1486 Average capital employed 3639 3324 3197 3218 3362
Headline operating profit revenue % 18.0 17.3 17.6 17.1 18.0 Headline effective tax rate % 26.5 25.0 25.5 27.0 26.5 Return on capital employed % 16.2 15.3 16.0 15.7 16.6 Return on shareholders funds % 14.5 14.3 15.8 14.9 17.8
Headline operating cash 69tel548 Headline operating cash conversion % Statutory free cashflow 37tel237 Statutory free cashflow per share p 93.6 61.1 40.1 36.2 60.3 Earnings per share Headline earnings per share p 97.6 85.2 86.1 81.8 92.7
Special dividend 30.00 Headline dividend cover 2.3 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.3 Number of employees 000s United Kingdom 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 U NA U D I T E D G R O U P F I NAN C IAL R E C O R D 2 0 13 2 0 17 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016
Non headline note 3
Headline
Non headline note 3
Continuing operations Revenue 1 4158 4158 4315 4315 Cost of sales 2225 2225 2342 2342 Gross profit 1933 1933 1973 1973 Sales and distribution costs 570 570 589 589 Administrative expenses 616 115 731 637 203 840 Other operating income 23 23 Profit on business disposal 28 223 223 Operating profit tel747 180 567 Interest receivable Interest payable 84 84 91 91 Other financing gainslosses 18 18 21 21 Other finance charges  retirement benefits Finance costs 4 78 15 93 86 25 61 Continuing operations  Profit before taxation 155 506 Continuing operations  Profit for the year 49tel114 382 Discontinued operations Lossprofit  discontinued operations 27 10 10 Profit for the year 491 224 715 Attributable to Smiths Group shareholders  continuing operations 48tel114 379 Smiths Group shareholders  discontinued operations 10 10 Noncontrolling interests in respect of continuing operations 3 3 3 tel496 114 382 Earnings per share 5 Basic 180.1c 95.9c Basic  continuing 182.7c 95.9c Diluted 177.8c 95.1c Diluted  continuing 180.3c 95.1c Assets and liabilities have been translated into US dollars at the exchange rate at the date of that balance sheet and income expenses and cashflows are translated at average exchange rates for the period.
This reflects the accounting approach that Smiths Group plc would use if the Group moved to reporting in US dollars without making any changes to its Group structure or financing arrangements.
U N A U D ITE D S U P P LE M E NTA R Y C O N S O LI D ATE D I N C O M E S TAT E M E N T  U S D O L L A R T R A N S L AT I O N Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Notes
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Profit for the period 715 382 Other comprehensive income Actuarial gainslosses on retirement benefits 8 70 59 Taxation recognised on actuarial movements 6 16 15 Other comprehensive income and expenditure which will not be reclassified to the consolidated income statement 54 44 Other comprehensive income which will be reclassified and reclassifications Exchange gainslosses 49 240 Cumulative exchange gains recycled on disposal 52 Fair value gainslosses and reclassification adjustments deferred on available for sale financial assets 1 3 reclassified to income statement on available for sale financial assets 4 28 deferred in the period on cashflow and net investment hedges 18 348 reclassified to income statement on cashflow and net investment hedges 31 Taxation recognised on fair value gains 6 1 Total other comprehensive income 64 183 Total comprehensive income 779 199 Attributable to Smiths Group shareholders 778 192 Noncontrolling interests U N A U D ITE D S U P P LE M E NTA R Y C O N S O LI D ATE D S TATE M E NT O F C O M P R E H E N S I V E I N C O M E  U S D O L L A R T R A N S L AT I O N Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 10 2657 2304 Property plant and equipment 12 415 417 Financial assets  other investments 16 28 12 Retirement benefit assets 8 514 434 Deferred tax assets 6 359 326 Trade and other receivables 14 74 67 Financial derivatives 19 75 38 4122 3598 Current assets Inventories 13 597 632 Current tax receivable 6 82 82 Trade and other receivables 14 952 986 Cash and cash equivalents 17 1032 571 Financial derivatives 19 17 16 2680 2287 Assets of businesses held for sale 27 31 Total assets 6802 5916 Noncurrent liabilities Financial liabilities borrowings 17 2108 1506 financial derivatives 19 3 1 Provisions for liabilities and charges 22 374 403 Retirement benefit obligations 8 219 329 Deferred tax liabilities 6 146 126 Trade and other payables 15 35 38 2885 2403 Current liabilities Financial liabilities borrowings 17 199 359 financial derivatives 19 12 23 Provisions for liabilities and charges 22 111 124 Trade and other payables 15 760 708 Current tax payable 6 60 95 1142 1309 Liabilities of businesses held for sale 27 7 Total liabilities 4027 3719 Net assets 2775 2197 Shareholders equity Share capital 23 196 196 Share premium account 468 466 Capital redemption reserve 7 7 Revaluation reserve 2 2 Merger reserve 311 311 Retained earnings 2155 1594 Hedge reserve 25 383 398 Total shareholders equity 2756 2178 Noncontrolling interest equity 19 19 Total equity 2775 2197 U N A U D ITE D S U P P LE M E NTA R Y C O N S O LI D ATE D B A L A N C E S H E E T  U S D O L L A R T R A N S L AT I O N Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Notes
Share capital and share premium
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Interest
Total equity At 31 July tel1594 398 2178 19 2197 Profit for the period Other comprehensive income Exchange lossesgains 1 2 2 1 2 3 Actuarial gains on retirement benefits and tax 54 54 54 Fair value gainslosses 13 13 13 Total comprehensive income for the period 1 Transactions relating to ownership interests Exercises of share options Taxation recognised on share options Purchase of own shares 25 13 13 13
Sharebased payment At 31 July tel2155 383 2756 19 2775
Share capital and share premium
Retained earnings
Equity shareholders funds
Interest
Total equity At 31 July tel1161 98 2219 13 2232 Profit for the year Other comprehensive income Actuarial losses on retirement benefits and related tax 44 44 44 Exchange lossesgains 120 59 Fair value gainslosses and related tax 31 348 379 379 Total comprehensive income for the year 120 59 671 300 192 7 199 Transactions relating to ownership interests Exercises of share options Purchase of own shares 25 12 12 12
Sharebased payment At 31 July tel1594 398 2178 19 2197 U N A U D ITE D S U P P LE M E NTA R Y C O N S O LI D ATE D S TATE M E NT O F C H A N G E S I N E Q U I T Y  U S D O L L A R T R A N S L AT I O N Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Net cash inflow from operating activities 29 607 524 Cashflows from investing activities Expenditure on capitalised development 47 34 Expenditure on other intangible assets 10 10 16 Purchases of property plant and equipment 12 79 108 Disposals of property plant and equipment 11 1 Investment in financial assets 16 27 23 13 Acquisition of businesses 26 735 12 Disposals of businesses  continuing operations 28 506 Disposals of businesses  discontinued operations 27 80 Net cashflow used in investing activities 297 182 Cashflows from financing activities Proceeds from exercise of share options 23 5 4 Purchase of own shares 25 13 12 Dividends paid to equity shareholders 24 212 239 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 1 1 Cash outflowinflow from matured derivative financial instruments 19 Increase in new borrowings 17 692 1 Reduction and repayment of borrowings 17 324 221 Net cashflow used in financing activities 147 487 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 457 145 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 569 774 Exchange differences 4 60 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 17 1030 569 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year comprise cash at bank and in hand 298 213 shortterm deposits 733 358 bank overdrafts 1 2 1030 569 Included in cash and cash equivalents per the balance sheet 1031 571 Included in overdrafts per the balance sheet 1 2 1030 569 Reconciliation of net cashflow to movement in net debt
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Net debt at start of year 17 1294 1278 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 457 145 Increase in borrowings 692 1 Reduction and repayment of borrowings 324 221 Movement in net debt resulting from cashflows 89 75 Capitalisation interest accruals and unwind of capitalisation fees 4 3 Movement from fair value hedging 6 33 Exchange differences 72 55 Movement in net debt in the year 19 16 Net debt at end of year 17 1275 1294 U N A U D ITE D S U P P LE M E NTA R Y C O N S O LI D ATE D C A S H  F L O W S TAT E M E N T  U S D O L L A R T R A N S L AT I O N Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Year ended 31 July 2017 Year ended 31 July 2016 Year ended 31 July 2015 Year ended 31 July 2014 Year ended 31 July 2013 Income statement metrics  headline Revenue 4158 4315 4525 4849 4866 Headline operating profit 74tel876 Headline profit before tax 66tel780 Income statement metrics  statutory Operating profit 85tel762 Profit before taxation 76tel620 Profit after taxation 71tel496 Balance sheet metrics Net borrowings 1275 1294 1278 1358 1129 Shareholders equity 2756 2178 2219 2090 2255 Average capital employed 4800 4864 4994 5287 5263
Headline operating profit revenue % 18.0 17.3 17.6 17.1 18.0 Headline effective tax rate % 26.5 25.0 25.5 27.0 26.5 Return on capital employed % 16.2 15.3 15.9 15.8 16.7 Return on shareholders funds % 14.2 14.6 15.3 15.1 18.1
Headline operating cash 88tel858 Headline operating cash conversion % Statutory free cashflow 46tel371 Statutory free cashflow per share c 118.6 89.4 62.6 59.5 94.4 Earnings per share Headline earnings per share c 123.6 124.6 134.5 134.4 145.1
Cents per share c 54.8 61.5 64.0 66.1 61.8 Special dividend c 49.3 Headline dividend cover 2.3 2.0 2.1 2.0 2.3 Number of employees 000s United States of America 7.7 7.9 8.4 8.3 8.5 Rest of World 14.2 14.1 14.9 14.9 14.8 U N A U D I T E D G R O U P U S D O L L A R F I NAN C IAL R E C O R D 2 0 13 2 0 17 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Fixed assets Intangible assets 2 Tangible assets 3 1 1 Investments and advances 4 3573 3487 Financial assets 5 7 Deferred tax assets 6 17 3598 3488 Current assets Retirement benefit assets amounts falling due after more than one year 12 390 327
Cash at bank and on deposit 9 468 207 Financial derivatives amounts falling due within one year 10 1 4 amounts falling due after more than one year Creditors amounts falling due within one year 8 411 363 Financial derivatives amounts falling due within one year 10 1 3 Net current assets 572 260 Total assets less current liabilities 4170 3748 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 9 1597 1137 Provisions for liabilities and charges 11 2 2 Retirement benefit liabilities 12 62 65 Financial derivatives amounts falling due after more than one year 10 1 Net assets including pension liabilities 2508 2544 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 13 148 148 Share premium account 13 355 352 Capital redemption reserve 13 6 6 Other reserves 13 181 181 Profit and loss account 13 1818 1857 Shareholders equity 2508 2544 The accounts on pages 196 to 206 were approved by the Board of Directors on 21 September 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Andy Reynolds Smith Bill Seeger Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer Smiths Group plc  registered number C O M P AN Y B AL AN C E S H E E T Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Retained profit
At 31 July tel6 181 1857 2544 Profit for the period 96 96 Other comprehensive income Actuarial gain on retirement benefits 34 34 Taxation recognised on retirement benefits 6 6 Total comprehensive income 124 124 Transactions with owners Exercise of share options 3 3 Purchase of own shares 10 10 Dividends paid to equity shareholders 167 167 Sharebased payment 14 14 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity 3 163 160 At 31 July tel6 181 1818 2508
Share premium
Other
Retained profit
At 31 July tel6 181 2042 2726 Profit for the period 17 17 Other comprehensive income Actuarial loss on retirement benefits 21 21 Taxation recognised on retirement benefits 4 4 Fair value losses on available for sale financial assets 4 4 Fair value gains reclassified to the income statement on available for sale financial assets 19 19 Total comprehensive income 23 23 Transactions with owners Exercise of share options 3 3 Purchase of own shares 8 8 Dividends paid to equity shareholders 163 163 Sharebased payment 9 9 Total transactions with owners recognised in equity 3 162 159 At 31 July tel6 181 1857 2544 C O M P A N Y S TAT E M E N T O F C H A N G E S I N E Q U I T Y Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Basis of preparation The accounts have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
These accounts have been prepared on a going concern basis and under the historical cost convention modified to include revaluation of certain financial instruments share options and pension assets and liabilities held at fair value.
As permitted by Section  of the Companies Act 2006 the Companys income statement and statement of comprehensive income have not been presented.
As permitted by Section  information about the Companys employee numbers and costs is not presented.
Exemptions from the requirements of IFRS applied in accordance with FRS 101 The following exemptions from the requirements of IFRS have been applied in the preparation of these financial statements in accordance with FRS 101 Paragraphs 45b and 46 to 52 of IFRS 2 Sharebased payment details of the number and weightedaverage exercise prices of share options and how the fair value of goods or services received was determined IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures Paragraphs 91 to 99 of IFRS 13 Fair value measurement disclosure of valuation techniques and inputs used for fair value measurement of assets and liabilities.
Paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements comparative information requirements in respect of paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property plant and equipment The following paragraphs of IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements 10d statement of cash flows 16 statement of compliance with all IFRS 38A requirement for minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements 38BD additional comparative information 111 cash flow statement information and 134136 capital management disclosures IAS 7 Statement of cash flows Paragraph 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting policies changes in accounting estimates and errors requirement for the disclosure of information when an entity has not applied a new IFRS that has been issued but is not yet effective Paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related party disclosures key management compensation The requirements in IAS 24 Related party disclosures to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group.
CO M P A N Y ACCO U N T I N G P O L I C I E S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Significant judgements key assumptions and estimates The preparation of the accounts in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the accounts and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results may differ from these estimates.
The key estimates and assumptions used in these parent company financial statements are set out below.
Taxation
The Company has recognised deferred tax assets of 55m 2016 44m relating to revenue losses brought forward.
The recognition of these assets is dependent on the ability to recover them against the unwind of other tax positions and forecast UK taxable profits of the tax group.
The treatment of these assets is reviewed regularly.
Further detail on the Companys deferred taxation position is included in note 6.
Retirement benefits The financial statements include costs in relation to and provision for retirement benefit obligations.
The costs and the present value of any related pension assets and liabilities depend on such factors as life expectancy of the members the returns that plan assets generate and the discount rate used to calculate the present value of the liabilities.
The Company uses previous experience and independent actuarial advice to select the values of critical estimates.
The estimates and the effect of variances in key estimates are disclosed in note 8 to the consolidated accounts.
At 31 July 2017 there is a retirement benefit asset of 390m 2016 327m which arises from the rights of the employers to recover the surplus at the end of the life of the scheme.
If the pension schemes were wound up while they still had members the schemes would need to buy out the benefits of all members.
The buyouts would cost significantly more than the present value of the scheme liabilities calculated in accordance with IAS 19 Employee benefits.
Investment carrying value Investments in subsidiary undertakings and loans due from subsidiaries are reviewed regularly and tested if there are any indications of impairment or problems with recoverability.
The recoverable amounts of investments are determined based on valuations of the underlying trading operations.
The recoverability of loans is assessed by looking at the credit quality of the subsidiary and any support available to the subsidiary.
These calculations require the use of estimates including projected future cashflows and other future events.
Foreign currencies Foreign currency transactions are recorded at the exchange rate ruling on the date of transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the retranslation at yearend exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the profit and loss account.
Operating leases Payments made under operating leases are charged to the profit and loss account as incurred over the term of the lease.
Where a leasehold property is vacant or sublet under terms such that the rental income is insufficient to meet all outgoings provision is made for the anticipated future shortfall up to termination of the lease.
Property plant and equipment Depreciation is provided at rates estimated to write off the relevant assets by equal annual amounts over their expected useful lives.
In general the rates used are Freehold and long leasehold property  2% Short leasehold property  over the period of the lease Plant machinery etc.
10% to 20% Fixtures fittings tools and other equipment  10% to 33%.
Investments in shares in Group companies The Companys investments in shares in Group companies are stated at cost less provision for impairment.
Any impairment is charged to the profit and loss account as it arises.
Financial instruments The policies disclosed in the Group accounting policies on pages 143 to 147 for recognition measurement and presentation of financial instruments are applied in the Company accounts.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method.
A deferred tax asset is recognised where it is probable that future taxable income will be sufficient to utilise the available relief.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the timing of the reversal of the temporary difference is controlled by the Company and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Provisions
Provisions for disposal indemnities restructuring costs vacant leasehold property and legal claims are recognised when the Company has a legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation and the amount has been reliably estimated.
Provisions are not recognised for future operating losses.
Provisions are discounted where the time value of money is material.
Postretirement benefits The Company has both defined benefit and defined contribution plans.
For defined benefit plans the liability for each scheme recognised in the balance sheet is the present value of the defined benefit obligation at the balance sheet date less the fair value of plan assets.
The defined benefit obligation is calculated annually by independent actuaries using the projected unit credit method.
The present value of the defined benefit obligation is determined by discounting the estimated future cash outflows using interest rates of AA corporate bonds that are denominated in the currency in which the benefits will be paid and that have terms to maturity approximating to the terms of the related pension liability.
Actuarial gains and losses arising from experience adjustments and changes in actuarial assumptions are recognised in full when they occur and presented in the statement of other comprehensive income.
For defined contribution plans the Company pays contributions to publicly or privately administered pension insurance plans on a mandatory contractual or voluntary basis.
Contributions are expensed as incurred.
The Company also has postretirement healthcare schemes that are accounted for on a similar basis to the defined benefit plans.
Sharebased payment The Company operates a number of equitysettled and cashsettled sharebased compensation plans.
The fair value of the shares or share options granted is recognised over the vesting period to reflect the value of the employee services received.
The charge relating to grants to employees of the Company is recognised as an expense in the profit and loss account and the charge for grants to employees of other group companies is recognised as an investment in the relevant subsidiary.
The fair value of options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket vesting conditions is calculated using established option pricing models principally binomial models.
The probability of meeting nonmarket vesting conditions which include profitability targets is used to estimate the number of share options that are likely to vest.
For cashsettled sharebased payment schemes a liability is recognised based on the fair value of the payment earned by the balance sheet date.
For equitysettled sharebased payment schemes the corresponding credit is recognised directly in reserves.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised as a liability in the period in which they are authorised.
The interim dividend is recognised when it is paid and the final dividend is recognised when it has been approved by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
CO M P A N Y ACCO U N T I N G P O L I C I E S CO N T I N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
1 Audit fee The audit fee for the Parent Company was 0.1m 2016 0.1m.
2 Intangible assets
Cost or valuation At 31 July 2016 and 31 July 2017 5
At 31 July 2016 and 31 July 2017 5 Net book value at 31 July 2017 Net book value at 31 July 2016 Intangible assets comprise computer software.
3 Tangible assets Plant and equipment Cost or valuation At 31 July 2016 3
At 31 July 2017 3
At 31 July 2016 2
At 31 July 2017 2 Net book value at 31 July 2017 1 Net book value at 31 July 2016 1 Plant and equipment comprises plant machinery fixtures fittings tools and equipment including computer hardware.
N O T E S T O T H E C O M P A N Y A C C O U N T S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 4 Investments and advances Shares in subsidiary undertakings
Total
Cost or valuation At 31 July 2016 2397 1101 3498 Exchange adjustments 17 17 Contribution through share options 7 7 Increases in advances due fromdue to subsidiaries 62 62 At 31 July 2017 2404 1180 3584 Provision for impairment At 31 July 2016 and 31 July Net book value at 31 July 2017 2394 1179 3573 Net book value at 31 July 2016 2387 1100 3487 Loans due to subsidiaries are offset against loans due from subsidiaries to the extent that there is a legal right of set off and an intention to settle the balances net.
At 31 July 2017 2088m of loans payable are offset against loans receivable 2016 1372m.
The Company has large offsetting loan balances because it uses loans to reduce its foreign currency exposures and separately monitor net cash generated from trading activities.
The Companys subsidiaries are largely held according to business lines by the following holding companies which are incorporated in England Smiths Group International Holdings Limited Smiths Detection Group Limited John Crane Group Limited Smiths Medical Group Limited Smiths Interconnect Group Limited The principal subsidiaries and their countries of incorporation are
Smiths Detection  Watford Ltd Smiths Medical International Limited John Crane UK Limited
Smiths Heimann SAS France Smiths Heimann GmbH Germany Smiths Medical France SA France Smiths Medical Deutschland GmbH Germany John Crane Italia SpA Italy
Smiths Detection AsiaPacific Pte Ltd Singapore Smiths Medical Japan Limited Japan John Crane Middle East FZE UAE United States Smiths Detection Inc.
Smiths Medical ASD Inc.
John Crane Inc.
Titeflex Corporation Flexible Technologies Inc.
Tutco LLC.
Hypertronics Corporation Smiths Interconnect Americas Inc.
Of the companies above Smiths Group International Holdings Limited is 100% owned directly by the Company.
The others are 100% owned through intermediate holding companies.
Shareholdings are of ordinary shares or common stock.
All subsidiaries operate in their country of incorporation.
See pages 207 to 214 for a complete list of subsidiary undertakings.
5 Financial assets At 31 July 2017 7m 2016 nil was held on deposit with banks as security for liabilities or letters of credit.
N O TE S T O TH E C O M P A N Y A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
6 Deferred tax assets The Company has recognised the following deferred tax assets and liabilities
Retirement benefit obligations
Other
Total
At 31 July 2016 2 48 44 2 Creditcharge to income statement 1 11 11 1 22 Charge to equity 1 6 5 At 31 July 2017 4 43 55 1 17 The Company is part of a UK tax group including all its UKbased subsidiaries.
The Company has recognised deferred tax assets of 55m 2016 44m relating to revenue losses brought forward.
The recognition of these assets is dependent on the ability to recover them against the unwind of other tax positions and forecast UK taxable profits of the tax group.
The timing of the unwind of other tax positions depends on the impact of pension contributions on the UK tax base.
The treatment of these assets is reviewed regularly.
At 31 July 2017 the Company has unrecognised deferred tax assets of nil 2016 19m relating to retirement benefit obligations.
7 Trade and other receivables 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owed by subsidiaries 59 55 Other receivables  Creditors amounts falling due within one year 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Term loans due within one year note 9 133 255 Amounts owed to subsidiaries 231 80 Other creditors 30 18 Accruals and deferred income Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 9 Borrowings and net debt 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Cash at bank 8 7 Short term deposits 460 200 Cash and cash equivalents 468 207 Term loans due within one year note 8 133 255 Term loans due after more than one year 1597 1137 Borrowings 1730 1392 Net debt 1262 1185 Term loans The currency and coupons for the term loans are disclosed in note 17 of the Group accounts.
31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Less than one year 133 255 Between one and two years 189 132 Between two and three years 189 Between three and four years Between four and five years Greater than five years 1408 816 Smiths Group plc term loans 1730 1392 See the liquidity risk disclosures in note 18 in the Group accounts for information on the cash and borrowing facilities available to the
The Company can borrow an additional 800m under the US800m multicurrency revolving credit facility which matures in February 2021.
10 Derivatives The tables below set out the nominal amount and fair value of derivative contracts held by the Company At 31 July 2017 Contract or underlying nominal amount Fair value
Liabilities
Net
Foreign exchange contracts not hedge accounted 165 1 1 Currency swaps net investment hedges 109 Cross currency swaps fair value and net investment hedges 569 56 56 Interest rate swaps fair value hedges 113 1 1 Total financial derivatives 956 57 2 55 Balance sheet entries Noncurrent 56 1 55 Current 1 1 Total financial derivatives 57 2 55 At 31 July 2016 Contract or underlying nominal amount Fair value
Liabilities
Net
Foreign exchange contracts not hedge accounted 437 2 2 Currency swaps net investment hedges 111 1 1 Cross currency swaps fair value and net investment hedges 326 25 25 Interest rate swaps fair value hedges 214 6 6 Total financial derivatives 1088 33 3 30 Balance sheet entries Noncurrent 29 29 Current 4 3 1 Total financial derivatives 33 3 30 N O TE S T O TH E C O M P A N Y A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
11 Provisions for liabilities and charges
31 July 2016
Utilisation
At
31 July 2017 Disposals The closing disposal provision relates to warranties and other obligations in respect of a past disposal and is expected to be utilised within the next five years.
12 Postretirement benefits The Company is the principal employer for the two major defined benefit plans in the UK.
The Company is accounting for all the UK defined benefit schemes funded and unfunded and virtually all of the postretirement healthcare schemes.
The retirement benefit assets and liabilities comprise 31 July 2017 31 July 2016 Market value of scheme assets 3959 4034 Present value of funded scheme liabilities 3571 3709 Surplus 388 325 Unfunded pension plans 55 56 Postretirement healthcare 5 7 Present value of unfunded obligations 60 63 Net pension assetliability 328 262 Retirement benefit assets 390 327 Retirement benefit liabilities 62 65 Net pension assetliability 328 262 See the disclosures for UK schemes in note 8 to the consolidated accounts for the circumstances of the major schemes risk management principal assumptions assets and liabilities and the funding position of the two major schemes.
13 Share capital and reserves Share capital Number of shares
Consideration
Ordinary shares of 37.5p each At 31 July 2016 395223072 148 Exercise of share options 253590 3 Total share capital at 31 July 2017 395476662 148 At 31 July 2017 all of the issued share capital was in free issue.
All issued shares are fully paid.
See note 9 to the consolidated accounts for information about share schemes including total shares under options and options exercisable at the balance sheet date.
During the year the Company received 3m 2016 3m on the issue of shares in respect of the exercise of options awarded under various share option schemes.
Smiths Industries Employee Benefit Trust The retained earnings include the purchase of Smiths Group plc shares by the Smiths Industries Employee Benefit Trust and the issue of these shares upon the exercise of share options.
The consideration paid was 10m 2016 8m and nil 2016 nil was received as a result of the issue of shares.
At 31 July 2017 the Trust held 766 2016 852 ordinary shares.
Distributable profits The Companys profit and loss reserve of 1818m 2016 1857m comprised 894m 2016 913m not available for distribution as a dividend and 924m 2016 944m available for distribution.
See note 25 in the Group accounts for a discussion of capital management and the factors the Board consider when proposing dividends.
Other reserves Other reserves arose from the cancellation of the share premium arising from an equityfunded acquisition in the year ended 30 July 1988.
Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 14 Contingent liabilities The Company has provided guarantees and arranged letter of credit facilities to support the Groups pension plans.
The current amount outstanding under letters of credit is 54m 2016 54m.
The Company has guaranteed the US800m revolving credit facility available to a subsidiary.
15 Post balance sheet event The directors propose a final dividend of 29.70p per share totalling approximately 118m for the year ended 31 July 2017.
The dividend will be submitted for formal approval at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 14 November 2017.
These financial statements do not reflect this dividend payable which will be accounted for in shareholders equity as an appropriation of retained earnings in the year ending 31 July 2018.
During the year ended 31 July 2017 a final dividend of 28.75p per share totalling 114m was paid in respect of the dividends declared for the year ended 31 July 2016.
N O TE S T O TH E C O M P A N Y A C C O U NTS C O NTI N U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
In accordance with Section 409 of the Companies Act 2006 disclosed below is a full list of related undertakings of the Company.
Related undertakings include subsidiaries associated undertakings and significant holdings in undertakings other than subsidiary undertakings.
The registered office address country of incorporation classes of shares and effective percentage of equity owned by the Group is disclosed as at 31 July 2017.
Name Security Direct % Total % UNITED KINGDOM 1 Sheldon Square Paddington London W2 6TT Smiths Detection Group Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Detection Investments Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Detection Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Heimann Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Detection United Kingdom Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Group Finance EU Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Group Finance US Limited Ordinary US1 100 1112 St Jamess Square London SW1Y 4LB Air Log Limited Ordinary 1p 100 EIS Group Plc Ordinary 25p 100 100 Flagtown Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Flightspares Limited Ordinary 1 Ordinary 10p 100 100 Francis Shaw And Company Manchester Limited Ordinary 1 100 Francis Shaw P L C 37% 2nd Pref Ordinary 10p 5.25% Cum Pref 1 Def 20p Ordinary 10p Gastite Systems Limited Ordinary 1 100 Graseby Limited Ordinary 25p 100 100 Kontak Manufacturing Company Limited Ordinary 1 100 Pyzotec Limited Ordinary 1 75 75 Roof Units Group Limited Ordinary 10p 100 100
Pension Trustees Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Sedding No.3 Limited Ordinary 1 100 SI Properties Limited Ordinary 25p 100 100 SITI 1 Limited Ordinary US1 100 Smiths Aerospace Components Tyseley Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Aerospace ComponentsBurnley Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Aerospace Gloucester Limited Ordinary 25p Ordinary A 25p 100 Smiths Finance Limited Ordinary 1 Red US1 100 Smiths Group International Holdings Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Healthcare Limited Ordinary 1p 100 100 Smiths Industries Limited 7% Non Cum Pref Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Interconnect Power Management UK Ordinary 100 Smiths Medical Distribution Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Medical Limited Ordinary 1 99 Smiths Nominees Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Power UK Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Wolverhampton Limited Ordinary 25p 100 TI Group Limited Ordinary 25p 100 100 TI Guarantee Company Limited Limited By Guarantee 100 TI Interest Limited Ordinary A 1 Ordinary B 1 Floating Rate Cum Red Pref C 1 Tigrup No.
14 Limited Ordinary 20p 100 Tigrup No.7 Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 XD Communications Limited Ordinary 1 100 XDG Limited Ordinary 50P 100 100 3 Melville Street Edinburgh EH3 7PE George Maclellan Holdings Limited Ordinary 5p Def Ordinary 25p 100 100 13th Floor 54 Hagley Road Edgbaston Birmingham B16 8PE CVE Trustee Limited Ordinary 1 100 100 Smiths Pensions Limited Ordinary 1tel Eureka Park Lower Pemberton Ashford Kent TN25 4BF Smiths Medical UK Ordinary US1 100 Graseby Medical Limited Ordinary 1 100 Medex Medical Limited Ordinary 1 100 Pneupac Limited Ordinary 0.50 100 SI Overseas Holdings Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Medical Group Limited Ordinary A 1 Ordinary B 1 Ordinary C 1 100 Smiths Medical International Limited Ordinary 1 Pref 2 100 29 Dunsinane Avenue Dundee DD2 3Qf Scotland Flexible Ducting Limited Ordinary 1 100 Trak Microwave Limited Ordinary Shares 100 52 Grayshill Road Westfield Industrial Area Cumbernauld G68 9HG Ashfield Medical Systems Limited Ordinary 1 100 S U B S ID I A R Y U ND E R TA K IN G S Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Name Security Direct % Total % UNITED KINGDOM Buckingham House 361366 Buckingham Avenue Slough Berkshire SL1 4LU Flexibox International Limited Ordinary 1 100 Flexibox Limited Ordinary 1 100 Global TI Limited Ordinary 1 100 John Crane Group Limited Ordinary 1 100 John Crane International Limited Ordinary 1 100 John Crane Investments Limited Ordinary 1 100 John Crane UK Limited Ordinary 1 100 Project Sugar Limited Ordinary 1 100 Bond Dickinson LLP St Anns Wharf 112 Quayside Newcastle Upon Tyne NE1 3DX OIE Services Limited Ordinary 1 100 Century House Maylands Avenue Hemel Hempstead Hertfordshire HP2 7DE Smiths DetectionWatford Limited Ordinary 1 100 Co Bond Dickinson LLP 13 Albyn Terrace Aberdeen AB10 1YP Subvenmar Limited Ordinary 1 100 Venmar Limited A Ordinary 10p B Ordinary 10p C Ordinary 1 Pref 10p XPD8 Solutions Limited Ordinary 1 100 First Floor Building 7 Croxley Business Park Hatters Lane Watford WD18 8PA Smiths Business Information Services Limited Ordinary 1 100 Forsyth House Cromac Square Belfast Co Antrim Flexibox Northern Ireland Limited Ordinary 1 100 KPMG LLP 8 Salisbury Square London EC4Y 8BB Lighthome Limited in liquidation Ordinary 1 100 100 Unit 130 Centennial Park Elstree Hertfordshire WD6 3TJ Hypertac Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Industries Industrial Group Limited Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Interconnect Connectors UK Ordinary 1 100 Smiths Interconnect Group Limited Ordinary 1 100
Rue Kwamme Nkrumah Torres ImporAfrica 3 Andar Apt A Luanda John Crane Angola Prestacao De Services Ltd Ordinary AOA 1 100
Av.
Leandro N.
Alem 1110 13 Floor Baker Mackenzie Office Buenos Aires John Crane Argentina SA Common 1 ARS 100 TI Group Automotive Systems Argentina SA Ordinary 1 ARS 100
549  551 Somerville Road Sunshine Melbourne Vic 3020 John Crane Australia Pty Limited Ordinary AUS1 100 Flexibox Pty Limited Ordinary AUS 100 Botany Grove Estate Unit 5 14A Baker Street Botany NSW 2019 Smiths Detection Australia Pty Ltd Ordinary AUD 1 100 Suite 201 Level 2 10 Norbrik Drive Bella Vista NSW 2153 Smiths Medical Australasia Pty Ltd Ordinary 100
Campus 21 Europairing A 03 5 02 Brunn Am Gebirge A2345 Smiths Medical Osterreich GmbH Ordinary 1 100 AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC House No 20 Ismayilbey Qutqasinli Street Baku AZ 1006 John Crane Baku LLC Ordinary US10 100
Pegasuslaan 5 Diegem 1831 Smiths Medical Belgium NV Registered Shares 100 Square De Meeus 18 Brussels 1050 John Crane Belgium NV Ordinno Par Value 100
Av Paulista 1048 1 Andar Conj.
11 Bela Vista Sao Paulo 01310100 Smiths Medical Do Brasil Produtos Hospitalares LTDA Ordinary R1 100 Rua Tabapua 422 10 Andar Conjuntos 101 A 104 Itaim Bibi Sao Paulo Cep 04533001 Smiths Detection Brasil Comrico De Equipamentos LTDA Common 100 Industrial District of The City of Rio Claro State of Sao Paulo AV.
Brasil
Number 4.700 Cep 13505600 Smiths Brasil LTDA Ordinary R1 100 S U B S ID I A R Y U ND E R TA K IN G S C O N T IN U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Name Security Direct % Total %
301 Gough Road Markham Ontario L3R 4Y8 Smiths Medical Canada Ltd Common Shares 100 3700 Stock Exchange Tower P.
Box 242 800 Place Victria Montreal PQ H4Z 1E9 Smiths Detection Montreal Inc.
Class A Shares Class B Shares 100 423 Green North Road Stoney Creek Ontario L8E 3A1 John Crane Canada Inc Common 1 100 4610 Eastgate Parkway Unit 3 Mississauga Ontario L4W 3W6 Flexible Technologies Canada Inc.
Ordinary Shares 1 100
Americo Vespucio 2542 Complejo Empresarial El Cortijo Conchali
John Crane Chile SA Ordinary 100
Building 9 333 Zhujian Road Huachao Town Shanghai Minhang District Kaelus Interconnect Shanghai Co.
Ltd.
Ordinary 1 100 No 255 Suhong Middle Road Suzhou Industrial Park Suzhou Antares Advanced Test Technologies Suzhou Co.
Ltd Ordinary 1 100
26 The 3rd Avenue Economic and Technological Development Area
Smiths Medical Instrument Zhejiang Co.
Ltd Ordinary Shares of RMB 100
7 Factory Building Maqiao Industrial Square Changshu Economic Development Zone Changshu Jiangsu Changshu FlexTek Thermal Fluid Systems Manufacturer Co.
Ltd US520800 Registered Capital 100 No.9 No.
1 Haitai Huake Road Huayuan Industrial District Outside The Ring Binhai HiTech Industrial Park Tianjin John Crane Technology Tianjin Co Limited Co.
Ltd Ordinary US1 100 Room 1668 No.
14F Floor 3 Datong Building Huanghe Avenue Nankai District Tianjin John Crane China Co Limited Ordinary CNY1 100 Room 923B No 55 Xili Road Shanghai China Pilot Free Trade Zone Smo Detection Equipment Shanghai Co.
Ltd Ordinary 100 Unit 3018 South Tower Beijing Kerry Centre 1 Guanghua Road Chaoyang District Beijing Smiths Medical Beijing Co.
Ltd Ordinary Shares 1 100
Calle 46A No 8254 Int 14 Parque Empresarial San Cayetano Bogota John Crane Colombia SA Ordinary COP 1 100 COSTA RICA Central Avenue and 8Th 33Rd St.
Number 777 Barrio Francisco Peralta San Jose Compania EMC Tecnologia S.
Ordinary US1 100 CZECH REPUBLIC Jana Sigmunda 78 Lutin 78349 John Crane Sigma as Ordinary CZK 1M 100 Olomoucka 306 Hranice IMesto Hranice 75301 Smiths Medical Czech Republic A.
Ordinary 100
Orestads Boulevard 73 2300 Kobenhavn S Smiths Medical Danmark Aps DKK 100 Shares 100 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Calle El Recodo 2 Bella Vista Santa Domingo John Crane Dominicana Sa Ordinary DP1 100
139 Mogamaa El Masanea Street El Amireya Cairo John Crane Egypt LLC Ordinary EGP 1 100 John Crane Egypt Sealing Systems LLC Ordinary EGP 1 100 Nile City Towers North Tower 22nd Floor Ramlet Boulaq Nile Cournich
Detection Technologies Egypt Quotas 100
114 Rue Jules Ferry B.
John Crane France S.
Ordinary 286 100 T I S A France Ordinary 100 22 Avenue Maurice Chevalier 77833 OzoirLaFerriere Paris Titeflex Europe S.
Ordinary 1 100 35 Rue Du Pont Des Halles Batiment A Rungis 94150 Smiths Medical France S.
7.7 Shares 100 31 Rue Isidore Maille SaintAubinLesElbeuf 76410 Hypertac S.
Ordinary 76 100 36 Rue Charles Heller Vitry Sur Seine F94400 Smiths Heimann S.
1 Shares 100 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Name Security Direct % Total %
Pl 10 40951 Muurame Kiinteisto Oy Ainolantie 21 Ordinary 100 Po Box 10 Punasillantie 15 Muurame 40950 John Crane Safematic Oy Ordinary 100
Bretonischer Ring 3 Grasbrunn 85630 Smiths Group Deutschland GmbH 1491400 Shares 3478400 Shares 995500 Shares Smiths Medical Deutschland GmbH 1000 Shares 27000 Shares 5000 Shares 500 Shares Flexschlauch Produktions GmbH Reepschlager Str.
10B Lubeck 23556 Flexschlauch Producktions GmbH Ordinary 100 Heselstucken 3 Hamburg 22453 Smiths Detection Germany GmbH Ordinary 100 Im Herzen 4 Wiesbaden 65205 Smiths Detection GmbH  25000 Share 183100 Share 791900 Share Smiths Heimann Gmbh Ordinary 100 Robert  Bosch  Breite 10 Gottingen 37079 John Crane Bearing Technology GmbH Ordinary 100 Tolzer Strasse 15 82031 Grunwald Zamor KG Ordinary Shares 1 49 Ulrichsberger Strasse 17 Deggendorf 94469 Hypertac GmbH Ordinary 1 100 Werner  Von  Siemens  Str.6 Fulda 36041 John Crane GmbH Ordinary 1 100
3 Stratigou Tobre Street Municipality Of Agia Paraskevi Athens 153 42 John Crane Hellas  Engineered Sealing Systems Monoprosopi EPE Ordinary 1 100
Level 5 Mill Court La Charroterie St Peter Port GY1 1EJ Smiths Group Insurance Limited Ordinary 1 100 HONG KONG Room 401 Corn Yan Centre 3 Juniper Street North Point Smiths Detection Hong Kong Limited Ordinary 1 HKD 100 Suite 11068 11F Tai Yau Building No 181 Johnston Road Wanchai Smiths Medical Hong Kong Limited Ordinary HK1 100
2040 Budaors Gyar U.
John Crane Hungary Kft Ordinary 1 100
508509 5th Floor Western Edge Ii Western Express Highway Borivali East Mumbai Smiths Medical India Private Limited Ordinary INR 1 100 D196 Okhla Industrial Area Phase1 New Dehli Plenty India Limited Ordinary Shares 100 No 10 B 1st Phase Peenya Industrial Area Bangalore John Crane Flexibox India Private Limited Ordinary INR 10 100 No 11 1st Phase Peenya Industrial Area Bangalore John Crane Sealol India Limited Ordinary INR INR 10 100 No 38 Kiadb Industrial Area Bangalor STS Titeflex India Pvt Ltd Ordinary Inr 100 100 Vardhman Crown Mall Unit No.
300 3rd Floor Sector 19 Dwarka New Delhi Smiths Detection Veecon Systems Private Limited Class A Equity Shares INR 10 Class B Equity Shares INR 10
Cilandak Commercial Estate Bldg 401A Ji.
Kko Cilandak Jakarta 12560 Pt John Crane Indonesia Ordinary IDR1000 99
Suite 3 One Earlsfort Centre Earlsfort Terrace Dublin 2 Smiths Detection Ireland Limited Ordinary 1.25 Ordinary B 1.
Ordinary D 1.25 Series C 1.25 Graseby Medical Ireland Limited Ordinary 1.
Each
T5354 Shannon Industrial Estate Shannon Co.
Clare
John Crane Ireland Limited Ordinary US1 100 S U B S ID I A R Y U ND E R TA K IN G S C O N T IN U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Name Security Direct % Total %
Via Da Bissone 7A Genova 16153 Hypertac SpA Ordinary 5 100 Via Della Stazione 2 04013 Latina Scalo Latina Smiths Medical Italia srl Ordinary 1 100 Via Giotto 3 Muggio 20835 Smiths Detection Italia srl Quota Value of Shares 100 John Crane Italia SpA Ordinary 5.16 100 Smiths Group Italia Srl Ordinary 1 100
2504 Kioicho Garden Tower 310 Kioicho ChiyodaKu Tokyo Smiths Detection Japan Gk Cash Contribution 100 2222 Kamitoyama Ritto City RittoShi ShigaKen John Crane Japan Inc Ordinary JYP 1000 70 711 Akasaka MinatoKu Tokyo Smiths Medical Japan Ltd Common Stock 100 Hamamatsucho Ds Building 2716 Hamamatsucho 1Chome MinatoKu
Flexibox Japan Kk Ordinary JYP 1000 100
Atyrau Region Gatyrau Station K Arabathan House Production Site 14 John Crane Kazakhstan Ordinary Equity 100 KOREA REPUBLIC OF Migeundong Westgatetower 15F 70 ChungjeongRo SeodaemunGu
John Crane Korea Co Ltd Ordinary Kwon 5000 100
207 Jalan Tun Razak Suite 13.03 13th Floor Menara Tan and Tan Kuala Lumpur 50400 John Crane Malaysia Sdn.
Bhd.
Ordinary 100 Level 21 Suite 21.01 The Gardens South Tower Mid Valley Centre Lingkaran Syed Putra 59200 Kuala Lumpur Flexible Ducting Malaysia Sdn Bhd Ordinary 1 100 Suite 13.03 13th Floor Menara Tan and Tan 207 Jalan Tun Razak 50400 Kuala Lumpur Smiths Detection Malaysia Sdn Bhd Share Of 1 Ringgit 100
679 Poniente 152 Vallejo Delegacion Azcapotzalco Mexico City 2300 Industrias John Crane Mexico S. de C.
Series A MXN 1 Series B MXN 1 100
Primero De Mayo Lote 3 Edificio 1B Prologis Park Reynosa 88780 Tutco De Mexico S de RL de CV Ordinary Shares 1.00 100 Ave Calidad No.
4 Parque Industrial Internacional Tijuana Tijuana B.
Smiths Healthcare Manufacturing S. de C.
Series B 10 Pesos Series B1 Pesos 10 100 Carretera Ciudad Victoria Matamoros Km.173600 Solonia San Fernando Centro Tamaulipas San Fernando CP 87600 John Crane Sociedad De Responsibilidad Limitada De Capital Variable Ordinary MXN 1 100 Paseo De La Reforma 505 Col Cuauhtemoc 6500 Cudad De Mexico Smiths Detection Mexico S. de Rl de C.
Partes Sociales 100
Bergen 9  17 Barendrecht Zuid 2993LR John Crane Holland BV Ordinary 1 100 Hydrograaf 25 Po Box 442 6900 Ak Zevenaar Duiven 6921 RS Indufil BV Ordinary 100 Jagersbosstraat 28 5241Jt Rosmalen Smiths Medical Nederland B.
Shares NLG100 100 Buckingham House 361366 Buckingham Avenue Slough Berkshire SL1 4LU England Smiths Group Holdings Netherlands BV Ordinary 100 NEW ZEALAND Quigg Partners Level 7 36 Brandon Street Wellington 6011 Smiths Detection New Zealand Limited Ordinary NZ1 100
Av.
Guillermo Dansey 2124 Urbanizacion Industrial Conde Lima John Crane Peru SAC Common Shares 100
Warszawska 153 Bielsko  Biala 43  300 John Crane Poland Sp Z O.
Ordinary 50 PLN 100 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017 Name Security Direct % Total %
Avenida Engenheiro Duarte Pacheco Amoreiras Torre 2 15 A Campo De Ourique Lisboa 1070102 Smiths Medical Portugal Unipessoal Lda 505000 Share 100 PUERTO RICO 654 Plaza Suite 933 654 Munoz Rivera Ave San Juan John Crane Caribe Ltd Common Shares 100 RUSSIAN FEDERATION 104 Build.
14 Oktyabrskaya Embankment SaintPetersburg Smiths Heimann Rus LLC Ordinary 100
LLC John Crane Rus Ordinary RUB 1 100 SAUDI ARABIA Dammam Industrial City Dammam 3243 John Crane Saudi Arabia Ltd Ordinary ZAR 1 100 Po Box 59490 Postal Code 11525 Riyadh Smiths Detection Saudi Arabia Ltd 1000 Saudi Riyals Shares 100
100 Beach Road 2006 Shaw Towers Smiths Detection Asia Pacific Pte.
Ltd Ordinary S1 100 Smiths Connectors Asia Pte.
Ltd.
Ordinary S1 100 80 Raffles Place Uob Plaza 1 3201 John Crane Singapore Pte Limited Ordinary S1 100 Smiths Medical Singapore Pte.
Limited Ordinary Shares 100
Michalska 2 Bratislava 811 01 John Crane Slovakia sro Ordinary 1 100 SOUTH AFRICA 2 Jansen Road Nuffield Industrial Sites Springs Gauteng 1559 Flexibox Pty Limited Ordinary 100 John Crane Pty Ltd Ordinary ZAR 1 100 3rd Floor 54 Melrose Boulevard Melrose Arch 2196 Smiths Medical South Africa Pty Ltd R1 Shares 100
Av Diagonal Num.635 P.1 Barcelona 08028 Smiths Medical Espana S.
Shares 1 100 Cemento 1 Torrejon De Ardoz Madrid John Crane Iberica SA Ordinary 6.
SWEDEN
Box 1143 164 22 Kista Smiths Medical Sverige AB SEKk100 Shares 100 Faltspatsgatan 4 Se421 30 Vastra Frolunda John Crane Sverige AB Ordinary 100
Freulerstrasse 4 4127 Birsfelden John Crane Switzerland AG Ordinary 1 CHF 100 Zurichstrasse 33 Adliswil 8134 Smiths Medical Schweiz AG Shares of CHF 10.00 Each 100
3244 FongJen Road Renwu District Kaohsiung City 814 John Crane Taiwan Co Ltd.
Ordinary T1 100
9311 31St Floor Um Tower Ramkhamhaeng Road Suanluang District
John Crane Thailand Limited Ordinary THB 1 Preferred Shares 100 993 Moo 5 Kingkaew Road Tambol Rajatheva Amphoe Bangplee Samutprakarn Province 10540 Smiths Detection Thailand Limited Pre THB100 Ordinary Thb100 100
Zone Industrielle Route De Khniss Monastir 5000 Smiths Connectors Tunisia Sarl Ordinary 100 DT 100
Istanbul Sariyer Huzur Mahallesi Ahmet Bayman Caddessi Dis Reklamcilik Apt No17191 John Crane Endustriyel Sizdirmazlik Sistemleri Ltd Ordinary TRY 25 100 S U B S ID I A R Y U ND E R TA K IN G S C O N T IN U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Name Security Direct % Total % UNITED ARAB EMIRATES Building B07 Industrial Mussaffah M44 Sector 15 Abu Dhabi Smiths Detection Security Systems LLC AED 1000 49 Dubai Airport Free Zone W7 2052 Smiths Detection Middle East FZE AED 1000000 Share 100 S20113 Jebel Ali Free Zone 61040 John Crane Middle East FZE Ordinary AED 1 100 UNITED STATES 111 Cedar Creek Road Post Office Box 84 Grafton W0084 Orion LLC Ordinary US0.01 100 116 Pine Street 3Rd Floor Suite 320 Harrisburg PA 17101 Tutco LLC Ordinary US1 100 1200 South Pine Island Road Plantation FL 33324 Smiths Interconnect Microwave Components Inc.
Common Stock 100 1209 Orange Street Wilmington DE 19801 Smiths Detection US LLC Ordinary US1 100 John Crane Inc Common US0.01 Preferred US0.10 100 John Crane Group LLC Ordinary 100 PowercamHoudaille Inc.
Common Shares 100 Flexible Technologies Inc Ordinary Shares US0.01 100 John Crane Production Solutions Inc Ordinary US0.01 100 Smiths Interconnect Americas Inc.
Common Stock 100 Smiths Interconnect Connectors Inc.
Common Stock US0.01 100 Smiths Interconnect Inc.
Common Stock US0.01 100 Trak Microwave Corporation Common Stock US10.00 100 Antares China Holdings Inc Common Stock US0.01 100 Smiths Business Information Services Inc.
Ordinary US0.01 100 Smiths Group Services Corp.
Common Stock US0.01 100 155 Federal Street Suite 700 Boston MA 02110 Hypertronics Corporation Common Stock 100 Lasalle Street Suite 814 Chicago IL 60604 John Crane International Inc.
Common Shares 100 2850 Safran Drive Grand Prairie TX75052 Smiths Detection International LLC Equity Interests 100 330 Corporate Woods Parkway Vernon Hills IL 60061 Medex CardioPulmonary Inc Common Stock of US0.
Smiths Medical ASD Inc.
Limited Common Stock 1 100 8730 Meldrum Houston TX 77075 Turbo Components And Engineering LLC Comon Shares 100 Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Rd Suite 400 Wilmington DE 19808 Mdii Investments LLC Ordinary 100 Smiths Detection LLC Equity Interests 100 Smiths Detection US Holdings LLC Ordinary US1 100 The Corporation Trust Company of Nevada 6100 Neil Road Suite 150 Reno NV 89511 Smiths Detection Inc Common Stock Oof 0.0001 100 Ct Corporation System 155 Federal Street Suite 700 Boston MA 02110 Titeflex Commercial Inc.
Ordinary US0.01 100 Millitech Inc.
Common Stock 100 Ct Corporation System 818 West Seventh Street 2nd Floor Los Angeles CA 90017 Sabritec Ordinary Shares 100 Tecom Industries Incorporated Common Stock US1 100 Ct Corporation System 9 Capitol Street Concord Nh 03301 Smiths Tubular SystemsLaconia Inc Ordinary Shares US1 100 One Corporate Center Hartord Ct 061033220 Titeflex Corporation Ordinary US1 100 Registered Agent Solutions Inc.
1679 Dupont Highway Suite 100 Dover DE 19901 Smiths Medical US Inc US0.01 Stock 100
Carretera Va A Perij Km 8  Avenida 50 Local N 18572 Zona Industrial El Silencio Maracaibo 4001 John Crane Venezuela CA Class A BSF1 Class B BSF1 Common BSF1 100 Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
GERMANY
Borsigstrasse 15 65205 Wiesbaden STI Security Training International GmbH Ordinary Shares 1 34 RUSSIAN FEDERATION 28 Academica Vedeneeva Street Perm Permskiy Region LLC John Crane Iskra Ordinary RUB 1 50 The following new companies were incorporated after 31 July 2017 Smiths Detection Netherlands B. was incorporated in the Netherlands on 1 August 2017.
Smiths Group plc indirectly owns the entire issued share capital and the new company will be consolidated as a subsidiary from the date of incorporation.
Smiths Group Innovation Limited was incorporated in the United Kingdom on 8 September 2017.
Smiths Group plc indirectly owns the entire issued share capital and the new company will be consolidated as a subsidiary from the date of incorporation.
S U B S ID I A R Y U ND E R TA K IN G S C O N T IN U E D Smiths Group plc Annual Report 2017
Announcement of results for 201617 22 September Ordinary shares final dividend exdividend date 19 October Ordinary shares final dividend record date 20 October Annual General Meeting 14 November Ordinary shares final dividend payment date 17 November 201718 interim results announced 23 March provisional Ordinary shares interim dividend exdividend date 5 April provisional Ordinary shares interim dividend record date 6 April provisional Ordinary shares interim dividend payment date 23 April provisional Smiths Group financial year end 31 July Announcement of results for 201718 21 September provisional Ordinary shares final dividend exdividend date 18 October provisional Ordinary shares final dividend record date 19 October provisional Annual General Meeting 14 November provisional Ordinary shares final dividend payment date 16 November provisional The market value of an ordinary share of the Company on 31 March 1982 for the purposes of capital gains tax was 136.875p taking into account the subdivision of 50p shares into 25p shares on 14 January 1985 and the subdivision and consolidation of 25p shares into 37.5p shares on 18 June 2007.
F I NAN C IAL C AL E N D AR Registered Office Smiths Group plc 4th Floor 1112 St Jamess Square London SW1Y 4LB United Kingdom telsite Incorporated in England
Auditor
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA UK Ttel United Kingdom Lines open 8.30am to 5.30pm Monday to Friday T 44 0tel International
Shareholding information By accessing site shareholders can view their personal shareholder information as well as practical help on share transfers and changes of address.
Shareholders wishing to change their election and receive documents in hard copy form can do so by contacting the Companys Registrar or by logging on to site Annual General Meeting AGM The Annual General Meeting of Smiths Group plc for 2017 will be held at 1100 a.
If you are in any doubt as to what action you should take in relation to the resolutions being proposed at the AGM you are recommended to consult your stockbroker bank manager solicitor accountant or other independent professional adviser authorised under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000.
Voting at the AGM The Company continues to provide electronic proxy voting for this years AGM.
Shareholders who will not be able to attend the AGM in person are encouraged to vote their shares by appointing a proxy and issuing voting instructions.
Electronic and paper proxy appointments and voting instructions must be received by the Companys Registrar not later than 48 hours before the AGM in order to be valid.
Shareholders who are not Crest members can appoint a proxy and vote online for or against or consciously not vote on the resolutions to be proposed at the AGM by visiting the website site Crest members Crest personal members and other Crestsponsored members should consult the Crest Manual or their sponsor or voting service provider for instructions on electronic proxy appointment and voting.
