St Ives plc ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 St Ives plc ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 WELCOME TO ST IVES PLC WHO WE ARE Our Group today St Ives is an international marketing services group comprised of 17 successful and dynamic marketing and print services businesses.
We operate not as a single entity but as a group of marketleading businesses each with its own unique value proposition.
Our businesses offer complementary services and collaborate closely with each other when this adds value to clients.
Digital Insight Data Strategic Marketing Marketing Activation Books 24% 8% 10% Revenue Revenue Revenue % of Group revenue % of Group revenue % of Group revenue 39% 19% Revenue Revenue % of Group revenue % of Group revenue Welcome St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Welcome to St Ives plc IFC Who We Are 01 Highlights Strategic Report
02 Chairmans Statement
04 Our Business Model and Strategy
06 Chief Executives Performance Review
08 Segment Overview 10 Strategy in Action 10  Collaboration 14  Acquisition 18  Internationalisation
20 Financial Review
23 Key Performance Indicators 24 Principal Risks and Uncertainties 28 Corporate and Social Responsibility Corporate Governance 32 Corporate Governance Report 36 Board of Directors 38 Audit Committee Report 41 Nomination Committee Report 42 Letter from Chair of Remuneration
45 Directors Remuneration Report
62 Directors Report 65 Statement of Directors
Our Figures
Independent Auditors Report
74 Consolidated Income Statement 75 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 76 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 77 Consolidated Balance Sheet 78 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 79 Notes to the Consolidated Financial
120 Company Balance Sheet 121 Statement of Changes in Equity 122 Notes to the Company Financial
129 Financial Calendar and Shareholder
The Strategic Report on pages 2 to 31 has been approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Matt Armitage Chief Executive 2 October 2017 Inside your report
Statement
Read about our Chairmans highlights.
Our Business Model and Strategy Read about our business model and strategy for growth.
Strategy in Action Read more about how we continue to deliver against our strategic priorities.
Corporate and Social Responsibility Read more about our sustainable and responsible practice.
28 We manage our business in three distinct segments Our industryleading Strategic Marketing businesses have strong capabilities across three specialist highgrowth areas Digital Data and
Our Marketing Activation businesses which deliver marketing communications through a combination of print and instore marketing services complement this offering whilst our marketleading Books business represents an additional source of profit and cash generation as we continue to grow.
See outside flap for the full Group overview.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 01 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Strategic Marketing now contributing 42% of Group revenue 2016  39% and 75% of Adjusted operating profit with encouraging new project wins.
Significant progress in key strategic priorities of collaboration and internationalisation 209 clients currently working with more than one business across the Group a 39% increase compared to the previous year.
Nine Strategic Marketing businesses serving clients on an international basis representing over 39% of Strategic Marketing revenue 2016  37%.
Due to continued decline decisive action taken to improve performance of the two legacy segments  Marketing Activation and Books.
Further revenue growth of 13% in the Strategic Marketing segment with organic growth contributing 5%.
Revenue generated from the Groups overseas businesses increased from 53.7 million to 66.5 million representing 17% of Group revenues 2016  15%.
Net debt reduced by onethird to 54.6 million representing a net debt to Adjusted EBITDA ratio of 1.6 times 29 July 2016  2.0 times.
Operational highlights Financial highlights
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 01 Financial highlights Adjusted profit before tax and Adjusted basic earnings per share exclude Adjusting Items.
Adjusting Items comprise of redundancies empty property and restructuring costs impairments gain or loss on disposal of properties costs related to the acquisitions or setting up of new subsidiaries impairment or amortisation charges related to goodwill tangible and intangible assets contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration movements in deferred consideration and costs related to the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme.
Further details can be found in the Financial Review section.
Revenue
Total dividend per share Adjusted profit before tax Statutory loss before tax Adjusted basic earnings per share Statutory loss per share 30.4m 17.61p 02 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 connecting clients with different partners throughout the Group.
The strong performance of Strategic Marketing has offset the pressure on our Marketing Activation businesses which have contended with overcapacity poor margins and additional issues in the key sectors of retail and grocery for a number of years.
The Books division has also been affected by low margins and the loss of a major publishing contract.
We have previously outlined a strategic review for both of these segments to improve efficiencies and reduce costs.
This process is ongoing and updates will be provided in due course.
Governance
The CEO Matt Armitage and the CFO Brad Gray have worked tirelessly to tackle the issues in our Marketing Activation and Books segments.
Their diligence and calmness under pressure meant that shortterm considerations have not caused us to deviate from our strategic priorities.
We are grateful for their leadership and our goal is for the Group to be in a position for them to be able to focus on developing our successful businesses.
The Board takes its role in corporate governance of the Group very seriously implementing rigorous and robust systems to ensure we meet the high standards demanded by our investors and the regulators.
We also take very seriously the forthcoming regulatory changes that will affect our Data businesses in particular to that end we have appointed John Richmond as Data Protection Officer for the
John will oversee the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR compliance and lead our collective efforts to reduce risk brought about by these legal changes.
As for Brexit the future economic effects remain unclear.
Although the vast majority of our revenues come from the UK and US we continue to keep close scrutiny on political and fiscal events.
We have taken steps to create a culture of knowledge sharing.
Transfers between roles and businesses will continue to be offered to employees into the new financial year.
The longterm effect will be individual career opportunities and also greater J Schwan founder and CEO of Solstice is increasingly taking a leadership role in the mobile services sector.
We believe these changes create a greater opportunity for the businesses to work with each other offering a diverse range of expert services to our clients.
We hope that this will lead to longerterm relationships with clients.
There have already been some exciting new contracts not least within our mobile services companies.
Solstice and The App Business TAB continue to collaborate and thrive through sharing resource and working practices a model were encouraging businesses across the Group to adopt.
Over 200 clients buy services from more than one of our companies.
This is a great credit to the senior leaders of the individual businesses who recognise the importance of collaboration between our companies.
We have completed the first stage of a Board evaluation which is carried out every other year.
This review of our strategy and practices allows us to prioritise our efforts for growth.
We have agreed that our number one task is to achieve a more stable balance sheet allowing us to consider future acquisitions and international expansion from a stronger foundation.
Meanwhile I would like to pay tribute to the commitment of employees across the Group during an uncertain period.
I believe that their dedication to driving our highquality businesses puts us in an excellent position for growth.
We remain committed to each individual s health and safety whether that is in our offices factories or workshops in the UK and overseas.
We constantly review systems across all our facilities in the belief that everyone has a right to riskfree working conditions.
Finally Ben Gordon has decided to stand down from the Board at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting on 30 November 2017.
Ben has been a Director for more than four years and his extensive experience particularly in the retail and books sectors has made a major contribution to the Board s debates.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank Ben for his valuable contribution during his time as a Director.
Outlook
On behalf of the Board I am sorry about the share price difficulties arising during the last 18 months.
However we are clear about the best way forward.
We will continue to monitor changing economic conditions and amend our strategy accordingly.
All other things being equal I consider us to be well placed to achieve solid growth and deliver outstanding service to our clients allowing us to deliver increased shareholder value in the next financial year.
I look forward to working with the Board and all our businesses to make that happen.
Richard Stillwell
2 October 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
I consider us to be well placed to achieve solid growth and deliver outstanding service to our clients allowing us to deliver increased shareholder value in the next financial year.
Positive outlook It has been a challenging year at St Ives but we end it looking forward with optimism based on a muchimproved performance in the second half of the year as mentioned in our trading statement in August 2017.
Fullyear results were in line with market expectations and we now hope to have put a difficult period behind us.
In particular profitability of the Digital businesses within Strategic Marketing is driving the Group forward with growth running ahead of expectations.
There have been several changes of leadership within the segment as well as a restructuring of our Digital and Data businesses.
A new management team within Digital now oversees Amaze Realise and Branded3.
In Data Damian Coverdale s remit has grown to include Occam Amaze One and Bench alongside Response One.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 03 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 03 CASE STUDY Unilever and Amaze are working together to tell Unilevers powerful sustainability story.
Every year more than 23 million people from 92 countries visit the packaged goods giants global network of websites.
Unilevers sustainability content needs to be accessible to everyone everywhere from consumers to investors and nutritionists to journalists.
The companys Sustainable Living Report was supported by a growing volume of online content but the user experience had become fractured.
Content was deeply buried making it difficult to navigate and engage with relevant information.
A newsite It required consistent navigation and signposting to make complex information easy to access understand and share.
It also had to be rolled out across 47 international sites in 28 languages.
Amaze explored digital data insights across the network to understand visitors and their journeys and inform a strategy.
This involved conducting a twelve month onsite survey across all of Unilevers websites site against industry best practice to identify improvement areas and developing personae based on insights to test and improve target audience understanding.
In addition to creating a simpler and more coherent navigation system that adapts as the user travels deeper into the sustainability content Amaze has introduced new components that help to create a richer visual design with better signposting for the reader and improved content findability.
Other innovations include a onepage creative summary of the Sustainable Living Report interactive content shareable modules and shorter case studies showcasing Unilevers work on the ground. uplift in reading time.
Most tellingly of all 43% of consumers confirmed they would be more likely to buy a Unilever product after visiting the site.
UNVEILING UNILEVERS SUSTAINABILITY STORY
Find out more about Amaze site 04 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 04 STRATEGIC REPORT OUR BUSINESS MODEL AND STRATEGY Leading through a collaborative approach St Ives is an international Marketing Services Group.
We operate not as a single entity but as a group of marketleading businesses each with its own unique value proposition.
Our
We have built strong capabilities in our Strategic Marketing businesses and specifically in the highgrowth segments of Digital Data and
Our complementary Marketing Activation capability delivers our clients marketing communications through a combination of print and instore marketing services.
Our strategic focus is to invest in and further develop our Strategic Marketing businesses.
Where there is specific client demand we will evaluate opening offices in new territories.
Our longer term goal is to expand our footprint of Strategic Marketing businesses.
Our Marketing Activation businesses and our longstanding and marketleading Books production and distribution business represent an additional source of cash generation as we pursue this growth strategy.
We encourage our businesses to be innovative and forward thinking so that they are able to evolve and adapt to the changing business environment whilst delivering complex and sophisticated solutions.
This helps to deliver enduring client relationships out of which the Group can build longterm market strength and shareholder value.
We place great emphasis on nurturing the right corporate culture.
We deliberately operate a flat corporate structure that gives autonomy to individual management teams whilst encouraging and facilitating collaboration within the Group.
This is enhanced by having a Managing Director responsible for more than one subsidiary business such as in our Data segment.
A fundamental aspect of our business model is that all our companies operate as separate brands and businesses.
This gives them freedom to develop their own intellectual property and to become leading players within their markets.
The Groups role is to support the businesses with investment to accelerate growth and to facilitate collaboration so that our combined offering creates maximum synergy scalability and value for our clients.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 05 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 05
MARKETING
SERVICES GROUP MADE UP OF DYNAMIC
BUSINESSES
St Ives Provides investment to accelerate growth Supports and facilitates collaboration Offers autonomy Group businesses Operate as individual brands Offer complementary services Share common attributes culture ambition specialism BUSINESS MODEL St Ives offers autonomy and supports collaboration to accelerate growth
Read more on page 10
Read more on page 14
Read more on page 18 GROWTH DRIVERS Our strategy for growth is centred around three key priorities 06 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 action to reduce the cost base of both segments to reflect the new market realities.
Despite these issues and their impact on the results we are pleased to report encouraging underlying progress within our core Strategic Marketing segment.
This segment lies at the centre of our longterm growth strategy and now represents some 42% of Group revenues and 75% of Adjusted operating profit.
In particular we have seen important progress in our pursuit of organic growth here through a number of significant new wins coupled with increasing collaboration between our various businesses and further internationalisation.
STRATEGIC REPORT
CHIEF EXECUTIVES PERFORMANCE REVIEW
Performance
highlights
Group revenue of 393.2 million was 7% higher than the comparable period in the previous year bolstered by our Strategic Marketing segment which delivered growth of 13%.
Excluding the effects of acquisition and currency movements organic growth across the Group was 5%.
Revenue within our Books segment was 12% ahead of the previous year while revenue within our Marketing Activation segment was broadly in line with the previous year.
The Groups statutory loss before tax of 44.1 million 2016  loss of 5.7 million includes Adjusting Items of 68.2 million 2016  36.1 million of which 66.1 million relates to noncash items in the current period.
The noncash Adjusting Items include amortisation of acquired intangibles of 10.0 million an impairment charge of 33.1 million mainly in the Marketing Activation and Books segments and contingent consideration expense of 23.0 million.
Other Adjusting Items include costs related to the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme of 1.9 million and restructuring costs of 3.0 million offset by gain on disposal of properties of 2.8 million.
The Groups Adjusted profit before tax declined to 24.1 million 2016  30.4 million and Adjusted basic earnings per share decreased by 24% to 13.39 pence 2016  17.61 pence.
The year saw further growth in our Strategic Marketing segment despite a number of project cancellations and deferrals in the last quarter of the previous financial year which impacted revenue growth and operating margin during the first half of the 2017 financial year.
However we are encouraged by the progress that has been made in the second half of the year to replace the cancelled work and return the segment to its previous levels of organic growth and operating margin.
Balance Sheet Net debt as at 28 July 2017 was 54.6 million down from the 80.8 million as at 29 July 2016 representing a net debt
Overall it has been a challenging year for the Group which is reflected in the reported results for the period albeit with a much improved performance during the second half.
Our
The principal challenges remain in our legacy Marketing Activation and Books segments where despite their strong market positions increased competition continues to exert downward pressure on margins.
In response the Board has taken immediate We continue to make good progress with our collaboration agenda with over 200 of our clients currently working with more than one business across the Group.
Encouraging progress in Strategic
1.6 times 29 July 2016  2.0 times.
Further reducing the Groups indebtedness remains a priority for the Board.
Dividend
The Board has reviewed St Ives nearterm dividend policy to reflect the impact of the issues experienced in the Groups legacy businesses and the costs involved in the ongoing cost reduction initiatives.
In doing so it has balanced the importance of dividends to shareholders the importance of investing in the further organic growth of the Groups core Strategic Marketing segment and the strengthening of the balance sheet.
Against that background the Board has proposed a final dividend of 1.30 pence per share giving a fullyear dividend of 1.95 pence per share a decrease of 75% against last years fullyear dividend of 7.80 pence.
The Board will reevaluate the longerterm dividend policy in due course.
If approved by shareholders the final dividend of 1.30 pence will be paid on 18 December 2017 to the shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017 with an exdividend date of 23 November 2017.
Strategic priorities The Board remains confident in our longterm strategy for further growth which is built around the Groups Strategic Marketing segment and remains centred around three key priorities
We continue to make good progress with our collaboration agenda with over 200 of our clients currently working with more than one business across the Group a 39% increase compared with the 150 reported in the last financial year.
These include major brands such as Standard Life Paddy Power and Expedia.
In addition we continue to see an increase in demand for integrated solutions from clients within our Strategic Marketing segment which while aligning to our collaboration agenda has led us to review and evolve our operating model within the segment.
This has also resulted in us bringing a number of our Digital and Data businesses closer together.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 07 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 ensure that the cost base reflects the future level of volumes we now expect.
Overall we remain confident in the longterm growth strategy currently being pursued in Strategic Marketing and in the quality of our businesses within that segment as illustrated by the major international clients and contracts they continue to attract.
However we recognise the need to address decisively the effect that the legacy businesses are having on the Groups overall performance and on our ability to generate value for shareholders.
This together with further strengthening of our balance sheet remains a top priority for the Board looking forward.
Matt Armitage Chief Executive 2 October 2017
Many of our businesses now deliver international solutions for clients.
Most notably 39% of our Strategic Marketing revenue now comes from clients based outside the UK 2016  37% with nine businesses within this segment currently servicing clients on an international basis.
Our strategy for developing our overseas footprint remains client driven with new office openings only taking place in territories where we can identify lucrative clientled opportunities.
We will continue to be disciplined in our implementation of this strategy targeting opportunities in large markets or in those with the potential for significant and sustainable growth where offices are capable of generating appropriate returns within a reasonable period of time.
Acquisition
Given the recent challenges across the Group we are currently prioritising organic over acquisitive growth including leveraging the investments we have made in existing propositions and in new offices.
In the longerterm the acquisition of further complementary marketing services businesses that add value to our existing portfolio and operate in our chosen growth areas of Digital Data and Insight services will continue to be an important element of the growth strategy of our core Strategic Marketing segment.
Outlook
Trading across our Strategic Marketing segment has recovered and we have been encouraged by new projects being won from existing and new clients.
Our pipeline for the first half of the new financial year is very encouraging and we are excited by the opportunities that the increased collaboration between our businesses is generating.
While trading conditions within our Marketing Activation segment continue to be very challenging we have taken decisive action to increase efficiency and reduce costs and remain focussed on diversifying into other sectors.
Similarly within our Books business we have taken further steps to Tesco turned to mobile services provider The App Business TAB to respond to an everincreasing demand for convenience among London based grocery shoppers.
The answer was Tesco Now a service with no minimum basket order delivering groceries quickly and on demand.
Tesco had already conducted experiments to collect shopper data providing early insight for a discovery phase run by TABs strategy team.
Research focussed workshops and indepth shopper interviews clarified customer expectation objectives and predicted order time and location.
Service priorities were set for the app empowering the joint team to make leaner faster decisions.
With Tesco being such a strong brand it was essential for the app to behave and feel like an integrated channel.
TABs designers developed a sleek user interface that maintained the familiar Tesco brand experience on mobile.
In parallel Tesco created a sophisticated middleware layer optimising data for fast efficient delivery to mobile.
This was a prerequisite for a speedy modern intuitive mobile experience and also allowed Tesco Now to integrate with backend systems.
Communication and scheduling were critical.
TAB and Tesco worked side by side to build their respective components via a modular architecture.
This delivered acute flexibility ensuring Tesco Now can grow evolve and be maintained efficiently in the future.
Working alongside Tescos experts TABs test engineers conducted extensive usability and exploratory trials.
TAB took an innovative approach automating the core endtoend journeys that customers make through the app.
Short quick feedback loops embedded in the app will continue to provide data on emerging pain points and highlight areas of improvement for future releases.
TAB and Tescos mutual focus and dedication have been a decisive factor in the pilot projects success to date with further rollout planned.
DELIVERING MARKETLEADING CONVENIENCE FOR TESCO
Find out more about The App Business site CASE STUDY 08 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our Strategic Marketing segment represents 42% of Group revenue for the year 2016  39% and 75% of Group Adjusted operating profit.
We have seen further very encouraging progress within the Strategic Marketing segment which remains core to the Groups longterm growth strategy.
One of our key priorities was to replace the work lost in the last quarter of the previous financial year which resulted in a challenging first half for the segment.
However following several significant new client wins and contract renewals during the period including longterm agreements to be the digital partner of Rockwell Automation SoftBank and DuPont Pioneer we are pleased to have delivered a significant improvement in the performance of the segment in the second half of the financial year.
As a result of an increase in client demand for more integrated solutions we have continued to drive our collaboration agenda and to evolve our operating model accordingly.
We continue to focus on the disciplines of Digital Data and Insight albeit the strict distinctions between these disciplines are becoming less relevant as more integrated solutions are provided to clients.
During the year we announced a number of senior management changes within our Digital and Data businesses.
Three Digital businesses Amaze Realise and Branded3 are now under the responsibility of a single management team while we have also announced that our Data businesses Occam Response One Bench and Amaze One will be managed by a single team.
These changes will ensure that we offer a coherent proposition combined with the breadth and scale of services to support our clients expanding digital and data requirements.
Over the period our Data businesses have worked more closely together than ever both with each other and also with our Digital businesses where numerous joint propositions have been developed.
We see further opportunities for collaboration between our Digital and Data businesses as data continues to be the driving force behind successful digital marketing and transformation activities.
The shortterm priority within our Data businesses is to ensure that our offering is fully compliant with and able to benefit from the new General Data Protection Regulation GDPR which will apply from May 2018.
Synergies between Solstice our Chicagobased mobile and emerging technology business and The App Business TAB our similar UK business continue to result in both businesses sharing resources working practices growth frameworks and data.
The two are working together to develop innovative connected digital experiences using voice virtual reality and Internet of Things technology for clients.
New wins in the financial year have included projects for clients including Bosch and Electrolux.
Within our research consultancy Incite we have seen growth of both our UK and US businesses through a significant number of new client wins in the technology FMCG finance and pharma sectors while client spend and sentiment in Asia also improved in the second half of the financial year.
We continue to support our overseas offices in order to provide an international offering to clients  a growing number of Incites clients are serviced by more than one Incite office  and to drive longterm growth although this continues to affect shortterm profitability.
Our healthcare consultancy Hive has gained several major new clients during the period including Roche Leo Pharma Lundbeck Ipsen and Almirall.
The business has also expanded its offering and client base in the US delivering significant growth albeit from a low base through a number of client wins including Pfizer.
We see the US and further international expansion as a significant contributor to future growth for this business.
Segment overview STRATEGIC REPORT
CHIEF EXECUTIVES PERFORMANCE REVIEW CONTINUED
Strategic Marketing 2017 2016 m m Digital 93.0 71.2 Data 32.3 36.2 Insight 37.7 36.7 Strategic Marketing revenue 163.0 144.1 Strategic Marketing Adjusted operating profit Before Adjusting Items.
See note 7 on page 93.
Revenue Adjusted operating profit Our retail consultancy Pragma has undertaken a number of large advisory projects including strategic reviews and commercial due diligence of multinational consumer businesses.
A growing number of such projects involve collaboration with FSP  our specialist propertyconsulting firm particularly where catchment analysis or location planning forms a key part of the investment decision.
The progress outlined above underscores the quality of our individual Strategic Marketing businesses and the potential for further profitable growth that they offer both individually and more importantly through collaboration.
They offer differentiated value added services to clients and we are pleased that the segments growth and margin have returned to the levels achieved in previous years.
19.4m CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 09 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our Marketing Activation segment represents 39% of Group revenue for the year 2016  42% and 16% of Group Adjusted operating profit.
Trading conditions within this segment continue to be very challenging due in large part to the ongoing pressures within the grocery retail market.
While our expertise in grocery retail remains an important strength diversification of the client base beyond this sector continues to be a priority.
The segment enjoyed new wins and project extensions during the year for clients including Royal Mail Innocent Superdry AkzoNobel ESPA and OfficeTeam further supporting the segments planned diversification.
While we have been successful in securing this work it should be noted that Books Marketing Activation Before Adjusting Items.
See note 7 on page 93.
Our marketleading Books segment represents 19% 2016  19% of Group revenue for the year and 9% of Group Adjusted operating profit.
Revenue was 12% higher than the prior year at 76.5 million 2016  68.6 million.
Trading during the first half of the year was generally positive particularly during the pre Christmas period with sales of printed books in the UK up 5% on 2016 as reported by Nielsen.
As announced in February 2017 we were informed by HarperCollins that our contract for the production of monochrome books in the UK would not be renewed.
The contract ended on 30 June 2017.
As a result of the nonrenewal significant restructuring and cost reduction initiatives have been implemented.
We continue to adapt to suit the evolving needs of clients leveraging our wellinvested digital print technology to provide a broader product range greater capacity to support fast lead times and lower stockholding with a continued focus on extending supply chain solutions to reduce the overall cost of the books supply chain. competitive in all areas.
As a result over the period the management team has been focussed on protecting margins through driving efficiency improvements and cost reductions.
Moving forward our priority is on strategic growth opportunities in markets that value service and innovation and which further reduce the segments overreliance on grocery retail.
This will include delivering a wider portfolio of goods and services that cover the whole of the marketing operations sphere of brands and retailers.
We will also continue to focus on margin protection while differentiating our competitive offering through targeted investment in new service lines and further additional crosssales initiatives.
Before Adjusting Items.
See note 7 on page 93.
2017 2016 m m Marketing Activation revenue 153.7 154.8 Marketing Activation Adjusted operating profit 2017 2016 m m Books revenue 76.5 68.6 Books Adjusted operating profit Adjusted operating profit Adjusted operating profit 2017 153.7m 2016 154.8m Revenue Revenue 8.1mtel 76.5m 2016 68.6m 10 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY IN ACTION
Collaboration remains a key strategic pillar of St Ives overall strategy for growth.
By supporting partnerships and joint working practices between our businesses the Group allows them to organically build and share new skills and expertise while avoiding the need to enforce change.
The number of clients now working with more than one business across the Group is 209 compared to 150 in the previous year.
In particular we have made great strides in collaboration among our Digital businesses.
Appointing a new Digital board to oversee Realise Amaze and Branded3 has also provoked new partnerships.
Similarly the promotion of Response One Managing Director Damian Coverdale to now include responsibility for Amaze One Bench and Occam is a driver of growth in those companies but is also helping to foster new collaborations between Data and Digital teams.
Number of clients now working with more than one business across the Group CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 11 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Following the successful roll out of the website which Pizza Hut described as its digital flagship restaurant Amaze was tasked with transforming the brands Customer Relationship Management CRM.
Quick wins such as increasing visit frequency average order value and boosting appeal to millennials were the goal of the new strategy.
Amaze engaged Amaze One to improve Pizza Huts existing CRM communications but time was tight.
With deadlines pressing embedding an Amaze One team member within Pizza Huts campaign team proved vital not only to the success of the campaigns but to the success of the relationship.
Once in place the Amaze One team member got up to speed with the way of working fast.
He worked with the Pizza Hut team to optimise campaign set ups selections and delivery enhancing targeting and segmentation and making other improvement recommendations.
Pizza Hut were delighted with his contribution and one project was up and running within a day providing valuable specialist support for Amaze.
One key area of collaboration was in workshops involving the client team Amaze and Amaze One.
The purpose was to understand the current and planned data landscape and unlock the insight needed to formulate recommendations for immediate and potential improvements to the CRM programme.
Amaze and Amaze One are now using the workshop outcomes to develop recommendations to support communications planning activities develop early life customer journeys and identify potential CRM quick wins.
The collaboration between the St Ives businesses has so far proved extremely successful.
Having defined top line customer journeys they are now developing these further focusing on messaging creative General Data Protection Regulation GDPR compliance and more.
WORKING TOGETHER TO ENSURE PIZZA HUTS CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE CANT BE TOPPED Pizza Hut Find out more about
STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED Collaboration continued Our Digital businesses operate in a connected society with the positive outcome of fostering a culture of collaboration in these forwardthinking organisations.
The Groups strategic pillar of collaboration is firmly embedded in its Digital businesses.
This is now regarded as a core foundation for success in a market demanding pace agility and innovation.
We collaborate firstly in the interests of our clients but just as importantly in the interests of our people.
Its a central premise from which we derive our solutions and our ideas says Fiona Proudler Managing Director of Amaze and Realise.
Since the closer alignment of Amaze Realise and Branded3 there has been an accelerated move towards greater collaboration.
Clients want results.
They are singleminded in this Proudler continues.
Our role is to generate results by bringing together the experts that exist across our businesses and getting them to collaborate on the problem.
Where they sit on a group structure chart is not important to the client.
Its a sense of shared vision and values and a commitment to deliver that matter.
Not every project or brief requires this approach but increasingly the answer does lie in a blend of skills from a number of different teams and locations.
Proudler cites Standard Life Investments as a good example.
Having worked with Realise for more than a decade the global asset management company required specialist search marketing services.
Realise brought in Branded3 for this expertise but retained the overall relationship and oversight of service delivery.
Meanwhile
Zoetis Pharmaceuticals appointed Realise to deliver on its transformation agenda but also needed skills in data intelligence strategy and search engine optimisation which Amaze and Branded3 could deliver.
Lexus is another impressive example on a large scale adds
Weve brought together multiple teams from different disciplines to build its new European web platform strategy user experience content technical support data intelligence and more.
Its a great chance for the Group businesses to develop new workstreams together to deliver the best solution for our client.
Collaboration is a top priority for many business leaders today.
It can have tangible benefits for staff retention and motivation.
We want our people to thrive at work.
For them to do so we need to provide new stimuli.
Working with experts in other areas and more importantly from our Group businesses  creates increasing opportunities to learn and develop to see new ways of thinking and operating and to hear about different experiences and approaches Proudler explains.
With todays clients wanting a more integrated set of services aligned around their end consumers needs the reach of the wider Group becomes an even greater asset.
Clients want dataled decisionmaking so the Digital businesses collective ability to partner with the Data businesses led by CEO Damian Coverdale is now a real strength within the
The result is endtoend customer experiences that look good are built to last and deliver real value.
FIONA PROUDLER Managing Director of Amaze and Realise An example of Data and Digital collaboration is Amaze One a joint venture between Amaze and Response One.
Amaze One combines the best of both worlds a datadriven business rooted in digital creativity and audience understanding Proudler states.
In an increasingly global world international partnerships within the Group  such as client projects in the US  are firmly on Proudlers radar.
She concludes International collaboration creates a global capability and reach that we were not previously able to offer clients offering ever more powerful solutions by working with our talent in the US and further afield.
St Ives key differentiator is having strong individual businesses able to seamlessly and quickly extend specialist services to other Group companies.
That will only increase over time.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 13 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Data within St Ives  which includes Response One Bench Amaze One and Occam  has contributed major client wins in the financial year allowing the businesses to enter this period on a firm footing.
Central to the success are two key factors the appointment of Damian Coverdale as CEO to oversee all four businesses and drive a combined strategy and closer collaboration between the Data businesses.
Coverdale added his new remit to his existing role as Managing Director of Response One in 2017.
He says I play an active role in setting the strategy of the Data group and identifying investments that will deliver maximum return.
My shortterm focus is on structuring the business to capitalise on the significant capabilities we now house under one roof.
That means devising effective solutions for clients founded on a deep understanding of data analytics technology and creativity.
We offer a diverse range of services from complex marketing technology solutions through to innovative planning and creative but the thin red line that connects us is the intelligent application of data he adds.
Its common for working groups to seed ideas and knowledge across the Data businesses.
Were stronger as a combined business.
Mixeddiscipline crossbusiness teams are deployed.
For example Azzurri Group which owns brands including Ask and Zizzi works with Occam Response One Bench and Amaze One.
Meanwhile collaboration with the Groups Digital companies is gathering pace.
Senior representatives from Data and Digital meet quarterly to identify collaboration opportunities.
Coverdale continues With Amaze One the relationship between Data and Digital has never been stronger.
This is manifested in client activity such as TSB and Azzurri.
Were creating a unified business with a single vision a combined proposition and operating model.
Collaboration is a necessity not an opportunity.
Now the General Data Protection Regulation GDPR is on the horizon all Data agencies must deliver well thoughtout innovative and compliant propositions as well as bulletproof data management processes technology and strategic customer communications.
With an eye on the future Coverdale concludes We are in the unique position of having combined data technology compliance creative and planning expertise delivering against all core client issues.
Weve invested in automated machine learning solutions to drive realtime predictive content and targeting and were upskilling our team to harness new technology.
Businesses cant ignore changing legislation and consumers expectations around how their data is managed and used.
Change is critical.
DAMIAN COVERDALE CEO of Response One Bench Amaze One and Occam 14 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED
Following a flurry of activity in previous years the focus during the year has been on continuing to bed in newer companies such as Solstice and The App Business.
The strategy of further acquisitions remains however where these opportunities make strategic sense to add strength depth and scale to the Groups offering.
Organic growth will continue to be fundamental to future performance across our segments.
This is built on a strategy of broadening projects to involve wider teams and new services within individual businesses but also introducing clients to the expertise of partner companies across the Group.
Meanwhile a drive to build more retained longterm relationships is under way.
7% Yearonyear revenue growth CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 15 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A key growth driver for both Solstice and The App Business TAB is the synergies between the two operations and their ability to work together seamlessly.
Jointly the businesses count more than 450 mobility experts in their ranks across three continents.
Rob Evans cofounder of TAB explains We have a deep collaboration with Solstice.
Both organisations are remarkably well aligned in terms of skills culture ambition and delivery model.
The crossfertilisation of knowledge in working practices new technologies partnership arrangements with technology providers and organisational structure have contributed significantly to growth in both companies over the past year.
J Schwan CEO and founder of Solstice adds We blend resources with TAB so utilisation improves considerably for both businesses.
People have transferred temporarily and permanently.
They gain travel career and life experience while delivering a project and there are tangible business benefits too.
Work for Electrolux exemplifies this collaborative approach.
The global white goods business had a strong desire to begin connecting its products to provide nextgeneration services and sought a digital innovation partner.
Electrolux had a mobile application for its latest air conditioner and together with Solstice determined that voice control was a compelling platform for users  specifically onoff functionality and temperature.
Solstice recommended using Amazon Alexa and Google Home voice platforms and partnered with TAB to bring together voice development experts.
The team and Electrolux created a roadmap for voice experiences starting with a firstofitskind Amazon Alexa Smart Home Skill for the Frigidaire Gallery Cool Connect Smart Window Air
Phase two consisted of building a companion Google Assistant Action for use on Google Home for the same air conditioner.
Electrolux customers can now ask Alexa or Google Home to turn their air conditioner on increase the temperature set fan speeds and change modes.
CONNECTING TO DRIVE SMART APPLICATIONS FOR ELECTROLUX
Find out more about The App Business site Find out more about
STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED Acquisition continued When St Ives acquired Solstice in 2015 the Chicagobased business was firmly established as a mobile specialist.
Fastforward two years and the company has harnessed the full spectrum of digital innovation services to great effect.
Founder and CEO J Schwan speaks of a positive financial year just gone with significant revenue growth.
This performance has been consistent across Solstices three pillars reimagining digital customer interaction digital product and service innovation for clients and streamlining digital operations.
Schwan explains Dropping the mobile specialism is a big change for us.
To solve more pressing strategic problems we couldnt constrain ourselves to one channel.
Every organisation is rethinking what it gives its customers be that a consumer facing company considering experiences around the Internet of Things or a businessto business firm automating lowvalue tasks to free up staff for highervalue roles.
Weve broadened our focus to digital innovation and its paying off.
The change has been a catalyst to larger multichannel engagements allowing Solstice to continue to invest in meeting the challenges of new consumer and technology trends.
Were engineers not scientists continues Schwan.
We take platforms built by tech companies and adapt them to bring new capabilities to market.
He cites a push into conversational user experience tools and artificial intelligence as two prime examples of expanding Solstices services.
These are not novelty projects but significant investments by large companies to leverage artificial intelligence AI as an additional way to service customers while reducing internal costs.
Customers want to be able to interact with brands in a more natural way through their devices voice chat text messaging.
Solstice is also leading the way in helping vast organisations deal with legacy systems which can trap untapped value in databases.
Schwan says Were solving the problem with Pivotal a software partner to help businesses modernise development capabilities.
This is a highgrowth area for us too.
Were working on the whole stack which is another compelling reason for using Solstice to solve big problems.
J SCHWAN Founder and CEO of Solstice One key operational change has been the promotion of Kelly Manthey to Chief Strategy Officer allowing Schwan to spend time devising ways for the business to collaborate with others across the Group.
Weve been working much more closely with other Group businesses during the last year.
St Ives is very supportive and has provided the investment needed for the growth were achieving we couldnt have done that alone he concludes.
Find out more about
17 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 In a market flooded with new entrants mobile services provider The App Business TAB is finding theres no substitute for experience.
Seven years after launching and following its acquisition by St Ives in early 2016 the company boasts a marketleading range of capabilities.
Its this breadth of expertise that has led to some major client engagements Transport for London Tesco Kingfisher and Unilever to name just a few  and growth of more than 20% across the previous year.
Cofounder Rob Evans believes that the journey from startup to established business continues to help TAB stand out from the crowd.
He explains Weve been specialising in mobile strategy design and development for seven years.
We built a world class mobile capability of our own from the ground up.
The experience of doing that allows us to be more of a strategic partner than just a delivery partner for our clients.
As mobile becomes central to all organisations future prosperity they cant risk outsourcing all the work and knowledge to a third party.
They need to build some capability of their own and the unique experience of doing this for ourselves is both attractive and impossible to copy.
Evans cofounder Daniel Joseph further illustrates the differentiation enjoyed by TAB Our competitors are either large consultancies that have acquired ROB EVANS AND DANIEL JOSEPH Cofounders of The App Business and mashed together services or smaller companies that dont have our scale and experience.
Our
The founders believe mobility is now fundamental to all organisations from developing and overseeing customer relationships to managing and motivating staff.
Increasingly this is allowing TAB to build longer term relationships with clients as they seek to change for a mobile future.
Evans adds Were being asked to build digital capability alongside innovative products which leads to more interesting consultative work and a solid income base for us.
Many sectors have a need for TABs services but Joseph believes two in particular will be a focus for the current financial year.
He says Financial services is investing heavily in technology.
Many companies feel behind the curve with new banks like Monzo taking share.
We recently won two large clients in the sector and we believe that a combination of the Groups deep expertise and existing relationships combined with our specialist financial services mobile experience provides a huge opportunity.
Were similarly excited about leveraging retail and automotive relationships across the Group.
Find out more about The App Business site 18 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT STRATEGY IN ACTION CONTINUED
The Groups horizons continue to expand.
Strategic Marketing revenues from international client work rose to 39% in the most recently completed financial year increasing from 37% in the previous years results.
St Ives now boasts a truly international footprint with offices in New York Chicago San Francisco Buenos Aires Singapore and Shanghai supplementing our London headquarters and other locations across the UK.
This multiterritory presence means we are able to operate inmarket with a dedicated local team through a boots on the ground approach coordinated from a centralised hub.
This will give us a firm foundation for continued overseas growth as well as the ability to open new offices when client opportunities arise.
Wildlife Reserves Singapore WRS an organisation dedicated to the management of world leading zoological institutions was seeking to find ways to increase visitor numbers.
WRS four main attractions welcome more than 4.5 million people per year but the cost of maintaining and developing the reserves meant a revenue boost was required.
Digital engagement was one of the key pillars being explored to increase engagement and footfall.
However there was an issue around the lack of availability of insight detailing the current customer journey or the experience of tourists and local people who interacted with WRS.
Incite was engaged to help WRS understand more about peoples journeys when they visited an attraction.
The consultancy devised ethnographic walkalongs in which they accompanied both local residents and tourists from countries including China Indonesia Philippines India Malaysia and
This allowed the Incite team to fully immerse in the guest journey and discover peoples requirements while considering what was missing from the visitor experience.
The ethnographic study unveiled cultural and behavioural differences and was supplemented with group discussions to capture pre and postvisit nuances.
Incite was able to determine visitor personae along with clear opportunities to enhance the experience.
The work was followed by a workshop to devise creative ideas.
Thanks to Incites strategy WRS has identified opportunities across stakeholder teams including marketing digital retail sales education and research and development.
WALKING TOWARDS A BETTER VISITOR EXPERIENCE AT SINGAPORES WILDLIFE
Wildlife Reserves Singapore Find out more about Incite site CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 19 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Travel Counsellors a global network of more than 1600 independent travel experts provide a uniquely personal travel service.
In a technologyenabled world they face the challenge of delivering personalised communications with all the benefits of marketing technology and automation without sacrificing the personal feel of human interaction.
Response One was appointed to help Travel Counsellors with this challenge.
The data experts proposed a new strategy that promised a single customer view providing the clients marketing team with greater data visibility analytics allowing campaigns to be created based on deep customer insight a Customer Relationship Management CRM platform for running personalised triggered campaigns and CRM consultancy including a redesign of the customer journey and the development of concepts into powerful marketing campaigns.
Response One spent many hours building its understanding of Travel Counsellors its challenges and its data working as a true partner.
This allowed the project team to be fluid reacting to new challenges and ideas from the client.
For example the Preference Centre which began as a small project on the side developed into a cornerstone of the new marketing strategy.
Response One managed the design and build of the online form allowing customers to specify their travel preferences.
Data is now fed into the CRM platform where it influences campaigns and prompts information on individuals requirements to the brands customer advisers.
Following a successful launch in the UK Response One and Travel Counsellors are now rolling out the service to Australia Ireland The Netherlands South Africa and United Arab Emirates tailoring the systems and strategy to each market.
MAKING JOURNEYS TO REMEMBER WITH CENTRALISED CRM Travel Counsellors Find out more about Response One site 20 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Group prepares Adjusted results which in managements view reflect how the business is managed and show the performance in a manner consistent with the previous year.
Adjusted results exclude items such as costs related to restructuring activities acquisitions made in prior periods disposal of sites impairment charges movement in deferred consideration and St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme charges.
The Groups statutory loss before tax of 44.1 million 2016  5.7 million includes Adjusting Items of 68.2 million 2016  36.1 million of which 66.1 million relates to noncash items in the current period.
Net debt reduced by 26 million STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW
The analysis of Adjusting Items is set out in table B above.
A noncash impairment charge of 2.9 million was recorded in the Books segment against noncurrent assets and inventories due to the loss of the HarperCollins contract.
Impairment charges of 29.9 million were recorded against the goodwill and non current assets of businesses within the Marketing Activation segment.
This reflects the continued decline in operating profits and expected future growth rates resulting from lower promotional activity levels within the grocery retail sector.
In addition an impairment charge of 0.3 million was recorded against intangible assets of the Data businesses for obsolete software.
The Group recorded a total noncash impairment charge of 33.1 million during the period.
Further details can be found in note 7 on page 93.
Other noncash Adjusting Items include contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration of 15.6 million an increase in deferred consideration of 7.4 million and amortisation of acquired intangibles of 10.0 million.
Revenue from our Strategic Marketing segment increased by 13% as a result of both strong organic and acquisitive growth.
Overview
During a challenging year the Group delivered revenue growth of 7%.
Due to continued margin pressures within the legacy Marketing Activation and Books segments the Groups Adjusted operating profit fell from 33.3 million to 27.1 million.
However over this period the Board has worked to strengthen the Groups balance sheet by cutting the proposed dividend by 75% compared to the prior year and selling three surplus properties.
The Groups statutory results are set out in table A above.
A.
Statutory results 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 July 2017 29 July 2016 Revenue 393.2m 367.5m Statutory loss before interest and tax 40.4m 1.8m Statutory loss before tax 44.1m 5.7m Basic loss per share 30.40p 5.93p
Adjusting Items 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 July 2017 29 July 2016 m m Loss before tax 44.1 5.7 Add back Adjusting Items Profitloss on disposal of property plant and equipment 2.8 1.7 Amortisation of acquired intangibles 10.0 9.2 Expenses related to restructuring items 3.0 2.6 Impairment of goodwill and other assets 33.1 12.7 Costs associated with the acquisition and setup of subsidiaries  0.8 Contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration 15.6 8.2 Increasedecrease in deferred consideration 7.4 0.8 Administrative expenses related to St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme 1.9 1.7 Adjusted profit before tax
The 7% 25.6 million increase in revenue included organic constant currency growth of 4% acquisition growth of 2% and a 1% positive currency translation impact.
Over
9% in the second half.
Organic
Revenue generated from the Groups overseas business increased from 53.7 million to 66.5 million over the financial year representing 17% of Group revenues 2016  15%.
Revenue from our Strategic Marketing segment increased from 144.1 million to 163.0 million with organic growth contributing 5% acquisition growth of 4% and currency translation of 4%.
Compared to the comparative period last year first half organic revenue growth was subdued at 3% as the impact of the cancelled work in fourth quarter of FY16 took longer to replace than anticipated.
Conversely second half organic growth compared to CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 21 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 the comparative period was 13% as new clients and projects started to generate additional revenue.
Revenue from the Marketing Activation segment decreased marginally from 154.8 million to 153.7 million primarily as a result of reduced client spend within the retail grocery market.
The revenue impact was mitigated somewhat by the segments strategy of diversification into new areas such as food and leisure while the UK general election also provided a oneoff boost to revenue.
Revenue from the Books segment in contrast to recent years proved to be resilient during the financial year increasing by 12% from 68.6 million to 76.5 million.
However following the conclusion of our print and distribution contract with HarperCollins in June 2017 we expect the non renewal to result in a reduction of approximately 11 million in Group revenue and 3.5 million in Group Adjusted operating profit in the financial year ending 3 August 2018.
Adjusted gross profit margin and underlying profitability The Adjusted operating profit decreased from 33.3 million 9% of revenue to 27.1 million 7% of revenue.
Adjusted operating profit in the Strategic Marketing segment has increased from 19.4 million to 20.2 million with an operating margin of 12% 2016  13%.
This includes a full year contribution from The App Business TAB.
The first half contributed 6.2 million with a margin of 8% compared to the second half of 14.0 million at a margin of 16%.
The first half margin was detrimentally impacted by our decision to broadly maintain our skilled workforce following project cancellations and deferrals in the fourth quarter of the prior year in anticipation of new client and contract wins.
Second half margin improved as these new clients and contracts delivered revenue without the requirement to substantially increase manpower costs.
Adjusted operating profit in the Marketing Activation segment decreased from 8.1 million to 4.3 million with an operating margin of 3% 2016  5%.
Despite the actions taken to consolidate sites to aid further restructuring and client diversification margin has continued to be adversely impacted as the grocery retailers reduced their print spend.
Adjusted operating profit in the Books segment decreased from 5.8 million to 2.6 million with an operating margin of 3% 2016  9%.
Reduced run lengths and an increase in orders continued to impact margin.
The loss of the HarperCollins contract from 1 July 2017 has resulted in a number of headcount reductions and redundancy costs of 2.9 million which are recorded as Adjusting Items.
The restructuring was completed at the end of July 2017.
Acquisitions
Although no acquisitions were made during the year Solstice and TAB remain within their earnout periods.
Solstices final earnout period is the calendar year ending 31 December 2017 with TABs final period being 1 May 2017 to 30 April 2018.
TABs second deferred consideration which was dependent on incremental EBITDA has been agreed.
Subsequent to the year end a cash payment of 2.2 million and the issue of a loan note of 1.6 million were made to settle the deferred consideration.
The loan note is exercisable six months after issue.
The Group exercised its option to pay all of the deferred consideration in cash or loan notes rather than by the issuing of shares.
The Group has reassessed the likely extent of any further deferred consideration payments to the previous shareholders of Solstice and TAB.
The amount of deferred consideration payable based upon their budgets and latest forecasts is set out in table C above.
The expected timings of the cash element of the deferred consideration payments are detailed in table D above.
C.
Deferred consideration Cash Shares Total m m m Solstice 16.0 3.9 19.9
Payment timings 2018 2019 m m
Solstice
Tax
The total tax credit was 0.7 million 2016  charge of 2.4 million.
A number of Adjusting Items are not deductible for taxation purposes.
The Groups effective tax rate on the Adjusted profit before tax was 20.7% 2016  20.8% compared to the standard rate of tax of 24.0% 2016  22.7% for the Group.
The Adjusted tax charge was 5.0 million 2016  6.3 million.
A net income tax of 0.6 million 2016  4.3 million was paid in the UK which included payments of 3.3 million in respect of 2016 and 2017 financial periods partially offset by refunds of 2.7 million in respect of prior periods.
Dividend
The Board is recommending a final dividend of 1.30 pence per ordinary share 2016  5.45 pence giving a total dividend of 1.95 pence 2016  7.80 pence.
The dividend is covered 6.9 times by Adjusted earnings and will be paid on 18 December 2017 to shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017 with an exdividend date of 23 November 2017.
Pensions
The Group closed its Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme to new members in 2002 and ceased future accrual within the Scheme in 2008.
The Group accounts for post retirement benefits in accordance with IAS 19 Employee Benefits.
The Consolidated Balance Sheet reflects the net deficit on the Scheme at 28 July 2017 based on the market value of the assets at that date and the valuation of liabilities using AA nongilt bond yields.
On an IAS 19 basis the net deficit on the Scheme reduced to 16.0 million 2016  26.4 million before the related deferred tax asset.
The value of the plan assets increased to 354.5 million 2016  344.1 million.
Approximately 65% of the plan assets are invested in return seeking assets providing a higher level of return over the longer period.
Plan liabilities remained in line with the prior year at 370.5 million 2016  370.5 million.
In calculating the amount of plan liabilities an increase in the rate of inflation was offset by an increase in the discount rate and a fall in the rate of increase in life expectancy.
The Schemes actuarial valuation reviews determine any cash deficit payments by the Group.
The
Schemes triennial valuation was as at April 2016 and the Group has reached agreement with the Scheme Trustee for future funding levels.
The Group will make deficit funding contributions of 2.6 million per annum and a contribution of 0.4 million per annum 2016  0.4 million towards the costs of administration.
The total increased contribution level to 3.0 million will apply from April 2016 and as the funding level was maintained at 2.4 million until an agreement was reached the contribution in the year to 3 August 2018 will be 3.8 million and thereafter will revert to 3.0 million per annum.
The charge for the year for the Groups defined contribution schemes was 3.8 million 2016  3.9 million.
22 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Cash flow Cash generated from operations was 30.7 million 2016  23.7 million.
Total capital expenditure was as per table E below.
The Group disposed of three surplus properties during the year generating cash of 11.9 million 11.7 million net of all costs.
Two of the properties together generated net income of 1.0 million per annum and the third property was previously occupied by part of SP  our point of sale business.
Debt
The Groups revolving credit facility which expires on 23 March 2019 remains at 95.0 million and was supplemented by a term loan of 30.0 million.
Subsequent to the year end the Group reduced its term loan by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
Net debt decreased during the year from 80.8 million to 54.6 million.
At 28 July 2017 St Ives had drawn 80.2 million on its bank credit facility leaving an unutilised commitment of 44.8 million.
The Group had cash and cash equivalents of 25.7 million.
At 28 July 2017 the ratio of net debt to EBITDA before Adjusting Items was 1.61 times 2016  1.96 times as shown in table F below.
Brad Gray Chief Financial Officer 2 October 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL REVIEW CONTINUED
E.
Capital expenditure 2017 2016 m m Strategic Marketing 2.1 3.1 Marketing Activation 0.8 1.5 Books 0.6 3.0 Total 3.5 7.6
Gearing ratio 2017 2016 m m Adjusted operating profit 27.1 33.3 Depreciation and amortisation 6.8 7.9 EBITDA before Adjusting Items 33.9 41.2 Net debt 54.6 80.8 Net debt to EBITDA before Adjusting Items 1.61 1.96 TEAMING UP TO DRIVE MEMORABLE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCES FOR JAGUAR LAND ROVER Jaguar Land Rover Find out more about Occam site Jaguar Land Rover JLR needed a better understanding of its data to improve Customer Relationship Management CRM and offer premium customer experiences.
This meant integrating a new Systems Applications and Products SAP system so JLR asked St Ives data and technology experts at Occam to take the wheel.
A broad data selection approach across customer and prospecting segments hadnt worked for JLR.
A more nuanced strategy was needed to communicate key benefits around new product releases.
Occam was tasked to develop the SAP system integration that would maximise the companys use of data creating the premium alwayson CRM experience its customers expected.
Occam enlisted St Ives sister businesses Amaze One and Response One to turn 20 existing data systems into one version of the truth shaping JLRs data into a single customer view.
This consolidated approach makes understanding and engaging customers easier to implement.
The SAP implementation drove the launch of the Range Rover
The new platform allowed the partner agencies and JLR to operate core CRM principles required in data profiling and targeting to avoid audience cannibalisation which was a real risk.
Meanwhile by formulating a targeting landscape of the Velars exact positioning in the range as well as a focus on relevant customer journeys the agencies provided clear direction to JLR such as engagement profiling and postcampaign analysis.
More customers were converted from consideration to purchase among key target segments thanks to deep dives into the subtleties of audience profiling boosting engagement and sales.
JLRs CRM management and the definition of CRM strategy has changed for the better thanks to the SAP system.
For the first time JLR is working from a single customer view creating realtime simplicity efficiency and engagement from campaigns to invoicing.
This approach helped to define the strategic direction of vehicle launches in 2017 setting a template for future activity.
CASE STUDY CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 23 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Measuring our performance Group revenue Group Adjusted operating profit Strategic Marketing revenue
Operational
Collaboration
Collaboration within the Group is a key pillar of our organic growth strategy.
Clients working with more than one business in the Group rose from 150 to 209 over the course of the year.
Internationalisation
39% We have seen a growing contribution from our international operations over the past year with 39% of Strategic Marketing revenue coming from clients based outside of the UK.
Health and Safety We have seen a decrease from 472 to 201 in the total number of days staff were unable to work due to a workrelated accident.
See page 31.
Before Adjusting Items.
See note 7 on page 93.
Group revenue growth 7.0% Group Adjusted earnings per share Strategic Marketing Adjusted operating profit 20.2mtel 150 2017 393.2m 2016 367.6m 2017 7.0% 2016 7.0% 2017 13.39p 2016 17.61p 2017 20.2m 2016 19.4m 2017 27.1m 2016 33.3m 2017 163.0m 2016 144.1m 2017 39% 2016 37% Link to strategy key ALL GROWTH
COLLABORATION ACQUISITION INTERNATIONALISATIONtel 472 24 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Risk management
Reviewing risk across the Group STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES The Board is responsible for carrying out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those threatening its ability to achieve its business model strategic objectives solvency and liquidity.
On behalf of the Board the Audit Committee reviews the effectiveness of the Groups risk management processes.
The Groups risk management framework is discussed on page 34.
A Group Risk Register is reviewed and debated by the Board and Audit Committee twiceyearly abetted by a further open discussion on business risks at the Boards annual strategy day.
The Group Risk Register includes risks that are specific to St Ives plc the holding company such as corporate financing and risks escalated from the risk registers of individual subsidiaries where they might have a material effect on the Group as a whole.
Risks at subsidiary level are further considered by the Executive Directors during quarterly presentations by each operating business.
The presentations include an update on the forecast current market conditions strategic direction and a SWOT strengths weaknesses opportunities and threats analysis provided annually.
The longerterm viability of the Group has been assessed by the Board over a threeyear period during the year.
Details of this review are on page 63.
Risk appetite The Board has reviewed its risk appetite in different areas of the business during the year.
Risk appetite relates to the degree of risk the Group is willing to take or accept to achieve its strategic objectives.
It is a key consideration in decisionmaking across the Group and helps to define the mitigating activities required to manage risks.
The Board seeks to minimise health safety liquidity and reputational risks and thereby has a particularly low risk appetite in these areas.
Rigorous health and safety policies Risk rating key
MEDIUM
LOW
Risk level change key and procedures are in place and monitored by the Group Health Safety and Environmental Advisor.
For liquidity risk the Group has detailed procedures for monitoring headroom in its bank facility and the associated leverage and interest cover covenants.
The investments in material foreign subsidiaries are hedged by drawing on the Groups bank facility in the same foreign currency.
In other aspects such as the securing of longerterm contracts in parts of the Group to facilitate growth and scalability the Board takes a more balanced approach on risk taking.
This degree of appetite is aided by the level of experience gained by the Group within its operating segments and the Groups controls and processes such as its delegated authorities.
Thus the Board has accepted a managed risk profile whilst attempting to mitigate risks effectively as it seeks to deliver its strategic goals.
The risk appetite of the Group across its principal risks was not altered materially during the year after consideration by the
The Board will continue to assess its risk appetite annually in light of changes to the economic environment strategic progress and the performance of the businesses.
Principal Risks and
The table opposite details the Groups principal risks and the key mitigating activities in place to address them.
It is recognised that the Group is exposed to risks wider than those listed.
The risks disclosed are ones believed to have the greatest impact on the business at this point in time and which have been debated at recent Board or Audit Committee meetings.
A risk rating from low to high has been incorporated for both the inherent risks and the residual risks by considering both the impact and the likelihood of each risk.
The inherent risk rating is measured before taking into account mitigating actions whereas residual risk ratings are after these mitigations have been factored in.
The changes in the risk ratings from the Boards assessment in the prior year have been highlighted as well as any new key risks that have been added to the register during the year.
Where applicable the relevant growth drivers from the Groups business model see page 5 have been attributed to each principal risk.
Link to strategy key
ACQUISITION
INTERNATIONALISATION
HIGHER
LOWER
NO CHANGE NEW RISK CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 25 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RISK DESCRIPTION RISK RATING
CHANGE IN 2017 MITIGATING ACTIVITIES RISK RATING
Acquisition strategy Acquisitions may not fit in to the Groups strategic direction and may fail to deliver growth and successful integration as a result.
As businesses are acquired as part of the Groups strategic objectives to grow its Strategic Marketing segment it is fundamental to identify businesses that will enhance the Groups capabilities.
No acquisitions were made during the course of the year.
As a result and whilst acquisitions remain a strategic objective in the medium term the inherent risk rating is lower than in the prior year.
Stringent selection criteria followed for pursuing acquisitions that fit within the Groups strategy and culture.
Detailed due diligence undertaken using external advisers.
Board strategic reviews held annually to monitor progress against the business model and to as necessary refresh and adapt the Groups strategy for delivering growth.
Meetings held with senior management of the subsidiaries to determine crossselling opportunities.
Organic growth Organic growth including overseas expansion may not be pursued in the right sectors or territories.
Investing in the wrong sectors or territories could result in significant incremental costs to the Group.
Organic growth is a key strategic objective for the business and the risk factors involved are considered to be consistent with the prior year in view of those territories that have been targeted.
Regular discussion of strategy at Board meetings and meetings of representatives from the businesses to develop the Groups proposition growth opportunities and collaborative behaviour.
Detailed budgets and threeyear plans submitted to the Board for review.
Scalability
Strategic Marketing businesses may not have sufficient scale within their sectors to secure substantial customer contracts.
Achieving scalability is important within Digital Data and Insight in order to pursue a highgrowth strategy.
Whilst included as a risk achieving greater scalability is also an opportunity for the Group.
This risk has been added as a key risk to the Group during the year following discussion by the Board on driving further organic growth.
Whilst the residual risk has also been assessed as medium the Board is encouraged by the progress made within Digital during the second half of the year in achieving greater scalability and with the current trajectory.
Collaboration by businesses such as working on joint pitches.
Organic growth of businesses through recruitment drives and opening of new offices.
Bringing businesses closer together under a single senior management team such as in Data to achieve a greater combined scalable offering.
Investment in highgrowth Strategic Marketing businesses and greater focus on securing longerterm contracts.
Legacy businesses Issues arising within Marketing Activation and Books may distract or inhibit the Boards focus on its strategic objectives.
This could in the short term impact the growth within the Strategic Marketing segment if the Board encounters issues that emerge in other parts of the Group.
This risk rating has been increased following the further decline in Marketing Activation led by the grocery sector and the loss of the HarperCollins contract in Books.
Cost mitigation has been undertaken.
Consolidation of businesses and management within the Marketing Activation segment has created greater synergies with a senior management team across the segment that oversees each of the subsidiaries.
Diversification away from the grocery retail.
Further restructuring and cost mitigation initiatives.
26 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RISK DESCRIPTION RISK RATING
CHANGE IN 2017 MITIGATING ACTIVITIES RISK RATING
Economy
Challenging economic conditions may inhibit growth and create uncertainty.
Uncertainty in the economy largely associated with Brexit could result in marketing campaigns or projects being cancelled or deferred at short notice.
Whilst the Group does have longterm contracts with clients the level of spend is predominantly at the clients discretion rather than being derived from guaranteed sales volumes.
This risk rating was increased during the prior year due to the degree of uncertainty in the economy partly impacted by Brexit.
The Boards view is that the risk remains the same.
Diversification into markets that are capable of delivering profit growth with an increasing range of marketing companies.
Diversification through growth in the US and opportunities pursued to open overseas offices where client demand warrants it.
Investment in a wider range of services offered to clients.
A continual review of the Groups cost base.
Secure more longterm relationships and contracts.
Seek to increase market share by investing in sophisticated and targeted sales lead generation. where needed.
Clients
Competitive pressure that may result in the loss of a key client.
The Group has a variety of key clients in each of its three business segments.
Longterm relationships have been fostered with many of these clients over a number of years.
Whilst the financial impact of these key contracts has not increased the likelihood of the risk and hence the risk rating has risen due to a greater appetite seen for clients to carry out full tenders particularly in the Marketing Activation and Books segments.
Encourage collaborative behaviour across the Groups businesses and create a commitment to crossselling that will distinguish the Groups marketing offering from its competitors.
Achieve or exceed service level agreements with clients.
Broaden our capabilities providing marketing solutions in support of our clients marketing strategies.
Avoid overreliance on any single client.
Implement bespoke propositions for securing the renewal of key client contracts providing Group support where appropriate.
Conduct client satisfaction surveys.
Employees
A failure to attract develop and retain employees with the necessary talent for our businesses.
Retaining staff is a key priority for the Group as it continues to invest in new and existing serviceorientated businesses.
This risk rating is consistent with the prior year.
Implement appraisals and fulfil training needs where identified.
Develop a collaborative culture across the Groups businesses.
Operate discretionary share based incentive schemes and other benefits.
Pay part of consideration in shares to vendor directors of acquired businesses with lockin obligations.
STRATEGIC REPORT PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES CONTINUED Risk rating key
MEDIUM
LOW
Risk level change key
LEVEL
LOWER
NEW RISK Link to strategy key COLLABORATION ACQUISITION INTERNATIONALISATION CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 27 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 RISK DESCRIPTION RISK RATING
CHANGE IN 2017 MITIGATING ACTIVITIES RISK RATING
Financing
The Groups ability to trade may be compromised by lack of cash funds.
Being able to finance working capital and carry out operations is fundamental to the Group.
This inherent risk is consistent with prior years.
The bank facility runs up to 23 March 2019 further details are provided on page 104.
Following the January 2017 trading update the residual risk rating was increased from low to medium at the half year.
The risk has since been further mitigated by the disposal of two freehold properties for net proceeds totalling 9.8 million resulting in the leverage covenant reducing to 1.6 at the year end see page 112.
Conduct going concern reviews and longerterm viability assessments twice yearly.
Continually monitor the Groups performance against its banking covenants.
Undertake monthly reviews of working capital cash forecasts and headroom on banking covenants.
Periodically review the Groups financial KPIs with its bankers.
Pension Scheme The volatility of the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme deficit.
The volatility of the Schemes deficit is impacted by the inflation rate changes in the discount rate derived from gilt yields and changes in actuarial assumptions such as mortality.
This risk rating associated with the Schemes deficit remains high.
The deficit had increased in recent years primarily due to low interest rates.
As at 28 July 2017 the deficit has reduced due to a higher level of return on the Schemes assets.
Agree deficit recovery plan with the Pension Scheme Trustee.
Regularly engage the Trustee Directors in discussions on the Groups performance.
Manage possible Section 75 debts arising from business disposals and closures.
Contribute to discussions on the Schemes investment strategy.
Proactively seek to limit the growth in the pension liability.
Reputational
Exposure to reputational or financial damage due to accident unethical trading noncompliance with legislation or regulation or disputes.
Health and safety is a preeminent priority for the Board and is discussed at each Board meeting.
Other reputational risks need to be carefully managed as part of the Groups governance procedures.
This risk rating is consistent with the prior year reflecting the Boards assessment of the associated risk impact.
Ingrain robust health and safety culture throughout the Group supported by rigorous health and safety and environmental policies.
Monitor compliance measure performance and investigate major incidents.
Monitor changes in legislation and regulations take legal advice and provide training where necessary.
Place a strong emphasis on compliance with local taxation rules by embedding the Groups processes and procedures.
Apply the Groups policies on Ethical Trading Share Dealing Equal Opportunities Dignity at Work and Whistle blowing.
Have in place business continuity plans and a procedure for dealing with leaks of inside information.
Data security Exposure to reputational or financial damage due to corruption or theft of company owned or clientowned data or data breaches arising.
This includes the risk of loss of data sabotage or disruption to the business fraud reputation damage and possible fines.
This risk was added as a key risk for the Group in the prior year due to in part the new General Data Protection Regulation GDPR coming into effect in May 2018.
IT functions in place around the Group with responsibility to protect data e. firewalls restricted access.
Periodic reviews by Internal Audit utilising inhouse IT as well as specialist external consultants.
Cyber security and IT questionnaires completed periodically by subsidiaries to highlight areas of potential risk together with any mitigating actions performed in order to address this risk.
The appointment of a new Data Protection Officer for the Group to assist with the Group s GDPR compliance.
28 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The App Business Limited TAB St Ives UKbased mobile solutions company is passionate about promoting its employees wellbeing and accelerating their career progression.
Recently the business has focussed on addressing mental health awareness collaborating with mental health charity Mind in order to provide training to TABs HR team and line managers.
Halfday sessions facilitated by trained therapists gave attendees advice on how to support an employee or colleague who may be struggling with mental health along with useful tips on emotional intelligence and resilience in the workplace.
Additionally TAB is partnering with CALM  the Campaign Against Living Miserably  to raise 15000 in support of the charitys national Healthy Mind campaign.
CALM is dedicated to fighting depression and suicide amongst men.
Fundraising activities to date include weekly social events for staff film nights and sporting events including sponsored participation in Virgin Sports British 10k run and the organisation of an intercompany football tournament in London.
Working at the cutting edge of technology nurturing and developing the careers of its employees is critical to TABs continued growth.
With this in mind TAB has recently experimented with updating its approach to career development.
One such trial includes the Career Zoom Out  a programme that encourages every employee to use the Kata model to set and drive incremental steps to achieving their goals with line managers and mentors.
Brett Thornton Strategy Lead at TAB commented The Career Zoom Out pushed me to think holistically about my longterm aspirations and how I can achieve them at TAB.
The Kata framework provided an easy way to design and run small personal development experiments which are already paying dividends for me and for TAB.
Two further initiatives also support employees ongoing skills development.
The first is TAB Talks which invites leading external speakers in technology and product design to share their experience and latest thinking.
The second initiative supports onthejob learning with bitesized Lunch and Learn talks by staff.
These have included an Internet of Things workshop and a guide to iOS programming for nontechnical staff.
The business believes it is important to highlight and celebrate the thought and consideration that TAB employees put into their products every day.
To do this TAB has rolled out Product Stories a multidisciplinary initiative that sees the whole business come together in order to zoom Sustainable and responsible business into the powerful details and subtleties that turn a new product from good to great.
Product Stories cover everything from custom iconography and motion design through to system architecture and lowlevel optimisation.
TABs Strategic Marketing Lead Emily Maginess commented Product Stories surface and celebrate the craft and care that goes into the smallest detail.
These are details that users may never notice explicitly  but they affect how users feel and unlock value build trust and create delight in the mobile experience.
Its been a mindblowing reminder of the technical skill level and experience across every discipline of TAB and continues to deepen my sense of understanding and pride in the exceptional work we deliver.
TAB continues to explore innovative ways to increase the businesss corporate social responsibility and is committed to the welfare and ongoing development of its people.
TABS PASSIONATE APPROACH TO STAFF WELLBEING AND DEVELOPMENT Focus CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 29 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 religion or belief.
Employees who become disabled during their working life will be retained in employment wherever possible and will be given help with necessary rehabilitation and retraining.
Wherever practicable the Group will modify procedures or equipment so that full use can be made of an individual s ability.
The Group promotes staff wellbeing.
Initiatives
28 to inhouse yoga classes.
What we are doing The Group seeks to pay its employees competitive remuneration packages and incentives.
We operate a Dignity at Work Policy to ensure that the Group provides a working environment free from harassment and bullying and where employees do not behave in a manner which may be offensive to others.
By gender the Group s employees are made up of 2184 males and 1036 females 68% and 32% of employees respectively 2016  2217 and 1029 68% and 32% and its senior management is made up of 66 males and 32 females 67% and 33% of senior management respectively 2016  60 and 31 66% and 34%.
The Board is currently made up of six males 86% and one female 14%.
Employees are regularly consulted by local managers and kept informed of matters affecting them and the overall development of the Group.
This is supplemented by regular emails and other communications from the Chief Executive on how the Group is performing plans for the future and how individuals can contribute to achieving the Group s aims.
Details of the Group s pension schemes are set out in note 27 to the financial statements.
How we are performing We measure gender split overall within senior management and at Board level voluntary employee turnover sickness absence and absence from work due to accidents or workrelated illness.
Each subsidiary applies appraisal systems relevant to their business and identifies training needs and wellbeing initiatives as they arise.
Charitable donations In addition to focusing on one or two themes such as mental health or projects each year the Group favours making donations to a broad range of charities.
Donations are usually made in cash but may include the provision of time and materials to provide addedvalue services for charities.
What we are doing The Group supports charities in three ways by setting and then donating an annual budget to charities serving communities in which the Group operates or to which employees or clients have a particular affinity matching the total contribution made by the Chairman from foregoing a proportion of his fees and supporting fundraising events for charities nominated by employees.
How we are performing During the year the Group made donations of varying sums to a wide spectrum of charities including Dementia UK Mind a mental health charity Prostate Cancer UK the UNCF an American organisation that funds and promotes minority education Crisis UK the UK s national charity for homeless people the Back Up Trust which supports people with spinal cord injury the Children s Sleep Charity and the Lurie Children s Hospital in Chicago.
Shareholder relations The Board attaches considerable importance to maintaining good relationships with shareholders.
Effective twoway communication with institutional shareholders and analysts is established through regular presentations involving the Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer.
What we are doing The Board receives an investor relations report at each of its regular meetings.
The Chief Executive and the Chief Financial Officer conduct biannual analysts briefings and where appropriate meet with the Company s major shareholders to further explain the Group s investment proposition.
A number of major shareholders have accepted the opportunity to meet NonExecutive Directors.
The Group operates a Supplier Performance Management programme to highlight any areas of concern with key suppliers and to allow the supplier the opportunity to improve their scoring.
The
Group s policies and procedures are underpinned by a robust audit programme which considers the risk and scale of each supplier.
Visits to suppliers production facilities are also carried out periodically to provide further reassurance.
We are committed to ensuring that there is no slavery or human trafficking within our supply chains and we expect our suppliers to adhere to the Modern Slavery Act 2015 MSA.
We have undertaken steps as far as is reasonable and practicable to ensure the requirements of the MSA are implemented within our supply chain.
Our MSA statement can be found on our website at site Payment terms granted to clients are negotiated according to the amount of risk and the financial strength of the client concerned.
It is the Group s practice to agree payment terms with all suppliers which will be adhered to provided that they perform in accordance with the agreed terms.
It is a disciplinary offence for any employee to breach the Group s Anticorruption and Bribery Policy.
How we are performing The average creditor days outstanding at 28 July 2017 for the Group was 79 days 2016  86 days.
The Company Secretary maintains a Bribery Risk Register which is refreshed annually and then reviewed by the Board together with a report from the Head of Internal Audit and the Company Secretary on how the Group s Anti corruption and Bribery Policy has been applied during the year.
The
Internal Audit function will follow up on any highrisk areas identified from this exercise.
Our people All our employees are central to the Group s success.
As at 28 July 2017 we employed 3220 people including 2936 fulltime and 284 parttime employees.
The Group is an equal opportunities employer and no job applicant or employee receives less favourable treatment on the grounds of age disability sex sexual orientation marital or civil partner status race colour nationality Our relationships with stakeholders The Board recognises that in managing the Group s activities it has responsibilities to a broad range of stakeholders including our clients and suppliers our people the community and our shareholders.
It also understands the importance of corporate social responsibility and aims to ensure this is reflected in our business practices.
In this report we outline how we seek to meet the responsibilities mentioned above and measure the Group s performance now and in the future.
The Group has had no human rights issues that need to be disclosed for an understanding of the development performance or position of the Group s corporate and social responsibility.
Clients and suppliers In its dealings with clients and suppliers the Group adheres to an Ethical Trading Policy.
What we are doing All subsidiaries report on how they manage their relationships with key clients.
Their CEO or Managing Director as the case may be has signed up to the Group s Anti corruption and Bribery Policy which together with the Ethical Trading Policy is publicised to all employees.
The Group has circulated a new Sustainability Policy which was introduced during the year.
The Group is committed to building strong working relationships with its suppliers ensuring that they are aligned on quality delivery innovation risk and compliance.
The Group operates a rigorous onboarding process.
For principal suppliers this involves the completion of an indepth questionnaire covering financials conflicts of interest insurance and other relevant information.
They are also required to adhere to our security standards quality standards environmental standards and Anticorruption and Bribery Policy.
Suppliers are required to substantiate their insurances and accreditations where applicable and the Group is focussed on a continuous programme of procurement governance.
T o facilitate this the Group has invested in a suitable esourcing platform.
30 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 our CO e intensity measure which is grams of CO e per  of revenue.
The CO e emissions performance of each reporting segment  Strategic Marketing Marketing Activation and Books  are also disclosed.
The most significant finding is the improvement in the Group s intensity ratio which has fallen yearonyear by 15% from 40.0
33.9 CO e revenue.
This has been driven by two simultaneous factors the total revenues for the Group have increased by 7% from 2016 to 2017 and in the same period the total carbon emissions for the Group has fallen from 14.7 thousand tonnes of CO emissions to 13.3 a reduction of 9%.
The Group is producing less emissions per  of revenue than in 2016.
The most significant driver of change in the Group s energy profile can be found in electricity which comprises 79% of the carbon dioxide emitted by the Group.
This has fallen to 10511 tonnes of CO in 2017 from 11636 in 2016 a reduction of 10%.
This single change is responsible for the vast majority of the reduction in the Group s CO emissions.
There has also been a reduction in vehicle emissions the 2017 figure was 1059 tonnes of CO a reduction of 12% from 1208 in 2016 and in natural gas emissions the 2017 figure was 660 tonnes of CO a reduction of 5% from 693 in 2016.
These reductions in emissions are being driven by a combination of technological change in the Group s manufacturing sites reducing emissions and a portfoliolevel diversification away from manufacturing towards consultancy driving revenues.
At a segmental level Books electricity usage constitutes 60% of the Group s total electricity when measured in energy usage with almost all of this being driven by the site in Bungay.
The Bungay site has increased electricity consumption in kWh by 8% yearonyear to 21040999 kWh in 2017.
This increase is broadly in line with the revenue increase in Books during the year.
The Group s electricity consumption has increased by 6% to 29898070 kWh in 2017.
The impact of increased electricity consumption has been reduced by a significant change to the DEFRA electricity conversion factors from kWh to CO The improvements in energy efficiency measured in kWh revenue seen at Books demonstrate that the overall improvement to the energy intensity ratio observed in 2017 is not being driven solely by How we are performing The Company s top 20 shareholders hold approximately 72% 2016 68% of the Company s issued share capital.
Those which have an obligation to notify the Company of their voting interests are shown on page 63.
The Annual General Meeting is regarded as an opportunity to communicate directly with shareholders and the chairs of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees will each be available at the meeting to answer shareholders questions.
Environment
St Ives is committed to continuous improvement in its environmental performance and accepts that its responsibilities with regard to environmental protection rank equally in importance with other key business objectives.
The Board is responsible for setting the Group s Environmental Policy and publishes an Environmental Statement each year on its website at site What we are doing We continually monitor and work to reduce the Group s carbon emissions waste sent to landfill and water consumption.
What we report We report our CO e emissions in line with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Report Regulations 2013.
In doing so we have adopted the following methodology a An operational boundary approach has been applied on Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions in the UK using DEFRA s Standard Set conversion factors for 2017. similar sites in the Group.
Using this methodology the estimated emissions from these sites equate to 0.4% of the Group s total emissions. our operational control.
The
Board will however keep this under review.
How we are performing The charts show the Group s Scope 1 and Scope 2 CO e emissions and STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY CONTINUED Scope 1  emissions from activities owned or controlled by the Group 2.8 thousand tonnes 2016  3.1.
Scope 2  emissions associated with our consumption of purchased electricity heat steam and cooling 10.5 thousand tonnes 2016  11.6.
CO e intensity measure grams per  of revenue Group 33.9 2016  40.0 Strategic Marketing 4.0 2016  4.4 Marketing Activation 26.9 2016  31.5 Books 111.5 2016  133.9 Total Group carbon emissions thousand tonnes 13.3tt Marketing Activation carbon emissions thousand tonnes 4.1tt Total Group waste sent to landfill tonnes Total Group water consumption thousand cubic meters 47tm Books carbon emissions thousand tonnes 8.5tt Strategic Marketing carbon emissions thousand tonnes 0.7tt 2017 13.3tt 2016 14.7tt 4.1tt 4.9tt 2016 9.2tt 8.5tt 0.6tt 2017 0.7tttel 2016 58tm 47tm 3 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES 31 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 action taken as a result are also considered and Group initiatives for improving Health and Safety performance.
The Group operates a bespoke on line Health and Safety Management System for reporting accidents and near miss incidents hosting a Health and Safety document library and applying standards of accreditation to contractors who apply for consent to work at our sites.
A driver safety awareness programme is in place throughout the Group which is an important part of managing T actical Solutions motor vehicles which are driven by its field marketing staff.
How we are performing The total number of RIDDOR reportable accidents at the Group s sites for the year ended 28 July 2017 was four 2016  three.
Of the four RIDDOR reportable accidents three resulted in at least seven days absence each with the fourth injury being classified as a major injury with zero days lost which was a fracture to a small bone in an employee s hand at Clays Limited.
The total number of days lost from all accidents at work was 201 days 2016  472.
This represents a 57% improvement on last year.
All accidents resulted in a review of the causes and action was taken in order to reduce the likelihood of any further accidents arising.
The number of near miss events recorded during the year was 1095 2016  1410.
The Group continues to strive for improvement in its safety performance and is focussed on a safety culture shift via the deployment of behaviouralbased safety techniques whilst maintaining compliance with all statutory requirements.
A copy of the Group s Health and Safety Policy and performance data for 20162017 will be made available on the Group s website from 31 October 2017.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Matt Armitage Chief Executive 2 October 2017 changes in the DEFRA conversion factors but also by the Group s operational behaviour.
The Strategic Marketing segment shows a yearonyear increase in emissions.
This is due to inclusion of The App Business data this year.
All of the businesses in the Group s portfolio are included in this year s report.
T wo further charts display that the Group s waste sent to landfill and water consumption continues to fall.
This is attributable to a better and more accurate data capture of the waste to landfill and the fact that the Group no longer reports on the water consumption within the Strategic Marketing segment as the volumes had reached a position of immateriality.
The Group s Environmental Policy and further information about the Group s environmental performance during 20162017 can be viewed on its website from 31 October 2017.
Health and safety The Board regards the health and safety of the Group s employees while they are at work as a preeminent duty.
What we are doing The Board ensures that responsibilities for Health and Safety are properly assigned accepted and fulfilled within the organisation.
A Statement of the Board s approach to Health and Safety is publicised at all of the Group s sites and each subsidiary company s CEO or Managing Director as appropriate has formally acknowledged their role in ensuring that managers and employees at each site are adequately conversant with their legal duties under health and safety legislation.
The first item on the agenda for each parent Board meeting is to receive a report on Health and Safetyrelated KPIs selected to measure and manage the Group s Health and Safety performance which are as follows monthly and cumulative statistics on near misses all accidents all lost time accidents total days lost reportable accidents the Group s Accident Frequency Rate the Group s Injury Incidence Rate and a report on employment liability insurance claims the circumstances of any lost time accidents and reportable accidents and management St Ives digital marketing technology and commerce consultancy Amaze demonstrates an excellent example of the Groups proactive approach to its employees and to the community that surrounds it.
The business has established partnerships with local schools in order to reimagine how the industry and education work together and to narrow the digital skills gap between them.
One of these initiatives is girl. computer science.
The initiative was implemented at two schools during the past year which involved Amaze running four technical inhouse learning experiences at each establishment giving students an insight into opportunities offered by the sector and a career in computer science.
The project was a great success.
In total 50 out of 70 girls involved chose to take up computer science three times the amount of students who were originally considering the subject.
Alongside girl.
Amaze offers students at its partnering schools the chance to attend technical presentations consider live briefs and apply for placement opportunities in order to build greater experience of the technology sector.
Amaze partnered with The Manchester College to create Computer Science and Developing Digital Solutions Certified by Amaze a unique course that is directly relevant to the digital sector.
It gives students the opportunity to enhance their technical knowledge and work on live briefs.
The agency decides on the technologies for students enrolled on the course and provides a tailored masterclass every two months.
The course is a recognised BTEC National Extended Diploma and with content chosen by Amaze students become equipped with the most uptodate and relevant skills for a career in the industry.
Helen Watson Head of HR at Amaze said the new programme provides a challenging and highly rewarding course for students who have what it takes to be among the next generation of digital talent.
Amaze provides students with the opportunity to widen their range of practical design skills and increase their hands on experience required for becoming a digital innovator within the business via an internal training programme called the Academy.
It offers a fasttrack and disciplinespecific syllabus to equip graduates with skills they can use immediately.
The syllabus includes modules on a wide range of subjects such as content management systems ecommerce platforms and transactional systems.
2017 Academy programme have achieved permanent positions within Amaze and are greatly contributing towards the business.
AMAZES COMMITMENT TO NARROWING THE DIGITAL SKILLS GAP Focus 32 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT I am pleased to introduce our Corporate Governance Report for the 52 weeks ended 28 July 2017.
Richard Stillwell
The
Board
Audit Committee
Committee
Nomination
Committee
N R The Nomination Committee is responsible for reviewing the size structure and composition of the Board including the consideration of skills knowledge and experience of the Board members.
It also manages succession planning and selects potential new Board candidates when appropriate.
The Audit Committee is responsible for monitoring and reviewing the integrity of the financial reporting process including the appropriateness of any judgements and estimates taken in preparing the financial statements the internal and external audit functions and internal financial control.
The Remuneration Committee is responsible for determining the remuneration policy and the application of the policy in relation to the Executive Directors remuneration whilst supporting shareholder value and the delivery of the Groups strategic priorities.
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee 33 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 2 October 2017 Dear Shareholder The Board invests a significant amount of time on maintaining high standards of governance in recognition of the value that sound corporate governance can add to the success and sustainability of the Groups business.
I am pleased therefore to introduce our Corporate Governance Report for the 52 weeks ended 28 July 2017 the period which includes individual reports from the Chair of each of the Audit Committee Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee on pages 38 to 61.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND ITS MEMBERSHIP The Boards membership throughout the period and the Directors attendance at prearranged meetings of the Board is set out in the table on page 34.
The Board meets at regular intervals and is responsible to the shareholders for overall Group strategy acquisitions and divestments major capital projects risk and financial matters.
Senior executives within the Group make regular presentations to the Board to apprise the Directors on their markets and how they serve them growth opportunities and future challenges and how they propose to address them.
All Directors receive agendas and papers in advance of each meeting.
Following the meeting detailed minutes are recorded and actions followed up.
The Board is satisfied that it has an effective and appropriate balance of skills and experience and that throughout the period each of the Companys NonExecutive Directors was independent in character and free from any business or other relationship which could materially interfere with the exercise of his or her judgement.
In reaching this opinion the Board has carefully considered potential conflicts of interest and the balance between applying good practice and what it believes is in the shareholders best interests.
The NonExecutive Directors have a clear understanding of their roles and responsibilities which are appropriately documented.
The NonExecutive Directors met during the period without any Group executive being present.
Mike Butterworth fulfilled the role of Senior Independent Director.
The roles of Chairman and Chief Executive are separate and distinct and an appropriate division of responsibilities between the two has been set out in writing and approved by the Board.
The Chairman has responsibility for the management of the Board and related matters whilst the Chief Executive has responsibility for executive leadership of the Group and for strategy implementation and performance.
The Companys articles of association set out detailed provisions for the retirement of Directors and their reappointment or appointment at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting AGM.
Although not required under the UK Corporate Governance Code April 2016 the Code all of the Directors have voluntarily agreed to retire at the 2017 AGM and seek reelection except for Ben Gordon who gave notice of his intention to resign as NonExecutive Director of the Company with effect from the conclusion of the forthcoming AGM.
BOARD ACTIVITY During the period the Board carried out a review of matters reserved to it for decision.
The Executive Directors meet regularly with the Chief Executive Officers and Managing Directors of the subsidiaries within the Groups business segments to discuss performance major customers sales growth including cross selling opportunities risks knowledge sharing people issues and procurement initiatives.
All Directors have full and timely access to all relevant information needed to enable them to properly discharge their responsibilities and have unrestricted access to other executives within the business to discuss any matter of concern to them.
A procedure exists for Directors to seek independent professional advice in the furtherance of their duties and to be reimbursed their reasonable legal fees.
Each Director also has access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary.
The areas of focus for the Board during the period were Health and Safety performance trading performance the Groups strategic options and risk and governance and Board performance.
The Board also held an annual strategic review awayday at which inter alia presentations were received from the senior executives of five of the Groups Strategic Marketing businesses.
BOARD PERFORMANCE The Board confirms following a performance review that all of the Directors standing for reelection continue to perform effectively and demonstrate commitment to their roles.
The Board engaged The People Stuff a third party consultancy to facilitate a formal evaluation of the effectiveness of the Board.
As part of the process The People Stuff attended and observed a Board meeting and conducted onetoone interviews with the Directors and Company
Recommendations following the evaluation will be implemented during 20172018 and included improving the review around strategy and risks at Board meetings to achieve greater alignment and restructuring the Board meeting agenda to incorporate all important areas covered in meetings.
The Chairman has arranged onetoone interviews with each Director to discuss the findings of the evaluation of the effectiveness of the Board.
An evaluation of the Chairman was also carried out by the NonExecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director.
On appointment each Director receives an induction appropriate to their previous experience and their knowledge of the markets in which the Group operates.
34 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT CONTINUED BOARD COMMITTEES The Board is supported by Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
The Company Secretary acts as Secretary to all the Committees and each Committee has written terms of reference available on the Groups website site.
The Audit Committee Report on pages 38 to 40 discusses the principal activities conducted by the Committee during the period the significant matters which were considered and how the Committee addressed these issues.
A report on the work of the Nomination Committee is set out on page 41.
A statement from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee and the Directors Remuneration Report can be found on pages 42 to 61.
A third party consultancy The People Stuff as referred to on page 33 also carried out evaluations of the effectiveness of the Boards Committees during the period and the outcome in each case was that they continued to run well and were effectively chaired and supported.
This supplemented internal questionnaires sent to the Committees members during the period to assess Committee effectiveness.
The membership of each Committee throughout the period under review is set out in the aforementioned reports.
BOARD AND COMMITTEE ATTENDANCE In the opinion of the Board the Board and its Committees each met sufficiently frequently to properly discharge the responsibilities set out in their respective terms of reference.
Details of Directors attendance at Board and Committee meetings based on their maximum possible attendance during the period are as follows
Nomination Remuneration Board Committee Committee Committee Matt Armitage Mike Butterworth Senior Independent Director and Chair Audit Committee Ben Gordon Brad Gray Helen Stevenson Chair Remuneration Committee Richard Stillwell Chair Nomination Committee Nigel Pocklington This table only shows details of attendance at meetings in the prearranged annual meeting calendar.
Other adhoc meetings were held during the period.
Throughout the period at least three Independent NonExecutive Directors served on each of the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT The Group has in place a corporate reporting and risk management framework in compliance with Principle C3 of the Code after having due regard to the Financial Reporting Council Guidance.
The Board is responsible for the Groups system of internal control including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management and for reviewing its effectiveness.
A workable and realistic system can only be designed to manage and mitigate rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives safeguard the Groups assets against material loss and fairly report the Groups performance and position in line with relevant legislation regulation and best practice.
Therefore the system can only provide a reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
As part of the annual budget process each subsidiary is required to submit an analysis of strengths weaknesses opportunities and threats to the Board.
Once consolidated by the Groups finance function the Boards Executive Directors review this detail with senior managers of the subsidiaries and if necessary findings from this analysis will be elevated to Board level discussion for further consideration.
The Company puts in place a series of forecasting mechanisms in order to receive information from the businesses across the Group and to forecast as efficiently and effectively as possible.
Risks within the business relating to strategic market operational financial legislative regulatory contractual and reputational matters are referred to the Board as necessary and the Directors consider themselves collectively responsible for ensuring that these risks are suitably managed.
The Group recognises that taking and managing risks is inherent in any business and in delivering its strategy.
On pages 24 to 27 we set out the principal risks and uncertainties that have been identified from the reporting and risk management framework their possible impact on the business and what mitigating actions the Board has approved.
The Board carries out reviews twice per annum both from a topdown and bottomup perspective and considers the impact that these principal risks might have on the business and on the Groups ability to meet its strategic objectives.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The process by which the Board exercises control is by holding a nine scheduled Board meetings per annum b an annual Board strategy away day c regular meetings of senior management within each of the Strategic Marketing Marketing Activation and Books segments which are chaired by an Executive Director and d regular management meetings of each operation within these segments.
Risk is reported on and monitored with senior management and any new areas of significant risk to the businesses are then raised at the next meeting of the Board if considered appropriate.
The Groups Internal Audit function consists of two qualified accountants who as necessary draw on additional resource from professional services firms.
The work planned for the Internal Audit team to undertake is linked closely to the risk management framework with the internal audit plan designed to give assurance around key risk areas.
The Internal Audit function independently reviews the risk identification procedures implemented by management.
Internal Audit reviews subsidiary risk registers and ensures they are updated by the heads of finance in each business.
Verification of mitigation actions takes place on a cyclical basis as part of the annual audit cycle.
During the period the Internal Audit function performed work on the Groups internal controls reviewing the control environment and conducting testing of key controls.
Controls testing of procurement accounts payable payroll accounts receivable and credit control cycles took place at selected sites including work at the Groups Shared Services Centre which provides centralised accounts payable credit control and general ledger services to a number of the Groups companies.
High risk issues identified within audit reports together with corrective actions were considered in detail at the meetings of the Audit Committee.
Annual internal control questionnaires supplemented by a half year questionnaire are completed by all the Groups businesses and reviewed by the Head of Internal Audit and the Company Secretary.
Any inconsistencies with the Groups established corporate governance regimes which are identified are disclosed to the Audit Committee.
COMPLIANCE STATEMENT The Company is required to comply with the Code to the extent that it applies to smallcap companies or in the case of its provisions explain the reasons for noncompliance.
The Code can be read in full on the Financial Reporting Councils website www. rc. ite.
In the opinion of the Board the Company has throughout the period ended 28 July 2017 been in compliance with the Code.
This Corporate Governance Report together with the reports on pages 38 to 61 describes how the Board has applied the key areas contained in the Code and where appropriate where it has adopted elements of corporate governance good practice.
Approved by the Board of Directors and signed on its behalf by Richard Stillwell Chairman 36 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Member of the Audit Committee Member of the Remuneration Committee Member of the Nomination Committee Mike Butterworth Senior Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed 1 August 2010
Experience Mike Butterworth ACA served for eight years as Group Finance Director of Cookson Group plc a FTSE250 company until December 2012 when Cookson was demerged.
Previously Mike was Group Finance Director of Incepta Group plc for five years an international marketing and communications group prior to which he spent five years as Group Financial Controller at BBA Group plc the international aviation and materials technology group.
Mike is the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and chairs the Audit Committee.
Other roles Mike currently holds NonExecutive Directorships and is Chairman of the Audit Committee at Cambian Group plc Johnston Press plc and Stock Spirits Group plc.
Ben Gordon Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed 15 July 2013
Experience Ben spent nine years as Chief Executive of Mothercare plc until 2011 and the previous three years as Senior Vice President and Managing Director of Disney Store Europe and Asia Pacific.
Ben had previously held senior positions within WHSmith Group in the UK and USA and with LOreal S. in France and the UK.
Following his resignation Ben will be stepping down from the Board at the conclusion of the 2017 AGM.
Other roles Ben is a NonExecutive Director of Britvic plc and a Trustee of the Canal and River Trust.
Matt Armitage Chief Executive Appointed 1 August 2014
Experience Matt Armitage ACMA joined the Board on 3 September 2007 as CFO having previously worked for Tequila London Ltd  a belowtheline marketing services business owned by Omnicom Inc  for five years as their Finance Director.
Matt headed up the Groups Marketing Services businesses from March 2012 until his appointment as Chief Executive on 1 August 2014.
Prior to joining the Company Matt had held various financial management positions with companies operating in the telecommunications technology and fastmoving consumer goods industries including ten years with Unilever plc.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE BOARD OF DIRECTORS KEY TO COMMITTEES 37 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Brad Gray Chief Financial Officer Appointed 1 August 2014
Experience Brad Gray ACA joined the Group from Grant Thornton in 1988 and held a number of finance positions for the following six years.
In
1994 he was appointed Finance Director of the Groups magazine printing business before serving as its Deputy Managing Director until 2007.
Brad then continued in general management as Managing Director of SIMS and subsequently as the Groups Operations Director.
In 2010 he was appointed Corporate Development Director playing a key role in implementing the Groups acquisition strategy.
In 2012 Brads responsibilities were broadened to include the responsibilities of Deputy Finance Director.
He was appointed Chief Financial Officer on 1 August 2014.
Helen Stevenson Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed 1 May 2012
Experience Helen Stevenson was Chief Marketing Officer UK at Y ell Group plc from 2006 to 2012 and prior to this served as Lloyds TSB Group Marketing
Helen started her career with Mars Inc where she spent 19 years culminating in her role as European Marketing Director leading category strategy development across Europe.
Helen has in the past served as a NonExecutive Director on the main board of the Department of Work and Pensions.
Helen chairs the Remuneration Committee.
Other roles Helen currently holds NonExecutive Directorships with the Skipton Building Society Trinity Mirror plc and Shirlaws Group and serves on the Strategic Advisory Board of Henley Business School.
Richard Stillwell
Appointed 26 April 2011
Experience Richard Stillwell joined the Board on 1 September 2006 and was appointed Chairman of the Company on 26 April 2011.
Richard was Executive Vice President of ICI plc where he had held various posts for 26 years until 2000 before changing career and qualifying as a barrister.
More recently Richard has held NonExecutive Directorships at Penna Consulting plc Scott Bader Ltd TBI Ltd and Fibreweb plc as well as Albertis Motorways UK Ltd and Albertis Overseas UK Ltd.
Richard chairs the Nomination Committee.
Other roles Richard is currently a NonExecutive Director of Curo Group Albion Ltd a notforprofit company involved in the provision of housing and community services.
Nigel Pocklington Independent NonExecutive Director Appointed 1 June 2016
Experience Nigel held a variety of senior management positions within Expedia Inc. site from 2007 to 2016.
He spent a decade of his early career at Pearson plc including a period leading the digital operations of the Financial Times.
Other roles Nigel is Managing Director of Travelsupermarket and a member of the management team of Moneysupermarket plc.
38 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT The Audit Committees key role is to gain assurance around processes that support financial reporting including internal control risk management and legal and regulatory compliance together with financial reporting itself.
2 October 2017 Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present a report on the role of the Audit Committee and its activities during the period ended 28 July 2017.
CURRENT MEMBERSHIP I chair the Committee and bring recent and relevant financial experience to it having served as Chief Financial Officer of a FTSE250 company for eight years until December 2012.
Throughout the period under review and the current financial year to date the other members of the Committee were Ben Gordon Helen Stevenson and Nigel Pocklington.
The Audit Committee as a whole has competence relevant to the sector in which the Company operates.
In addition to the Committee members the Chairman the Executive Directors of the Board the Head of Internal Audit and the external audit partner are invited to attend each meeting.
The Committee members do however meet separately at least once a year with the external auditors and the Head of Internal Audit and I am in frequent contact with both the external audit partner and the Head of Internal Audit.
ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE The Committee carries out the functions required by DTR 7.1.3R of the UKLA Disclosure and Transparency Rules.
The principal responsibilities of the Committee are set out in the Committees terms of reference which are available from the Groups website site.
MAIN ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE IN 20162017 The Committee held three scheduled meetings in the period at which it agreed an internal audit plan considered reports from the Group s Head of Internal Audit monitored the quality of work performed by the Internal Audit function considered the appropriateness of the Group s risk management process including the results of an internal controls questionnaire completed by management within the Group s operating sites considered the reappointment of the external auditors their reports to the Committee their fees and their independence including an assessment of the appropriateness to conduct any nonaudit work ensured the integrity of the financial reporting process was upheld reviewed the Group s trading updates and Half Year Report prior to release considered significant accounting and reporting issues pertinent to the preparation of the Half Year Report and the Annual Report and Accounts analysed the effectiveness of the external audit by reviewing replies to questionnaires completed by management and Audit Committee members conducted a review of the Committee s effectiveness received the Group s updated bribery risk register and considered the effectiveness of recommendations by Internal Audit approved an updated Group policy on the provision of nonaudit services in alignment with new EU rules updated the Committee s terms of reference assisted the Board with the review of the Company s Business Risk Register considered an assessment of the Group s longerterm viability and received a report setting out the Going Concern review undertaken by management.
The Committee was satisfied with the effectiveness of the internal controls within the Group during the period with the exception of certain accounting controls in its Books business Clays Limited Clays which related to the quality and review of reconciliations covering inventory and certain accruals.
This issue was isolated to Clays and did not impact other businesses in the Group as our subsidiaries operate on a largely autonomous basis.
Remedies have been introduced to improve the controls environment at Clays.
These include further reviews of detailed reconciliations resource changes and greater segregation of duties due to more processes being performed by the Groups Shared Services Centre.
ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 During the period the Financial Reporting Council the FRC reviewed the Companys Annual Report and Accounts 2016.
No significant matters were noted but a number of minor points were raised around the requirement for additional disclosure of certain items in the financial statements which have been incorporated in this Annual Report.
The Committee also undertook a review and assessment of the Annual Report and Accounts 2017 the Annual Report in order to determine whether in its opinion the Annual Report for the period taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides shareholders with the information they need to assess the Groups position performance business model and strategy.
To provide additional support to the Board in making this assessment the Committee approved and monitored a detailed review and verification process of the Annual Report undertaken by management and provided confirmation to the Board that this process was both followed and effective.
In this respect the Committee received reports on the requirements of Provision C.1.1. in the opinion of the Committee complies with Provision C.1.1. reviewed the outcomes of reviews performed by the external auditors.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 SIGNIFICANT FINANCIAL MATTERS The Committee has assessed whether suitable accounting policies have been adopted and whether management has made appropriate estimates and judgements in respect of significant financial matters.
The Committee considered accounting papers which provided details on the main financial reporting judgements and classifications which were addressed as follows Significant matters considered How the Committee addressed these issues The assessment of the carrying value of goodwill 108.7 million property plant and equipment 26.2 million and intangible assets 42.8 million The Committee received reports in relation to the assessment of the carrying value of the goodwill for each cash generating unit CGU.
The Committee considered key judgements including the discount rate terminal growth rates and the future cash flow forecast of each CGU to which goodwill and investments are allocated based upon the projected financial plans approved by the Board.
The conclusion of the review and the key assumptions are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The Committee considered reports on the carrying value of acquired intangible assets where there were indicators of impairment such as loss of clients maintenance of proprietary techniques and trademarks.
The Committee also reviewed disclosures where a reasonably possible change indicated a material impairment.
During the period the Committee reviewed the impairment assessment of goodwill for Tactical Solutions UK Ltd and SP Group Ltd that was carried out by management and concluded that an impairment charge of 3.5 million and 21.1 million respectively was required.
An impairment charge of 2.8 million was recorded against the property plant and equipment of SP Group Ltd due to a continued decline in operating profits as a result of lower promotional activity levels within the grocery retail sector.
Following the loss of the HarperCollins contract an impairment charge of 2.9 million was made against the plant equipment and inventories in the Books segment.
An impairment charge of 0.3 million was made against intangible assets of the Data businesses for obsolete software.
Subsequent to the period end the Group was informed by Sainsburys that it would not renew its contract for the provision of marketing materials.
As a result an impairment charge of 2.5 million has been recorded against the goodwill of Service Graphics in the 20162017 financial period.
The above charges have been recorded as Adjusting Items in the Consolidated Income Statement note 7.
The classification of Adjusting Items 68.2 million The Board uses Adjusted results as the measure of the ongoing financial performance of the Groups businesses and excludes such items that are considered to distort the comparison of the trading performance of the Group and across its businesses.
The Audit Committee assessed the classification of these Adjusting Items according to their nature and value in line with ESMA Guidance APMs.
The Committee reviewed reports outlining the accounting policy on the classification of Adjusting Items and satisfied itself with the treatment applied.
The accounting policy on Adjusting Items can be found in note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
The valuation of the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme 16.0 million The valuation of the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme is judgemental mainly due to underlying assumptions used to determine the Schemes liability.
This includes assumptions such as the discount rate inflation and life expectancy of the Scheme members at the balance sheet date.
The Committee reviewed reports from management outlining the assumptions used and agreed with those assumptions as outlined in note 27.
The assumptions presented to the Audit Committee by management are underpinned by actuarial advice.
The Audit Committee considered the suitability of the actuary.
The key judgements relating to the assumptions used in accounting for deferred contingent consideration relating to prior year acquisitions 22.9 million Estimated deferredcontingent consideration is dependent upon the level of EBITDA achieved by the respective businesses.
The judgements largely relate to the assumptions used to derive the future EBITDA of the businesses which is based on the forecasts approved by the Board.
The Committee reviewed and assessed future forecasts and the value of deferred contingent consideration as disclosed in note 11.
GOING CONCERN The Committee received a report setting out the Going Concern review undertaken by management that forms the basis of the Boards going concern conclusion on pages 62 to 63.
VIABILITY
An overview of the viability process undertaken was provided to the Audit Committee and reviewed for completeness.
The viability evaluation was then provided to the Board to assist in its assessment of the Companys longerterm viability in order to make the statement found on page 63.
40 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AUDIT COMMITTEE REPORT CONTINUED EXTERNAL AUDITORS The external auditors appointment is reviewed regularly and in accordance with the Auditing Practices Board standards the Lead Audit Partner is rotated at least once every five years.
As such a new Lead Audit Partner for the external audit was appointed in 20162017.
A full tender process was last conducted by the Company in 2009 which resulted in Deloitte LLP Deloitte being reappointed.
In line with the new EU rules on external audit another tender will take place by 2019 and the external auditor will be rotated by the end of the 20192020 financial year.
The Board continues to monitor any legal or regulatory changes proposed or made in the UK which affect small cap companies.
The Committees policy for determining the level of fees for nonaudit services that the external auditor can provide which was updated during the period to reflect the new FRC EU PIE rules is as follows a certain types of engagement shall not be undertaken by the external auditor including services related to the internal audit function and tax b relevant ethical guidance shall be taken into account regarding any proposal to request the Groups external auditors to perform nonaudit services c cumulative nonaudit fees from 20192020 onwards are capped at 70% of the average of the audit fees for the Group for the preceding three year period d subject to e below the Board shall appoint whoever in its opinion will provide the most cost effective and timely service for undertaking a particular project and e the Chief Financial Officer is to consult with the Chairman of the Audit Committee in advance of any nonaudit work in excess of 25000 per project that the external auditor may be invited to perform for the Group so that an agreed view might be taken on whether to put the project out to tender.
The Committee has satisfied itself that this policy has been appropriately applied.
The split between audit and nonaudit fees for the period is disclosed in note 5 to the consolidated financial statements.
The nonaudit fees were 140000 for the period for services relating to corporate restructuring and were not considered by the Committee to compromise the objectivity and independence of Deloitte.
The Committee agreed to select Deloitte to provide these services due to their inherent knowledge of the Group.
The Committee also considered the robustness of Deloittes safeguards and procedures to counter threats or perceived threats to their objectivity the application of their independence policies and their adherence to the Ethical Standards published by the Auditing Practices
In all these respects the Committee was satisfied with Deloittes objectivity and independence.
The Committee is satisfied that there are no relationships between the Company and Deloitte its employees or its affiliates that may reasonably be thought to impair the auditors objectivity and independence.
Private meetings are held with Deloitte to ensure that no restrictions are placed on the scope of their audit and to offer the external auditor opportunities to discuss any items the auditors did not wish to raise with the executives being present.
A review of the effectiveness of the external audit for the 20152016 year end was performed during the period which involved the completion of two questionnaires containing assertions of best practice  one by each member of the Audit Committee containing ten assertions  and another completed by the management of each subsidiary containing 15 assertions.
The areas covered included the audit team expertise and experience the audit planning process audit execution communication adding value responsiveness reporting timeliness and focus.
Participants were requested to score each assertion between one and four to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement.
The results were then reviewed by the Audit Committee and Chief Financial Officer and discussed with the external auditors.
The completed questionnaires showed in aggregate that the external audit had achieved a clear majority of the assertions in each area of focus.
Areas of improvement that had been noted were addressed at the Audit Committee meeting during the period and continue to be implemented throughout the current external audit.
In the absence of any adverse findings as to the objectivity and independence and effectiveness of Deloitte the Committee has recommended to the Board that Deloitte be reappointed for 20172018.
Mike Butterworth Chair of the Audit Committee 41 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE NOMINATION COMMITTEE REPORT The Nomination Committees key role is to lead the process for Board appointments and make recommendations to the Board.
2 October 2017 Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Nomination Committee I am pleased to report to you on the work it undertook during the period ended 28 July 2017.
CURRENT MEMBERSHIP The Board has decided that a Nomination Committee consisting of all the serving Board Directors is workable given the size of the Board and indeed desirable.
All Directors are given a voice in deciding on the method for reaching a shortlist nominating and deciding on the selection of new members of the Board.
It is important to a small board such as ours that the process of selection is right to suit the particular circumstances and that any decision made to nominate a new member of the Board is unanimous.
Directors interview all candidates for appointments to Executive Director and NonExecutive Director positions.
The Board is aware of the increasing focus on the composition of boards and the emphasis on diversity.
The Board agrees that diversity within the boardroom is important to the success of the business and the Committee seeks to reflect this view.
The Board however does not feel it is appropriate to set numerical targets for diversity in the boardroom or in particular to set a percentage of women it aspires to having on the Board.
The Groups policy on affording equal opportunities to all employees and suitable applicants extends to the Board.
Anyone appointed to the Board will however be selected on merit against objective criteria taking into account the skills expertise and experience of the candidates.
When we look outside the Group to recruit we make clear that we are keen to consider candidates from all parts of the community in terms of gender ethnicity nationality disability age sex sexual orientation marital or civil partner status race colour religion or belief.
We intend to continue with this policy.
Our disclosure on diversity generally can be found on page 29 within the Strategic Report.
ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE The principal role of the Committee is to consider and recommend to the Board candidates who are appropriate for appointment as Executive or NonExecutive Directors so as to maintain an appropriate balance of skills and experience represented on the Board and ensure that the Board is refreshed as appropriate.
MAIN ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMITTEE IN 20162017 During the period the Committees main tasks were to consider the composition of the Board and Board level succession planning.
In considering the composition of the Board the Committee has recognised the continued focus on the growth of its Strategic Marketing companies as part of the Groups strategy.
The makeup of the business will continue to develop through organic growth investment in the acquired businesses and in the longer term future acquisitions.
During the period the Board considered its ongoing succession planning and continues to assess the suitability of the makeup of the Board in light of the Groups overall strategy.
The Committee discharged its other principal duties by ensuring that an appropriate review of Board Committee and Director effectiveness was undertaken during the period considering whether the NonExecutive Directors were sufficiently independent for corporate governance purposes deciding on which Directors should retire at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting and approving the division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Chief Executive.
Richard Stillwell Chair of the Nomination Committee 42 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE LETTER FROM CHAIR OF REMUNERATION COMMITTEE I am pleased to present our Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 28 July 2017.
Helen Stevenson Chair of the Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committees key role is to set the broad policy for remunerating the Executive Directors and recommend a remuneration policy which supports the creation of value for shareholders and the delivery of the Groups strategic priorities.
The
Committee is mindful of the intense scrutiny around executive remuneration and seeks to adopt best practice where appropriate taking into account its position in the small cap sector.
2 October 2017 Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Remuneration Committee the Committee I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 28 July 2017 covering the remuneration of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
This report is split into three parts this Annual Statement a Policy Report and an Annual Report on Remuneration.
As this is the third year of operating our existing remuneration policy we shall be asking our shareholders to approve a revised policy at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting AGM in addition to the usual advisory vote on the Annual Report on Remuneration.
The background to and the reasons for the proposed amendments are set out opposite.
REVIEW OF REMUNERATION POLICY Our current remuneration policy was approved by shareholders at the 2014 AGM receiving 99.5% support.
In line with the relevant reporting requirements and as foreshadowed in last years report the threeyear term of the policy will shortly expire and therefore the Committee has taken the opportunity to review our remuneration arrangements to ensure they remain fit for purpose.
PERFORMANCE AND REMUNERATION FOR 20162017 20162017 annual bonus payout of 0% 2014 LTIP award vesting 0% IMPLEMENTATION FOR 20172018 0% salary increase bonus of up to 100% salary based 75% on Adjusted PBT and 25% on strategicpersonal objectives LTIP vesting 70% on Absolute TSR and 30% on growth in underlying Adjusted operating profit of Strategic Marketing LTIP grants at 90% of salary LTIP vesting underpinned by Committee discretion LTIP holding period of two years post vesting SUMMARY FOR EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS At a glance 43 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Committee concluded that the current remuneration structure continues to be largely appropriate but is proposing a number of changes to performance measurement for future shortterm and longterm incentives to aid simplicity enhance motivational effectiveness and better support our strategy.
In finalising these proposals the Committee consulted with and has taken on board feedback from institutional shareholders holding over 50% of the Companys issued share capital and also shared its proposal with two investor representative bodies the Investment Association and the ISS.
SUMMARY OF PROPOSED CHANGES FOR 20172018 Annual bonus No changes are proposed to the existing policy and 20172018 bonuses will continue to be based 75% on financial performance and 25% on strategicpersonal objectives.
It is intended that the financial element for 20172018 bonuses will be based on Adjusted PBT in place of Adjusted EPS to ensure we are able to set robust profit targets which are transparent and motivational during a period when the number of shares outstanding could vary due to the potential issuance of shares to fund acquisition related earnout payments.
There is no intention to change the degree of stretch in the targets by using PBT instead of EPS.
Additionally the Committee would note that this is intended as a temporary change and expects to revert to EPS over the longerterm.
Strategicpersonal objectives are aligned with priorities already communicated to shareholders including the strengthening of the balance sheet and profitable growth from our Strategic Marketing segment.
As always we will review again the performance measures in advance of the next financial year to ensure these remain relevant to the business.
Any bonus earned over 50% of salary will continue to be deferred in Company shares for two years and be subject to malus provisions.
LTIP
The Committee proposes to Introduce a two year holding period following LTIP vesting in line with emerging best practice in remuneration policies for 20172018 grants onwards to Executive Directors.
In total this results in a five year combined vesting and holding period.
Add flexibility to vary the performance measures for future cycles.
The majority of the LTIP will continue to be linked to financial andor TSR performance.
LTIP grants in recent years vest after three years based 50% on threeyear relative TSR 25% on Adjusted EPS and 25% on the percentage of Group Adjusted operating profit arising from the Strategic Marketing businesses.
For 20172018 awards having taken on board feedback from shareholders during our recent consultation the Committee intends to link vesting 70% to Absolute TSR and 30% to growth in Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing with overall vesting underpinned by Committee discretion.
This change in measures is intended to simplify the plan and support the Groups strategy whilst recognising the preference expressed by a majority of shareholders to use at least two performance measures.
While the Committee considered Relative TSR it felt that on balance Absolute TSR would be more motivational simpler and provides direct shareholder alignment given the lower share price.
LTIP vesting is underpinned by Committee discretion such that for any shares to vest the Committee must be satisfied with the underlying performance of the business.
In making this assessment the Committee will take into account factors such as the strength of the balance sheet quality of earnings etc.
LTIP awards are subject to a malus provision and clawback for a period of two years after vesting.
Other elements Our policy in relation to other areas of remuneration will remain unchanged and will operate consistently with previous years.
PERFORMANCE AND REWARD FOR 20162017 The Groups overall results for the year were impacted by challenges faced in our legacy businesses however further progress was made in the strategy to grow our Strategic Marketing segment with organic growth having been achieved.
There exists further opportunity for our businesses to work closer together through collaboration following the senior management changes made within Digital and Data.
Targets for Executive Directors 20162017 bonuses were based 75% on Adjusted EPS and 25% on strategicpersonal objectives.
Neither the EPS condition nor the stretching strategicpersonal objectives were achieved which warranted no bonus for either Executive Director.
A summary of actual performance against the targets set is included on page 55.
The Annual Report on Remuneration also gives details of LTIP awards granted in November 2014.
The Companys 20162017 Adjusted basic EPS performance which acts both as a primary performance condition and as an underpin to the Relative Total Shareholder Return element did not meet the relevant targets and the awards will therefore lapse.
Further details are provided on page 55.
44 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE LETTER FROM CHAIR OF REMUNERATION COMMITTEE CONTINUED IMPLEMENTATION OF REMUNERATION POLICY FOR 20172018 Executive Director salaries remain the same for 20172018.
The annual bonus will operate on a similar basis as in 20162017.
Maximum bonus opportunities remain at 100% of salary with any amount earned over 50% of salary continuing to be deferred in shares for two years and subject to malus provisions.
As outlined above 75% of the bonus will be based on Adjusted PBT with the remaining 25% based on the achievement of key strategicpersonal objectives.
As with the 20152016 financial year LTIP grant sizes will be reduced from 100% of salary to 90% in light of the lower share price.
Vesting will be subject to stretching targets underpinned by Committee discretion.
Further details of the implementation of our Remuneration Policy for 20172018 are provided on page 58.
We continue to value any feedback from shareholders and hope to receive your support at the forthcoming AGM.
Helen Stevenson Chair of the Remuneration Committee 45 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
This Directors Remuneration Report has been prepared in accordance with The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Amendment Regulations 2013.
The Report is also in accordance with the requirements of the Listing Rules and the relevant recommendations contained within the UK Corporate Governance Code April 2016 the Code relating to Directors remuneration and takes into account the views of our major shareholders.
The legislation requires the auditors to report to the Companys members on certain disclosures contained in this report and to state whether in their opinion that part of the report has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
The sections between pages 45 and 61 which are subject to audit have been highlighted.
POLICY REPORT Directors Remuneration Policy This section of the report sets out the Remuneration Policy for Executive and NonExecutive Directors which shareholders will be asked to approve at the Annual General Meeting AGM on 30 November 2017.
The Committee intends that the policy will come into effect from the date of the AGM and is intended to apply for a period of three years.
Overview of Remuneration Policy The Committees policy for the remuneration of the Companys Executive Directors is that it should be structured so as to attract and retain executives of a high calibre with the skills and experience necessary to develop the Company successfully.
It aims to recommend strategies which support the creation of longterm value for shareholders and reflect and support the delivery of the Companys strategic priorities while taking due account of market best practice.
When determining levels of remuneration the Committee periodically reviews the remuneration practices adopted by appropriate comparator companies both in the market generally and in the same business sector as the Company.
The Committee believes that a significant portion of the remuneration package of senior executives should be linked to performance while ensuring that an appropriate balance is struck between i fixed and variable pay ii shortterm and longterm variable pay and iii the delivery of rewards in cash and shares.
The Committee will regularly review the Companys remuneration policies to ensure that these polices neither encourage nor reward inappropriate operational risktaking that may be to the detriment of shareholders interests and that these remuneration policies are therefore compatible with the Companys general risk policies and systems.
The table below sets out the key aspects of the Companys remuneration policy for Executive Directors that is intended to operate during the current financial year and in future years.
A description of how the Company intends to implement the policy for the 20172018 financial year is set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on page 58.
Revised Executive Director Remuneration Policy Table As described earlier in this report the Committee undertook a review of the Companys remuneration policy in 2017 and is proposing some minor changes to the Policy to introduce a two year holding period on vested LTIP shares and add flexibility to vary the performance measures for future LTIP cycles.
These changes have been introduced to reflect the changing nature of the Group in line with its strategic objectives with the proviso that the majority of any LTIP award will continue to be linked to financial andor TSR performance.
The Policy for other elements of remuneration remains unchanged.
Basic salary Purpose and link to strategy To provide competitive fixed remuneration that will attract and retain key employees of a high calibre and which will reflect their experience and position in the Company.
Operation Normally reviewed annually with increases effective from 1 August salaries are paid monthly.
In setting salaries the Committee takes into account the following capability of the individual any changes in responsibility increases awarded across the workforce external economic factors such as inflation and benchmarking for similar roles in comparable organisations.
Maximum potential value Executive Directors salaries effective 1 August 2017 are unchanged as follows Chief Executive 400000 p.
Chief Financial Officer 230000 p.
No monetary maximum has been set although increases are generally in line with the range in percentage of salary terms awarded across the Group.
In accordance with normal practice at all levels in all parts of the Group increases above this level in percentage of salary terms may be made in certain circumstances such as where there is a change in responsibility or a significant increase in the scale of the role or size and complexity of the Group.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
46 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Purpose and link to strategy To provide market competitive yet cost effective benefits to attract and retain high calibre executives.
Operation Benefits generally include provision of a car or cash in lieu of car and fuel allowance and private medical and life assurance cover.
The Committee may introduce other ancillary benefits which are on similar terms to those offered to the wider workforce or required in order to remain market competitive.
Overseas recruitment or an international assignment may require the benefits package to be more tailored and may include for example relocation costs tax equalisation arrangements etc. as necessary.
Maximum potential value The maximum annual car and fuel allowance is 15520.
The maximum overall cost of total benefit provision including but not limited to annual car and fuel allowance may vary each year subject to changes in the Companys insurance premiums or changes to the terms of the benefits provided.
The values for the year under review expressed as a cost to the Company of providing the benefits are described in the Directors single figure table on page 54.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
Pension
Purpose and link to strategy To provide market competitive yet costeffective benefits.
Operation Only basic salary is pensionable.
A Company contribution to a defined contribution pension scheme a personal pension or provision of a cash payment in lieu of a pension contribution or combination of such may be provided at the discretion of the Committee.
Maximum potential value Up to 15% of salary.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 47 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Annual bonus Purpose and link to strategy Incentivises achievement of annual objectives which support the shortterm performance goals of the Company.
Operation At the start of each year the Committee determines the choice of annual bonus measures and targets to ensure they reflect the KPIs of the business at that time.
Payments under the annual bonus plan are subject to compulsory payment of any bonus earned over 50% of salary on an after tax basis in the Companys shares under the Company Deferred Bonus Shares DBS arrangement which are subject to a holding period of two years and the element of the annual bonus paid in shares is subject to malus provisions in the event of a material misstatement of the Companys financial position.
Deferred shares will generally be forfeited if a Director leaves the Group unless in certain good leaver situations or if the Committee determines otherwise.
Dividends andor dividend equivalents are payable on the deferred bonus shares during the two year holding period.
Maximum potential value 100% of basic salary.
Performance metrics Performance is measured over one financial year.
Bonus awards are subject to achievement against a sliding scale of challenging financial targets and may also be subject to challenging strategicpersonal objectives.
The majority of any bonus will be earned for achieving challenging financial targets aligned with the Companys key performance indicators e.
Adjusted PBT or EPS.
A minority may be subject to achieving preset strategicpersonal objectives which reflect the key priorities of the role at the time.
Bonuses become payable once a threshold level of performance is achieved against the targets which triggers a bonus payment of up to 25% of salary rising to 100% of salary for meeting or exceeding the maximum targets set.
Measurement of financial metrics is made on the basis of audited figures.
Where strategicpersonal targets are set it may not always be practicable to set these using a sliding scale.
Page 58 of the Annual Report on Remuneration provides details of the performance measures and weightings to apply for the year ended 3 August 2018.
48 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Longterm incentives Purpose and link to strategy Incentivises executives to achieve superior financial growth and returns to shareholders over the longerterm.
Provides alignment with shareholders through awards of shares.
Promotes retention of key individuals.
Operation The LongTerm Incentive Plan LTIP was approved by shareholders in 2010.
Awards can be in the form of an option a conditional award or a forfeitable award.
Eligibility to receive awards is at the discretion of the Committee each year.
An LTIP award may be made shortly after an appointment subject to the Company not being in a prohibited period subject to the permitted maximum.
Awards are normally made on an annual basis and vest three years from grant subject to continued employment and the satisfaction of challenging threeyear performance targets.
A two year holding period following LTIP vesting applies to grants from 20172018 onwards to Executive Directors.
In total this results in a five year combined vesting and holding period.
The Committee reviews the quantum of awards annually and monitors the continuing suitability of the performance measures.
Participants benefit from the value of dividends paid over the vesting period to the extent that awards vest.
This benefit is delivered in the form of cash or additional shares at the time that awards are exercised.
All Awards granted after November 2013 are subject to a malus provision and clawback for two years after vesting in the event of a material misstatement of the Companys financial position.
Maximum potential value Awards with a face value of up to 125% of basic salary or 200% if the Committee believes there are exceptional circumstances can be made on an annual basis.
The Company operates within a 10% in ten years ABI new share issue dilution limit.
Performance metrics Performance is measured over a threeyear period.
Performance measures weightings and targets are determined by the Committee in advance of grant to support Company strategy and provide shareholder alignment.
The majority of LTIP awards will continue to be linked to financial andor TSR performance.
Under each measure threshold performance will result in 25% of maximum vesting for that element 0% vests below this increasing prorata to 100% for maximum performance.
Where TSR performance conditions are set performance against the condition is monitored independently on the Committees behalf and where financial targets are set performance against the condition is tested based on numbers derived from the audited financial statements.
LTIP vesting is underpinned by Committee discretion such that for any shares to vest the Committee must be satisfied with the underlying performance of the business.
In making this assessment the Committee will take into account factors such as the strength of the balance sheet quality of earnings etc.
Page 59 of the Annual Report on Remuneration provides details of the performance measures targets and weightings to apply for the year ended 3 August 2018.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 49 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Allemployee share schemes Purpose and link to strategy Encourages longterm shareholding in the Company.
Operation Invitations made by the Committee under the HMRC Approved Sharesave Scheme.
Executive Directors may participate in a monthly savings contract on the same terms as other employees of the Group.
Maximum potential value As per HMRC limits e. per calendar month.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
Share ownership guidelines Purpose and link to strategy To provide alignment between executives and shareholders.
Operation The Committee operates shareholding guidelines of 200% of salary for the Chief Executive and 150% of salary for other Executive Directors.
The net of tax number of deferred bonus shares or vested shares under the Companys LTIP will normally be required to be retained until the guideline is met.
The Committee may take account of progress towards this target when determining LTIP awards.
Maximum potential value Not applicable.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
Notes to the Policy Table While the remuneration policy for Executive Directors is designed having had regard to the policy for employees across the Group as a whole there are some differences in the structure for senior employees which the Committee believes to be necessary to reflect the different levels of responsibility within the Company.
The following key differences exist between the Companys policy for the remuneration of Executive Directors and its approach to the payment of employees generally there is an increased emphasis on performance related pay and in particular for sharebased incentives at the Executive Director level eligibility to participate in and the maximum opportunity in relation to an annual bonus vary based on individual role and local practice participation in the LTIP is limited to the Executive Directors and certain selected senior managers and benefits offered to other employees vary by subsidiary to take account of relevant market conditions and local practice.
The choice of the performance metrics and range of targets applicable to the annual bonus plan for Executive Directors reflect the Committees belief that any incentive compensation should be appropriately challenging and tied to both the delivery of robust performance relating to the Groups financial KPIs and where appropriate specific individual objectives.
Performance metrics applicable to the LTIP are selected to support Company strategy and provide shareholder alignment.
Awards to be made in 20172018 will vest based on stretching targets relating to Absolute TSR and growth in Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing which will simplify the plan support portfolio reshaping and provide direct shareholder alignment.
Targets applying to the annual bonus and LTIP are reviewed annually based on a number of internal and external reference points.
Performance targets are set to be stretching but achievable with regard to the particular strategic priorities and economic environment in a given year.
The share ownership guideline levels are detailed above.
The shares that an Executive Director may count towards the shareholding guideline include those held in the name of the Director those held in the name of the Directors spouse partner or children any shares held in a family trust for the benefit of the Director andor hisher spouse partner or children and any shares held in a personal pension plan on behalf of the Director.
The Committee may in its absolute discretion approve the holding of shares by alternate means e. award and if permitted on such terms determined by the Committee acting fairly and reasonably.
For the avoidance of doubt in approving this Directors remuneration policy authority is given to the Company to honour any commitments entered into with current or former Directors such as the payment of a pension or the vestingexercise of past share awards that have been disclosed to and approved by shareholders in previous remuneration reports.
Details of any payments to former Directors will be set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration as they arise.
The Committee operates the annual bonus LTIP and Sharesave plans in accordance with their rules HMRC guidance and where relevant the Listing Rules.
To ensure these incentive plans operate in an efficient manner the Committee retains a number of standard market practice discretions which include determining the eligibility to participate in the plans determining the timing of grant of awards and any payments the size of awards and payments although with quantum restricted to those detailed in the table above and the respective plan rules the determination of whether the performance conditions have been met and the resulting vestingpay out dealing with a change of control for example the timing of testing performance targets or restructuring of the Group determining a good or bad leaver for incentive plan purposes based on the rules of each plan and the appropriate treatment chosen adjustments required in certain capital events such as rights issues corporate restructuring events and special dividends and the annual review of performance conditions for the annual bonus plan and LTIP .
In some circumstances such as a material acquisitiondivestment of a Group business or a change in Accounting Standards and Interpretations which mean the original performance conditions are no longer appropriate the Committee can adjust the targets set different measures and alter weightings as necessary to ensure the conditions achieve their original purpose and are not materially less difficult to satisfy.
50 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Reward Scenarios The chart below shows how the composition of each of the Executive Directors remuneration packages varies at different levels of performance under the policy set out above as a percentage of total remuneration opportunity and as a total value Fixed pay comprises the 20172018 basic salary and expected pension contributions and a value for benefits using the value for the year ended 28 July 2017 value as a proxy.
Incentive opportunities reflect implementation for 20172018.
The assumptions used in the above at the ontarget performance level are i half of maximum bonus is earned and ii 25% of the LTIP award vests which is the level of vesting if each target achieves its minimum threshold.
The maximum performance level assumes the full bonus is earned and the LTIP award vests in full.
No share price growth is included at the point of vesting under any scenario for the LTIP to ensure the above provides a simplistic overview of the current value of remuneration payable under the different performance scenarios.
Approach to recruitment and promotions Basic salary levels will be set on appointment after having had due regard to the Companys general remuneration policy but adjusted as appropriate to reflect the experience and calibre of the individual and the market rates for similar roles in comparable organisations.
If it is considered appropriate to appoint a new Director on a below market salary e. of a series of increases to a desired salary positioning over an appropriate time frame subject to performance in post.
Should it be appropriate to recruit an executive from overseas or for the individual to relocate then reasonable expenses and payments may be paid in relation to such a relocation which would then be subject to disclosure in due course.
Benefits and pension arrangements would generally be in line with those offered to current executives but it may be necessary to tailor these to reflect for example local market norms local legislation etc.
The annual bonus maximum will be in line with current Executive Directors i.
100% of basic salary prorated for the period of service.
Depending on the timing of the appointment the Committee may use different performance measures targets and weightings to that of the current executives for the first year of service.
An LTIP award may be made shortly after an appointment subject to the Company not being in a prohibited period subject to the permitted maximum.
The total maximum variable remuneration that may be awarded in respect of recruitment is 300% of salary excluding buyout awards referred to below.
The Committee may offer additional cash andor sharebased elements to replace deferred or incentive pay forfeited by an executive leaving a previous employer.
The Committee would seek to ensure where possible that these awards replicate the potential value forfeitedlost in joining the Company and in terms of time horizons vesting periods expected values and potential impact of performance conditions these factors are recognised in determining the quantum of such compensation.
This award would be facilitated under the existing incentive plans where possible but also using Rule 9.4.2. of the Listing Rules if necessary.
For an internal Executive Director appointment any variable pay element awarded in respect of the prior role may be allowed to pay out according to its terms adjusted as relevant to take into account the appointment.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Minimum
100% 62% 26% 12% 39% 100% 62%39% 32% 29% 26% 12% 32% 29% Ontarget Maximum Minimum Ontarget
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
Maximum
Fixed pay Annual bonus LTIP 51 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Service contracts and loss of office payments Summaries of the Executive Directors contracts are disclosed below.
These contracts are held at the registered office and are available for inspection in accordance with Provision B.3.2 of the Code.
Date of contract Notice period
Matt Armitage 10 July 2014 12 months Brad Gray 10 July 2014 12 months It is the Companys policy that Executive Directors should serve under rolling service contracts of 12 months duration or less and that there should be no special provisions for compensation in the event of termination neither in the normal course nor following a change in control of the Company and that any compensation payments made should take account of the Directors duty to mitigate his loss.
The Executive Directors current service contracts all comply with this policy.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the contractual terms for new Executive Directors to ensure these reflect best practice.
In summary the contractual provisions are as follows Provision detailed terms Notice period Up to 12 months Termination payment Limited to a maximum of basic salary and benefits paid monthly and subject to mitigation Change of control No Executive Directors contract contains additional provisions in respect of a change of control The service contract for any new appointment would be made on similar terms to those described above.
In a leaver event the following payments may also be made to departing Executive Directors Any sharebased entitlements granted to an Executive Director under a Company share plan will be determined based on the relevant plan rules.
In certain prescribed circumstances however such as death illhealth disability retirement or other circumstances at the discretion of the Committee a good leaver status may be applied.
Under the LTIP for good leavers future awards will normally be tested for performance over the full performance period and be reduced prorata to reflect the proportion of the performance period actually served roundedup to the next complete financial year with Remuneration Committee discretion to determine that awards vest at an earlier date andor to disapply time prorating.
Vested LTIP awards which are subject to an additional holding period will typically be retained and released at the end of the holding period with Committee discretion to treat otherwise.
Under the DBS in certain prescribed circumstances awards will be retained in connection with a leaver event such as death or permanent disability or any other reason permitted by the Remuneration Committee A prorata bonus may be payable for the period of active service in certain prescribed good leaver circumstances and in other circumstances at the discretion of the Committee and subject to the achievement of the relevant performance targets At the discretion of the Remuneration Committee a contribution to reasonable outplacement costs in the event of termination of employment due to redundancy.
The Committee also retains the ability to reimburse reasonable legal costs incurred in connection with a termination of employment and Any payment for statutory entitlements or to settle or compromise claims in connection with a termination of any existing or future Executive Director as necessary.
External NonExecutive appointments Executive Directors may not accept an appointment outside the Company without prior permission of the Board.
The extent to which any fees are retained by the individual or are remitted to the Company will be considered on a casebycase basis.
No Executive Director currently holds an external nonexecutive appointment.
52 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Chairman and NonExecutive Directors The following sets out the fee policy for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors Purpose and link to strategy To attract and retain high calibre individuals without prejudice to the application of independent views.
Operation NonExecutive Directors remuneration is decided by the Executive Directors and the Chairman the Chairmans fee is set separately by the Committee.
Fees are set periodically by taking account of the time required to fulfil the role and fees payable at similar sized companies.
Any increases in fees also take account of any increases payable to Executive Directors and to the general workforce.
NonExecutive Directors may not participate in the Groups cash or sharebased incentive arrangements.
NonExecutive Directors also receive reimbursement of travel and office related expenses.
Maximum potential value For 20172018 the fees comprise a base fee of 42500 p. plus additional fees of 5000 p.
Senior Independent Director position and 7500 p. for chairing the Remuneration and Audit Committees.
The Chairmans fee is set at 130000 p.
These fees may be revised periodically in line with the Companys policy.
Given the periodic nature of the review any increases as a % of total fees may be greater than that awarded to the wider workforce in any particular year.
The maximum aggregate fees are set in accordance with the Companys articles of association.
Performance metrics Not applicable.
The policy on NonExecutive Directors letters of appointment is that they shall be for an initial period of no more than three years.
The letters of appointment are kept at the registered office and are available for inspection in accordance with Provision B.3.2 of the Code.
The letters of appointment are summarised as follows Date of letter of appointment Notice period
Mike Butterworth 14 July 2010 3 months Ben Gordon 4 July 2013 3 months Nigel Pocklington 25 May 2016 3 months Helen Stevenson 3 April 2012 3 months Richard Stillwell 26 April 2011 6 months No other remuneration is payable to a NonExecutive Director on termination of an appointment.
Consideration of shareholder views The Remuneration Committee considers shareholder feedback received in relation to the AGM each year at a meeting immediately following the meeting.
This feedback plus any additional feedback received from time to time is then considered as part of an annual review of remuneration policy.
In addition the Committee seeks to proactively engage directly with major shareholders and their representative bodies and takes seriously their views.
In the event that the Committee wishes to make material changes to the remuneration policy appropriate dialogue will take place with the Companys major shareholders in advance.
This year the Committee undertook a full review of the remuneration policy ahead of its expiration at the 2017 AGM.
Having developed a number of proposed changes shareholders representing over 50% of St Ives issued share capital along with key institutional investors were invited to provide and discuss feedback on the proposals.
The comments received during this stage of the consultation helped the Committee to make changes  including complementing Absolute TSR with an additional measure in the LTIP  which it was agreed would be in the best interests of the Company and help to further focus executives on delivering St Ives strategy over the next few years.
A two year holding period following LTIP vesting has also been introduced in line with emerging best practice in remuneration policies for 20172018 grants onwards to Executive Directors.
In total this results in a five year combined vesting and holding period.
Details of votes cast for and against the resolution to approve last years remuneration report are set out in the Annual Report on Remuneration on page 54.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 53 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Group Whilst the Company does not formally consult with employees on matters of executive remuneration it does consider the general basic salary increase for the broader UK employee population when determining the annual salary review for the Executive Directors.
The Committee is also made aware of employment conditions within the wider group including a general overview of variable pay plan outcomes.
The Committee also considers environmental social and governance issues and risk when reviewing executive pay quantum and structure.
ANNUAL REPORT ON REMUNERATION
The following section provides details of how St Ives remuneration policy was implemented during 20162017.
Membership of the Committee Mike Butterworth Ben Gordon Nigel Pocklington and Helen Stevenson all independent NonExecutive Directors served on the Committee throughout the year.
Helen Stevenson chaired the Committee throughout the year.
The number of meetings held attendances and a description of the principal matters considered by the Committee in carrying out its duties during the year are described on pages 34 and 53.
During the year under review the Committee where appropriate sought advice and assistance from the Company Secretary and members of the Board including the Chairman of the Board and the Chief Executive in connection with carrying out its duties.
None of these persons took part in decisions relating specifically to their own remuneration.
Role of the Committee The Committee is responsible for determining and agreeing with the Board the overall remuneration policy and its implementation including setting the individual remuneration packages and contractual arrangements for the Executive Directors senior management and the Chairman of the Board which support the creation of value for shareholders and the delivery of the Groups strategic priorities.
The Committee is mindful of the intense scrutiny around executive remuneration and seeks to keep abreast of and adopt best practice where appropriate taking into account its position in the small cap sector.
When undertaking its duties the Committee also ensures that due account is taken of pay and employment conditions throughout the Group by keeping abreast of matters such as i the general level of salary increases if any applied throughout the Group ii the levels of bonuses paid and bonus opportunity offered to the workforce as a whole and iii any widespread changes that are proposed to Groupwide employment conditions.
The full terms of reference for the Committee are available on the Companys website site.
Committees advisers During the year the Committee retained Kepler Associates a brand of Mercer which is part of the MMC group of companies Kepler as independent advisers to the Committee.
Kepler were selected following a formal tender process conducted in 2015.
Kepler is a signatory to the Code of Conduct for Remuneration Consultants in the UK details of which can be found on the Remuneration Consulting Groups website at site During the year one of MMCs other companies Marsh acted as St Ives commercial insurance brokers.
The fees paid to Kepler in relation to advice provided to the Committee for 20162017 were 49675 on a time and materials basis.
The Committee has reviewed the advice provided by Kepler during the year and is satisfied that it has been objective and independent.
The terms of engagement between the Company and Kepler are available from the Company Secretary upon request.
Summary of activities During the year the Committee approved outcomes of bonuses for the Executive Directors in respect of 20152016 the Directors Remuneration Report for 20152016 the Executive Directors salaries and pension provision for 20172018 the Chairmans fees for 20172018 and the grant of awards on 16 November 2016 under the Companys 2010 LTIP to certain senior managers and the performance conditions attached to their vesting.
Additionally the Committee performed a consultation with the Companys major shareholders on minor changes to the Remuneration Policy wording and on the performance conditions applying to shortterm and longterm incentives for the forthcoming year.
Following this consultation the Committee then also approved the structure of the Executive Directors bonus scheme for 20172018 and held preliminary discussions on the performance targets to apply to LTIP awards to be granted in late 2017.
54 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Summary of shareholder voting at the AGM in December 2016 The following table shows the results of the advisory vote on the 20152016 Remuneration Report at the AGM in December 2016 Votes for % for
Total Votes
Remuneration Report
92352330 99.92% 77289 0.08 % 92429619 7561 Note 1 Includes Discretionary votes.
St Ives Directors Remuneration Policy was last subject to a binding vote at the 2014 AGM when 99.5% of shareholders voted in favour of the relevant resolution.
REMUNERATION PAYABLE TO DIRECTORS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 28 JULY 2017 Directors single figure table audited Set out below in a single figure is the total remuneration of all Directors for the financial year Share Share Taxable Taxable plans plans Pension Pension
Basic benefits benefits vesting vesting benefits benefits salaryfee salaryfee note1 note 1 Bonus Bonus note 2 note 2 note 3 note 3 Total Totalteltelteltel
NonExecutive
Mike Butterworth 55.0 55.0         55.0 55.0 Ben Gordon 42.5 42.5         42.5 42.5 Nigel Pocklington 42.5 7.1         42.5 7.1 Helen Stevenson Richard Stillwell note 4 110.0 110.0         110.0 110.0
Taxable benefits constitute additional payments in lieu of the provision of a company car and fuel benefit and medical expenses insurance cover.
Figures for share plans vesting are based on the number of shares vesting for performance periods substantially completed as at year end.
The 2014 LTIP award will lapse in full in November 2017.
See page 55 for details.
Pension benefits were in part paid into a Group Personal Pension Plan and part paid as a cash supplement for Matt Armitage and Brad Gray.
Brad Gray participated in the Groups Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme until it was discontinued on 1 September 2008.
Brad Grays entitlement to a deferred pension from the Scheme ceased during the year on the payment out of the scheme on 20 December 2016 to a selfmanaged pension arrangement.
The transferred sum of 1.2 million was calculated by the Schemes actuary after applying a reduction factor agreed by the Trustee and applying generally such calculations to take account of the underfunded position of the Scheme.
13260 of the pensions benefits figure shown for Brad Gray in 2016 related to the capitalised increase in his defined benefit pension entitlement calculated in accordance with the reporting requirements.
Richard Stillwell has elected to forego 20000 per annum of his fee of 130000 per annum.
Richard Stillwells fees are shown above after foregoing this proportion of his fees during 20162017.
The Company donates this sum so withheld together with a matching sum from the Company to registered charities.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 INCENTIVE OUTCOMES FOR THE PERIOD ENDED 28 JULY 2017 audited Annual bonus Executive Directors bonuses for the year ended 28 July 2017 provided for a payment of up to 100% of salary based 75% on Adjusted EPS performance over the financial year and 25% on personalstrategic objectives.
All bonuses in excess of 50% of basic salary are deferred into Company shares in line with the overall remuneration policy.
Details of performance against the financial targets set are provided below
Stretch Actual % of Financial measure 25% of salary 75% of salary performance salary earned Adjusted EPS 13.39p 0% In addition each Executive Director could earn up to 25% of salary for the achievement of stretching strategicpersonal objectives including areas such as portfolio reshaping and other business priorities.
In its assessment the Committee noted that whilst progress had been made the stretching strategic objectives had not yet been achieved.
Accordingly neither Executive Director will receive an annual bonus payment in respect of 20162017.
The Board considers the strategic objectives to be commercially sensitive and therefore will not be disclosing these objectives prospectively.
However it is intended that these objectives will be disclosed retrospectively within two years.
2013 LTIP As reported last year 20152016 Adjusted EPS performance was below threshold against targets set for 2013 LTIP awards and accordingly this element lapsed in November 2016.
Relative TSR performance would have been assessed over the threeyear period to 12 November 2016 however since the EPS underpin applying to this element of the awards was also not met the full award lapsed in November 2016.
Accordingly the value of 2013 LTIP awards vesting included in the single figure table above for 2016 is Nil.
2014 LTIP Vesting of the 2014 LTIP awards is dependent on two equallyweighted measures over a threeyear period Adjusted EPS and TSR relative to the FTSE AllShare Media sector excluding FTSE100 companies.
Further details including vesting schedules and performance against each of the metrics are provided in the table below Measure Weighting Targets Outcome Vesting % Adjusted EPS in 50% 0% vesting below 21.0p 25% vesting for 21.0p 100% vesting for 24.0p or more Straightline vesting between these points 13.39p 0% TSR relative to the AllShare Media sector excl.
FTSE100 companies 50% 0% vesting below median performance 25% vesting for performance in line with median 100% vesting for upper quartile performance or greater Straightline vesting between these points Performance period ends in November 2017 however EPS underpin not met 0% Total vesting 0% With regard to the outcome of EPS performance the Committee as part of testing the condition also assessed the potential impact on the targets of the adoption of the amendment to IAS 19 and the impact of the change in accounting policy to treat IAS 19 charges relating to the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme as Adjusting Items.
The adjusted growth rate in EPS over the threeyear performance period was such that the target was not met irrespective of the basis of testing the target i. was not impacted by the change in accounting standards and change in policy.
The TSR portion of the award is measured over three years from the date of the award and so is not due to be measured until 12 November 2017.
However the EPS underpin of 20.0 pence applying to the TSR portion was not met and accordingly the full award will lapse in November 2017.
56 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Summary of longterm incentives vesting in November 2017 audited The total number of shares which vested in relation to the performance period substantially completed as at year end and which are reflected in the single figure table on page 54 is as follows % shares vesting Transfer of Total number for performance Number of Share price on Total value awardearliest Date of grant of shares note 1 awards vesting vesting pence on vesting  vesting date Matt Armitage 12 Nov 2014 179718 0% 0 na 0 12 Nov 2017 Brad Gray 12 Nov 2014 102696 0% 0 na 0 12 Nov 2017
EPS underpin in respect of 2014 awards was not met and accordingly all shares will lapse in November 2017.
Scheme interests awarded during the 20162017 financial year audited In November 2016 Matt Armitage and Brad Gray were granted awards under the Companys LTIP  as follows Shares over which Value of shares % of salary Date of grant awards granted awarded  awarded Matt Armitage 16 Nov 2016 280920 360000 90% Brad Gray 16 Nov 2016 161529 207000 90% Face value is based on a share price of 128.15 pence the market value at the time of grant.
As disclosed in last years report to reflect the fall in the share price following the April 2016 Trading Update LTIP grant sizes for 20162017 were reduced from 100% of salary to 90% of salary.
Awards granted vest on Adjusted EPS relative TSR and Adjusted operating profit from the Strategic Marketing segment each measured over three years and with overall vesting underpinned by Committee discretion.
A summary of the performance conditions is shown in the table below Measure Weighting Targets Performance measurement period Adjusted EPS in 20182019 25% 0% vesting below 18.5p 25% vesting for 18.5p 100% vesting for 20.0p or more Straightline vesting between these points Adjusted EPS in 20182019 TSR relative to the AllShare Media sector excl.
FTSE100
50% 0% vesting below median performance 25% vesting for performance in line with median 100% vesting for upper quartile performance or greater Straightline vesting between these points Threemonth average to 2 August 2019 as compared to threemonth average to 29 July 2016 Proportion of operating profit from Strategic
25% 0% vesting below 75% 25% vesting for 75% 100% vesting for 85% or greater Straightline vesting between these points Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing as compared to total Group operating profit in 20182019 Vesting of awards is subject to overall Committee discretion All awards made since November 2013 are subject to a malus and clawback provision which will enable the Committee to reclaim value that should not have been received in the event that if within the twoyear period following the year of vesting a material misstatement of the Companys financial results relating to the year of vesting is identified.
In such circumstances a clawback would be based on the extent to which the first vesting was overpaid based on new information.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Statement of change in remuneration of Chief Executive compared with other employees All employees
Executive Percentage change 2017 change vs 2016 000 vs 2016 note 1
400 0% 1.9% Benefits in kind 18.2 1.7% 2.7% Annual bonus 0 0% 100%
Reflects the change in average pay for Group Head Office employees employed in both 2016 and 2017.
This subset of employees is felt to be the most appropriate comparator to the Chief Executive as they have a similar remuneration structure.
Review of past performance The chart below illustrates the Companys Total Shareholder Return for the eight years ended 28 July 2017 relative to the performance of the FTSE Small Cap Index and FTSE All Share Index.
Both the FTSE Small Cap and the FTSE All Share represent a broad equity indices of which the Company is a constituent member and therefore have been selected as comparators for this reason.
Source DataStream tel400 Value of 100 investedtelteltel St Ives plc FTSE Small Cap FTSE All Share The table below details the Chief Executives single figure of remuneration over the same eightyear periodteltel 2016 2017 Patrick Martell Patrick Martell Patrick Martell Patrick Martell Patrick Martell Matt Armitage Matt Armitage Matt Armitage Total remuneration 000 725.3 802.0 1246.6 1335.0 1648.4 1133.5 477.8 478.2 Annual bonus as a percentage of maximum 100.0 100.0 100.0 96.3 100.0 69.7 Nil Nil LTIP vesting as a percentage of maximum Nil Nil 100.0 93.9 98.5 100.0 Nil Nil 58 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED
Relative importance of spend on pay This table shows overall expenditure on pay excluding employers NICs for all employees shareholder distributions payments of dividends and capital expenditure with the percentage change in each.
2017 2016 Percentage 000 000 change Overall expenditure on pay 168118 150717 9.8% Dividends paid in the year 8705 10934 20.4% Capital expenditure 3465 7612 54.5% Exit payments made in the year audited No exit payments were made in the year.
Payments to past Directors audited No payments to past Directors were made in the year.
IMPLEMENTATION OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR REMUNERATION POLICY FOR 20172018 Basic salary Following the annual review and taking into account business circumstances it was determined that there would be no increase in the salaries of the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer for 20172018.
Salary levels will remain as follows From 1 August From 1 August 2017 2016 % increase Matt Armitage Chief Executive 400000 400000 0% Brad Gray Chief Financial Officer 230000 230000 0% Pension and benefits No changes in pension contribution rates or benefits provision to the Executive Directors are to be applied during the year.
Annual bonus The annual bonus for the 20172018 financial year will operate on broadly the same basis as in 20162017.
Bonus opportunities for Executive Directors remain at 100% of salary with any amount earned over 50% of salary deferred in shares for two years and subject to malus provisions in the event of material misstatement.
As described earlier in the report 75% of the bonus opportunity will be based on Adjusted PBT previously Adjusted EPS performance with the remaining 25% based on the achievement of key strategicpersonal objectives aligned with the businesss strategy and priorities that have been communicated to shareholders.
A summary of performance measures and weightings is included in the table below
Weighting
Adjusted PBT 75% Strategicpersonal objectives 25% In the event of any material acquisition or divestment the Committee would adjust the PBT targets for the acquisitiondivestment plan.
The Board considers the targets for the annual bonus measures to be commercially sensitive and therefore will not be disclosing these objectives prospectively.
However it is intended that retrospective disclosure including any such adjustment of targets will be provided in the Directors Remuneration Report within two years.
In setting Adjusted PBT targets for the year the Committee reviewed a range of internal and external reference points to ensure that targets are appropriately stretching yet achievable.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Longterm incentives LTIP awards to be made to Executive Directors in late 2017 are anticipated to be 90% of salary and may vest subject to performance over a threeyear period with vested shares subject to a two year holding period.
As described in the letter from the Chair of the Remuneration Committee the Committee is proposing to link vesting of these awards 70% to Absolute TSR targets and 30% to growth in Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing with overall vesting underpinned by Committee discretion.
For any shares to vest the Committee must be satisfied with the underlying performance of the business.
In making this assessment the Committee will take into account factors such as the strength of the balance sheet quality of earnings etc.
The Committee believes that this will help to simplify the plan and support portfolio reshaping.
While the Committee considered relative TSR it felt that on balance Absolute TSR would be more motivational simpler and provides direct shareholder alignment given the reduced share price.
A summary of performance targets for the forthcoming grant which are on the basis that the policy is voted for at the 2017 AGM are included in the table below Measure Weighting Targets Performance measurement period Absolute TSR share price plus rolled up dividends 70% 0% vesting below 110p 25% vesting for 110p 100% vesting for 170p or more Straightline vesting between these points Threemonth average to 31 July 2020 Growth in Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing 30% 0% vesting below 6% 25% vesting for 6% 100% vesting for 14% or more Straightline vesting between these points Adjusted operating profit from Strategic Marketing in 20192020 as compared to In the event of any material acquisition or divestment the Committee would adjust the operating profit targets to ensure only outperformance of the acquisitiondivestment plan is rewarded.
Vesting of awards is subject to overall Committee discretion.
The Absolute TSR performance range for 20172018 LTIP awards of 110p to 170p corresponds to c.75% to 170% growth from the trailing threemonth average share price on 28 September 2017 the date of Committee approval of the performance range.
Implementation of NonExecutive Director remuneration policy for 20172018 Base fee levels for the Chairman and NonExecutive Directors are currently 130000 p. and 42500 p. for the Audit and Remuneration Committee chairs of 7500 p. and a fee for acting as the Senior Independent Director of 5000 p.
There will be no increases to these fees for 20172018.
The Chairman continues to forego 20000 p. sum from the Company to registered charities.
Share ownership guidelines and Directors interests in the share capital of the Company audited Shareholding guidelines are in place that require Executive Directors to acquire a holding equivalent to 200% of basic salary for the Chief Executive and 150% of basic salary for the Chief Financial Officer.
These levels are considered appropriate to ensure that there is robust longterm alignment achieved between Executive Directors and shareholders.
The net of tax number of deferred bonus shares or vested shares under the Companys LTIP will normally be required to be retained until the guideline is met.
Directors share dealings must be conducted in accordance with the Companys Share Dealing Policy.
Interests of Directors and their connected persons in 10 pence ordinary shares fully paid of the Company at 28 July 2017 were as follows Unvested LTIP Unvested Expressed as a awards subject deferred bonus Beneficial Beneficial percentage of
Executive
Matt Armitage 677205 19654 504717 466931 104% Brad Gray 419882 11231 59767 59767 25%
Mike Butterworth 26000 26000 Ben Gordon 25000 25000 Helen Stevenson 22000 22000 Richard Stillwell 90000 90000 Nigel Pocklington 10000 10000
Unvested deferred bonus share awards relate entirely to the 20142015 bonus award.
Calculated by reference to the number of unvested deferred bonus share awards added to beneficial holdings the midmarket closing price of the Companys ordinary shares on 2 October 2017 79.5 pence and the Directors annual rate of basic salary.
There have been no changes to any of the Directors shareholdings between 28 July 2017 and 2 October 2017.
60 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors outstanding share incentive awards audited Details of the share options held by Directors who served during the year are shown below.
All options were granted under the LTIP for Nil consideration.
Market price per share Balance at Balance at at date 30 July Exercised Lapsed Awarded 28 July Vesting Date of award of award 2016 during year during year during year 2017 date Expiry date Matt Armitage 12 Nov 2013 184.25p 150000  150000   12 Nov 2016 12 Nov 2023 12 Nov 2014 192.00p 179718    179718 12 Nov 2017 12 Nov 2024 12 Nov 2015 184.70p 216567    216567 12 Nov 2018 12 Nov 2025 16 Nov 2016 128.15p    280920 280920 16 Nov 2019 16 Nov 2026 546285  150000 280920 677205 Brad Gray 12 Nov 2014 192.00p 102696    102696 12 Nov 2017 12 Nov 2024 12 Nov 2015 184.70p 155657    155657 12 Nov 2018 12 Nov 2025 16 Nov 2016 128.15p    161529 161529 16 Nov 2019 16 Nov 2026 258353   161529 419882 Details of the qualifying performance conditions in relation to outstanding share incentive awards are summarised below Absolute Adjusted basic EPS 12 November 2014 Award 12 November 2015 Award 16 November 2016 Award Performance measurement period EPS for 20162017 financial year EPS for 20172018 financial year EPS for 20182019 financial year Weighing % of award 50% 25% 25% 100% vesting 24.0p or more 25.23p or more 20.0p or more Between 25% and 100% vesting From 21.0p to 24.0p From 22.23p to 25.23p From 18.5p to 20.0p Relative TSR 12 November 2014 Award 12 November 2015 Award 16 November 2016 Award Performance measurement period 1 Aug 2014 to 28 Jul 2017 1 Aug 2015 to 3 August 2018 29 Jul 2016 to 2 Aug 2019 Comparator group FTSE AllShare Media FTSE AllShare Media FTSE AllShare Media excl.
FTSE100 companies excl.
FTSE100 companies excl.
FTSE100 companies Weighing % of award 50% 50% 50% 100% vesting Upper quartile or above Upper quartile or above Upper quartile or above Between 25% and 100% vesting Between median and Between median and Between median and upper quartile upper quartile upper quartile Underpin Adjusted basic EPS of 20.0p Adjusted basic EPS of 21.73p Committee discretion in the 20162017 financial year in the 20172018 financial year Proportion of operating profit from Strategic Marketing 12 November 2014 Award 12 November 2015 Award 16 November 2016 Award Performance measurement period  Operating profit from Strategic Operating profit from Strategic Marketing as compared to total Marketing as compared to total Group operating profit in Group operating profit in 20172018 20182019 Weighing % of award  25% 25% 100% vesting  65% or more 85% or more Between 25% and 100% vesting  Between 55% and 65% Between 75% and 85% Underpin  Adjusted basic EPS of 21.73p Committee discretion in the 20172018 financial year The market price of St Ives plc ordinary shares of 10 pence each at 28 July 2017 was 55.88 pence and the range during the financial year 20162017 was 37.50 pence to 152.00 pence.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT CONTINUED 61 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share options  Sharesave Scheme audited Balance at Balance at
30 July Exercised Lapsed Granted 28 July Exercise from which Expiry Date of grant 2016 during year during year during year 2017 price pence exercisable date Matt Armitage 23 Apr 2013 6596  6596  Nil 108.60 1 Jun 2016 1 Dec 2016 Brad Gray 23 Apr 2013 6596  6596  Nil 108.60 1 Jun 2016 1 Dec 2016 During the period the Executive Directors options under the 2013 Sharesave Scheme lapsed and there were no further Sharesave options granted to the Directors.
Dilution
Under the ESOS 2001 LTIP and the Sharesave Scheme awards of options over no more than an aggregate 10% of the Companys issued share capital may be granted over new issue shares in any rolling tenyear period with awards made under any other share plans also being counted.
As at 28 July 2017 excluding lapsed options and options exercised and satisfied from utilising existing issued shares options over 8759794 shares 6.1% of the Companys issued share capital have been exercised through new shares or remain outstanding under all share plans and so count towards this limit.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Helen Stevenson Chair of the Remuneration Committee 2 October 2017 62 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REPORT The Directors present their Directors Report and the audited financial statements for the period ended 28 July 2017.
The Corporate Governance Report set out on pages 32 to 35 also forms part of this report.
Details of significant events since the balance sheet date are contained in note 39 to the financial statements.
An indication of likely future developments in the business of the Company and details of research and development activities are included in the Strategic Report.
Information about the use of financial instruments by the Company and its subsidiaries is given in note 28 to the financial statements.
STRATEGIC REPORT FUTURE DEVELOPMENT AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS The Strategic Report which the Company is required under law to prepare can be found on pages 2 to 31.
The Strategic Report includes disclosures regarding likely future developments in the business of the Group carbon emissions and information on the Groups employment policies.
Certain sections of this Annual Report contains forwardlooking statements with respect to the strategy financial condition results operations and businesses of the Group or markets in which the Group operates.
These statements involve risk and uncertainty because they depend on circumstances that occur in the future and relate to specific events not all of which are within the Groups control.
Although the Group believes that the expectations reflected in such forwardlooking statements are reasonable there are a number of factors that could cause actual results or developments to differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forwardlooking statements.
The Group undertakes no obligation to update any forwardlooking statement.
Nothing in the Annual Report should be construed as a profit forecast or an invitation to deal in the ordinary shares of St Ives plc.
DIRECTORS AND THEIR SHARE INTERESTS The present membership of the Board is set out on pages 36 and 37.
The Directors interests in ordinary shares of the Company are set out in the table on page 59 within the Directors Remuneration Report.
RESULTS AND DIVIDENDS The Groups statutory loss before taxation for the year amounted to 44068000 2016  5714000.
The Directors propose a final dividend of 1.30 pence for each ordinary share payable on 18 December 2017 to holders on the register as at 24 November 2017.
If approved the final dividend will make total dividends for the year of 1.95 pence per ordinary share Ordinary dividends
Proposed final EMPLOYMENT POLICIES EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES EMPLOYEE COMMUNICATION AND DIVERSITY The Group is committed to providing equal opportunities with regard to employment free from discrimination and harassment and in a healthy and safe working environment.
Details of how we deliver on these commitments and communicate with our employees are provided in the Corporate and Social Responsibility Report on pages 28 to 31.
HUMAN RIGHTS The Company does not have a specific human rights policy however ethical values and integrity are central to our businesses both in the UK and abroad.
As a socially responsible business we believe that we must operate legally ethically and to approved policies at all times in order to deliver our customers the best service consistent quality and confidence that the people who make and sell our products are not being exploited or exposed.
Our Ethical Trading Policy establishes the principles which we expect our employees contractors agents suppliers consultants and other third parties with whom the Group trades to comply.
During the period the Company published its first Modern Slavery Act Statement in accordance with section 54 of the Modern Slavery Act 2015
The Company is completely opposed to any form of slavery and human trafficking and the Group will not knowingly do business with any organisation or body involved in slavery and human trafficking.
More information on the Groups approach to modern slavery can be found in the Corporate Social Responsibility section of the Strategic Report on pages 28 to 31.
The Companys MSA Statement can be found on its website at site GOING CONCERN The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic Report.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described in the Financial Review.
In addition note 29 to the financial statements includes the Groups objectives policies and processes for managing its interest rate risk foreign exchange risk credit risk liquidity risk and capital risk.
The Strategic Report is to be found on pages 2 to 31.
During the period the Group has reduced its revolving credit facility to 95 million supplemented by a term loan of 30 million and increased its maximum leverage covenant condition net debt to Adjusted EBITDA for the remaining duration of the facility.
Subsequent to the period end the Group reduced its term loan by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
As highlighted in note 28 to the financial statements the Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through an overdraft facility of 15 million that is part of an overall funding facility of 125 million which falls due for renewal on 23 March 2019.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The current economic conditions create uncertainty particularly over the level of demand for the Groups services but the Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current facility and obtain further financing when the current facility expires.
After making enquiries the Directors consider that the Group has adequate resources and borrowing facilities to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Consequently they have continued to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
VIABILITY STATEMENT In accordance with provision C.2.2 of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors have assessed the Companys viability over a threeyear period having taken account of the Companys current situation and principal risks.
A threeyear assessment period which is in alignment with our mediumterm planning horizon was selected as this gives management and the Board sufficient visibility of the future and is consistent with the average duration of contracts with key clients.
Visibility is very limited beyond this horizon because of the fast changing nature of many of the markets in which the Companys businesses operate.
The analysis was performed by running a number of potentially stressful yet plausible scenarios against a base high level financial forecast over the threeyear period starting from the end of the 20162017 financial year.
The events reflected in the stress scenarios with the greatest financial impact included the potential closure of an operating site resulting from competitive pressure and a general decline in sales volumes of 10% due to challenging or uncertain economic conditions.
The related scenarios reflected the estimated financial impact of the events associated with the principal risks outlined in the Principal Risks and Uncertainties Report from pages 24 to 27 and included mitigating actions where these would be under the Companys control.
Other scenarios were also modelled including a weakening of the Pound Sterling against the US Dollar to 11.20 and the payment of the maximum possible remaining contingent consideration for The App Business.
In addition to an assessment of the impact the individual risks could have on the Companys debt leverage and level of debt the impact of a combination of the risks impacts occurring simultaneously was also modelled to test the results of a particularly high stress combined scenario.
To support the final conclusion on viability the assessment also took account of potential mitigations available to the business in the event of the combined scenario.
Additionally the revolving credit facility is expected to be renewed within the threeyear assessment period.
Based on this analysis the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due up to July 2020.
In making this statement the Directors have also made key assumptions which they consider to be reasonable for example on sales volumes and pricing and on the availability of financing beyond the end of the term of the current bank credit facility in March 2019.
ACQUISITION OF THE COMPANYS OWN SHARES At the 2016 Annual General Meeting shareholders approved an authority for the Company to make market purchases of its own shares up to a maximum of 14249966 shares.
This authority ends on the date of the next Annual General Meeting.
Since the year end no ordinary shares have been purchased by the Company therefore at the date of this Report 90637 ordinary shares are held in treasury.
MAJOR INTERESTS IN SHARES The Company had been notified in accordance with chapter 5 of the Disclosure and Transparency Rules of the following voting rights as shareholders of the Company As at 28 July 2017 As at 2 October 2017 Percentage of Percentage of issued share issued share Number of capital carrying Number of capital carrying voting rights voting rights voting rights voting rights Allianz Global Investors GmbH 7612064 5.33% NN Group N.
11200000 7.84% Prudential plc 7719887 5.40% Standard Life Aberdeen plc 10827447 7.58% FIL Limited 7432590 5.20% Percentage based on ordinary shares in issue excluding treasury shares as at 28 July 2017 and as at 2 October 2017 respectively.
AUDITOR
A resolution to reappoint Deloitte LLP as auditors of the Company will be proposed at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting to be held on 30 November 2017.
Details about this proposal are set out in the Notice of Meeting accompanying the Annual Report and Accounts.
In proposing this resolution the Board has taken into account the view of the Audit Committee on Auditor independence discussed by the Chair of the Committee on page 40.
Each of the Directors of the Company as at 2 October 2017 has confirmed that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Company s auditors are unaware and the Director has taken all the steps that he or she ought to have taken as a Director to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Company s auditors are aware of that information.
This confirmation is given and should be interpreted in accordance with the provisions of Section 418 of the Companies Act 2006.
POLITICAL DONATIONS The Company made no political donations during the period 2016  Nil and the Board has no intention to seek shareholders approval to permit the Board to make political donations.
64 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 DIRECTORS AND OFFICERS LIABILITY INSURANCE The Company maintains Directors and Officers liability insurance which gives appropriate cover for legal action brought against its Directors.
The Company has also granted indemnities to each of its Directors on identical terms who served during the period to the extent permitted by law and the Companys articles of association in respect of liabilities incurred by virtue of their office.
Qualifying third party provisions for the benefit of its Directors as defined by Section 234 of the Companies Act 2006 were in force during the period ended 28 July 2017 and continue to be in force at the date of this Report.
DIRECTORS CONFLICT OF INTEREST In accordance with the provisions of Section 175 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has procedures in place to deal with the situation where a Director has a conflict of interest and the Nomination Committee regularly reviews conflict authorisation.
No conflicts of interests were identified during the period.
Directors do not take part in discussions on matters in which they are interested and they may be requested to leave a meeting at which a matter in which they are interested is to be discussed.
CHANGE OF CONTROL The Group has a revolving credit facility of 95 million supplemented by a term loan of 24.5 million which falls due for renewal on 23 March 2019.
The terms of the revolving credit facility and term loan stipulate that consent of the lenders to continue the overall facility is required should there be a change of control of the Company.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION The Companys share capital consists of ordinary shares as set out in note 30 to the financial statements on page 112.
The shares carry no rights to fixed income.
All members who hold ordinary shares are entitled to attend and vote at the Annual General Meeting.
On a show of hands at a general meeting every member present in person and every duly appointed proxy shall have one vote and on a poll every member present in person or by proxy shall have one vote for every ordinary share held or represented.
The Notice of Meeting specifies deadlines for exercising voting rights and each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings.
All shares are fully paid.
There are no specific restrictions on the size of a shareholding nor on the transfer of shares which are both covered by the provisions of the articles of association and prevailing.
The Company is not aware of any agreements between shareholders that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities and voting rights.
Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 35.
Shares held by the Employee Benefit Trust abstain from voting.
With regard to the appointment and replacement of Directors the Company is governed by its Articles of Association the UK Corporate Governance Code the Companies Act and related legislation.
The Companys articles of association may only be amended by a special resolution of shareholders at a general meeting.
Directors are elected or reelected by ordinary resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
The Board may appoint a Director but anyone so appointed must be elected by ordinary resolution at the next general meeting.
Under the articles of association Directors retire and may offer themselves for reelection at a general meeting at least every three years.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The thirtysixth Annual General Meeting of the Company will be held on Thursday 30 November 2017.
The Notice of Meeting is included in a separate document sent to shareholders.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE The corporate governance statement as required by the UK Financial Conduct Authoritys Disclosure and Transparency Rules DTR 7.2 comprises the Additional Information section of the Directors Report above and the Corporate Governance Report on pages 32 to 35 of this Annual Report.
DIRECTORS REPORT The following information is also incorporated into the Directors Report Listing Rule requirement Location in Annual Report Details of any longterm incentive schemes as required by LR 9.4.3 R.
Directors Remuneration Report on pages 42 to 61 Details of any arrangements under which a Director of the Company has waived or agreed to waive any emoluments from the Company or any subsidiary undertaking.
Where a Director has agreed to waive future emoluments details of such waiver together with those relating to emoluments which were waived during the period under review.
No such waivers Details required in the case of any allotment for cash of equity securities made during the period under review otherwise than to the holders of the Companys equity shares in proportion to their holdings of such equity shares and which has not been specifically authorised by the Companys shareholders.
The information required under this paragraph LR 9.8.4 paragraph 7 must be given for any unlisted major subsidiary undertaking of the Company.
No such share allotments By order of the Board Daniel Fattal Company Secretary 2 October 2017 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE DIRECTORS REPORT CONTINUED 65 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors are required to prepare the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Article 4 of the IAS Regulation and have chosen to prepare the parent company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the accounts unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and of the profit or loss of the Company for that year.
In preparing the Group financial statements International Accounting Standard 1 requires that Directors properly select and apply accounting policies present information including accounting policies in a manner that provides relevant reliable comparable and understandable information provide additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in IFRSs are insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions other events and conditions on the entity s financial position and financial performance and make an assessment of the Company s ability to continue as a going concern.
In preparing the parent company financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
Directors responsibility statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge the financial statements prepared in accordance with the relevant financial reporting framework give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit or loss of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole and the Strategic Report includes a fair review of the development position and performance of the business and the position of the Company and the undertakings included in the consolidation taken as a whole together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they face and the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole are fair balanced and understandable and provide the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Company s performance business model and strategy.
This responsibility statement was approved by the Board of Directors on 2 October 2017 and is signed on its behalf by Matt Armitage Brad Gray
Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer
2 October 2017 66 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ST IVES PLC REPORT ON THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 28 July 2017 and of the Groups loss for the period then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Parent Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements of St Ives plc the Parent Company and its subsidiaries the Group which comprise the Consolidated Income Statement the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the Consolidated and Parent Company Balance Sheets the Consolidated and Parent Company Statements of Changes in Equity the Consolidated Cash Flow Statement the related notes 1 to 40 of the Consolidated financial statements and the related notes 1 to 19 of the Company financial statements.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Group financial statements is applicable law and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the Parent Company financial statements is applicable law and United Kingdom Accounting Standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the Group and the Parent Company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We confirm that the nonaudit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the Group or the Parent Company.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 67 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES SUMMARY OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Key audit matters The key audit matters that we identified in the prior year were Goodwill and intangible assets Retirement benefit obligations Valuation of Strategic Marketing revenue Classification and disclosure of Adjusting Items Acquisition Accounting Deferred and Contingent Consideration No new matters have arisen in the current period and contingent acquisition accounting had been identified as a key audit matter in prior years reflecting the acquisitive nature of the Group.
In the current year we have focused the risk to deferred and contingent consideration relating to previous acquisitions.
Materiality The materiality that we used in the current year was 1197000 which was determined on the basis of Adjusted profit before tax.
Scoping Our scope last year comprised of a full audit for all main UK trading companies as well as an audit of specified account balances for Solstice in Chicago due to the size and importance of this division to the Group.
In the current year audit we have classified Solstice as a full scope audit and performed specified activities on a few of the smaller entities as detailed further below in our opinion.
The percentage covered is similar year on year and explained in more detail further below.
Significant changes in our approach There were no changes in our audit approach apart from the matters described above.
CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO PRINCIPAL RISKS GOING CONCERN AND VIABILITY STATEMENT We have reviewed the Directors statement regarding the appropriateness of the going concern basis of accounting contained within note 1 to the financial statements and the Directors statement on the longerterm viability of the Group contained within the Strategic Report.
We are required to state whether we have anything material to add or draw attention to in relation to the disclosures on pages 24 to 27 that describe the principal risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated the Directors confirmation on page 65 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity the Directors statement in note 1 to the financial statements about whether they considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing them and their identification of any material uncertainties to the Group and the Parent Companys ability to continue to do so over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements the Directors explanation on page 63 as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions or whether the Directors statements relating to going concern and the prospects of the Company required in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 are materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We confirm that we have nothing material to add or draw attention to in respect of these matters.
We agreed with the Directors adoption of the going concern basis of accounting and we did not identify any such material uncertainties.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
68 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ST IVES PLC CONTINUED KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgement were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
There are no new matters arising in the current year.
Goodwill and intangible assets Key audit matter description The assessment of the carrying value of goodwill at 108.7 million FY16  135.6 million and acquired intangible assets of 42.2 million FY16  52.0 million involves considerable judgement due to the challenges in accurately forecasting future cash flows in the changing market environment.
Data Marketing Hive Amaze Service Graphics and Tactical Solutions were the most sensitive to changes in key assumptions and with the lowest headroom therefore we focused our testing on these entities.
In the current year the impairments to goodwill totalled 27.1 million FY16  12.3 million.
Impairment
Key assumptions in managements analysis include short and longterm growth rates and the discount rate applied to the future cash flows.
Management disclose this as a key source of estimation uncertainty in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements and this is detailed in note 16 and considered within the significant financial matters section of the Audit Committee report.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We challenged managements assumptions used in their impairment assessment of the Groups goodwill and intangible assets.
Our procedures included assessing the shortterm cash flow projections against recent performance historical forecasting accuracy and gaining an understanding and challenging the key assumptions involved in the forecasts from management including finance and those outside of finance along with agreeing the amounts to contract where available comparing the longterm forecasts against longterm economic growth rates from external data comparing the discount rate applied against a broad comparator group as well as involving our internal valuation specialists to assess the key components of the discount rate calculation considering the reasonableness of and recalculating the sensitivity assessment applied by management and reviewing the sensitivity disclosure included in the Annual Report and Accounts performing further sensitivity analysis of our own on the impairment model and assessing the carrying value of the intangibles with specific focus on the ongoing use of the proprietary techniques and corroborating that the customer relationships remained in place.
Key observations We believe that the impairments recorded in the period are appropriate in light of the revised forecasts provided by management and are materially accurate.
Following these impairments these CGUs are supportable but sensitive to short term forecasts which has been appropriately disclosed in note 16.
We concur with management that a reasonably possible change in projected revenue growth for Service Graphics Tactical Solutions Data Marketing and Hive would indicate impairment and it is appropriate for additional disclosure to be provided.
Whilst the remaining CGUs are dependent on both short and longterm growth assumptions we conclude that the assumptions applied in the impairment models taken in aggregate are within our acceptable range.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 69 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Retirement benefit obligations Key audit matter description Pension assets in FY17 is 354.5 million FY16  344.1 million and pension liabilities is 370.5 million in both FY17 and FY16.
Therefore the net pension deficit on the Consolidated Balance Sheet is 16.0 million FY16  26.4 million.
There is significant judgement involved in the valuation of the retirement benefit obligations.
Therefore our key audit matter relates to the pension liability assumptions with the key assumptions being inflation rate and discount rate.
Management has acknowledged this as a key source of estimation uncertainty in the accounting policy in note 2 and detailed in note 27 and considered within the significant financial matters section of the Audit Committee report.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter The audit procedures we performed in respect of this risk included meeting with the Groups pensions advisors and management to discuss the valuation approach applied and the assumptions used in the valuation using internal specialists to consider and challenge the actuarial assumptions adopted by the Group for the valuation of its retirement benefit obligations.
This includes benchmarking the assumptions against a relevant comparator group.
Key observations We are satisfied that the methodology and assumptions applied in relation to determining the pension valuation when taken in aggregate fall within an acceptable range.
Valuation of Strategic Marketing revenue Key audit matter description We pinpointed the key audit matter relating to strategic marketing revenue as the revenue related to incomplete projects at year end.
This totalled 11.9 million in FY17 FY16  11.4 million.
In the strategic marketing businesses there are projects where revenue is recognised on a percentage of completion basis as noted in the revenue recognition policy in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements and detailed in note 3 we have also raised this as a key issue to the audit committee.
There is a risk that revenue may be misstated due to the degree of judgement exercised by management in estimating future costs.
We also note that revenue recognition carries with it a fraud risk.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We have considered managements application of revenue recognition policies to assess compliance with IAS 18 Revenue.
In particular this involved reviewing the underlying contracts to assess whether revenue was correctly recognised in line with the contract and pinpointing the key audit matter to projects not complete at periodend and challenging management on the percentage of revenue recognised for different projects and corroborating the judgements made to supporting information.
Key observations We have not identified any issues or exceptions relating to revenue recognised over our reporting threshold.
Classification and disclosure of Adjusting Items Key audit matter description Adjusting Items amount to 68.2 million pretax FY16  36.1 million.
This balance is made up of 3.0 million restructuring costs 1.9 million pension costs and 66.1 million costs related to acquisitions made in the prior periods offset by 2.8 million income recognised from the sale of Property Plant and
The increase from the prior period is due to higher impairment costs year on year.
There is a risk that items relating to the ongoing business are being disclosed as adjusting and that items are not being split out in line with the Group accounting policy which could distort the information presented to shareholders.
Adjusting Items is detailed in the significant accounting policies in note 2 and detailed in note 7 and considered within the significant financial matters section of the Audit Committee report.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We challenged the appropriateness of the classification of Adjusting Items.
Our procedures included assessing whether there is sufficient justification for items to be classed as adjusting particularly in the context of managements accounting policy as described in note 2 challenging management on how they have complied with the guidelines issued by ESMA on the APMs and reviewing the Adjusting Items disclosure in note 7 of the accounts in line with IAS 1 Presentation of financial statements.
Key observations We are satisfied that the Adjusting Items have been classified in line with managements accounting policy and that appropriate disclosure has been provided around the nature and quantum of each material item.
70 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ST IVES PLC CONTINUED Acquisition Accounting DeferredContingent Consideration Key audit matter description Total deferred and contingent consideration on the balance sheet for FY17 is 15.9 million FY16  1.8 million and there is a risk that the treatment of amounts paid to former shareholders of acquired businesses is accounted for incorrectly.
Postacquisition the risks relate to the EBITDA estimates for the earnout targets and ensuring that the amounts classified as remuneration is correctly distributed over the period in which they relate.
The EBITDA estimates directly impact the future deferred and contingent consideration expected to be paid and variances between forecasts and actuals can lead to significant variances in the timing of when deferred and contingent consideration is accounted for.
Deferred and contingent consideration is detailed in the significant accounting policies in note 2 and detailed in note 11 furthermore we have raised this to the audit committee as a key issue.
How the scope of our audit responded to the key audit matter We challenged managements assumptions used in their deferred and contingent consideration workings by performing the following procedures reviewing the IFRS 3 workings which calculate the split between consideration and remuneration assessing the forecast EBITDA estimates to ensure they align with the budgets used within goodwill impairment work to ensure consistency of approach and reviewing the amended workings for Solstice in light of the variation to the Membership Interest Purchase Agreement.
Key observations We consider that the accounting for deferred and contingent consideration has been performed correctly and that management have appropriately disclosed within the key sources of estimation uncertainty in note 2 the key sensitivities that exist.
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality both in planning the scope of our audit work and in evaluating the results of our work.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group materiality 1197000 2016  1430000 Basis for determining materiality 5% of Adjusted profit before tax 23.6 million.
Statutory loss before tax was adjusted to add back other pension costs classified as Adjusting Items by the Group 0.5 million.
Rationale for the benchmark applied In the past we have assessed that statutory income before tax was too variable to use as the sole benchmark for our materiality determination and therefore as has occurred in prior periods we have considered a range of benchmarks using Revenue and profit before tax measures as a basis.
Group materiality 1.2 million Adjusted profit before tax 23.6 million Component materiality range 0.1 million to 1.0 million Audit Committee reporting threshold 0.06 million 95% Adjusted profit before tax 5% Group materiality We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to the Committee all audit differences in excess of 59000 FY16  70000 as well as differences below that threshold that in our view warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
We also report to the Audit Committee on disclosure matters that we identified when assessing the overall presentation of the financial statements.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 71 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Our group audit was scoped by obtaining an understanding of the Group and its environment including groupwide controls and assessing the risks of material misstatement at the Group level.
Based on that assessment and at the request of management and the Audit Committee the following divisions were subject to full scope audit  Books SP Group Service Graphics St Ives Management Services Occam Response One Incite Amaze Realise The App Business and Solstice.
These locations represent the principal business units and account for 92% of the Groups revenue 92% of the Groups Adjusted operating profit and 89% of the Groups net assets.
They were also selected to provide an appropriate basis for undertaking audit work to address the risks of material misstatement identified above.
We performed analytical procedures on Hive Tactical Solutions Branded3 FSP and Pragma representing the remaining 8% of both revenue and the Groups Adjusted operating profit and 11% of the Groups net assets.
Our audit work at these locations was executed at levels of materiality applicable to each individual entity which were lower than group materiality and ranged from 178000 to 1014000 FY16  114000 to 715000.
At the parent entity level we also tested the consolidation process and carried out analytical procedures to confirm our conclusion that there were no key audit matters of material misstatement of the aggregated financial information of the remaining components not subject to audit or audit of specified account balances.
The group audit team have ensured that they have maintained oversight of the work performed at the components by involving key component team members in our planning briefing including a discussion of risk assessment to ensure an integrated approach was followed.
We have maintained regular communications with each component throughout the audit attended closing meetings for each component and reviewed documentation of the findings from their work.
During the course of the audit the audit partner visited SP Group St Ives Management Services Response One and Occam.
The audit manager also visited Incite.
Revenue Profit before tax 92% Full audit scope 8% Review at Group level 92% Full audit scope 8% Review at Group level Net assets 89% Full audit scope 11% Review at Group level 72 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF ST IVES PLC CONTINUED OTHER INFORMATION The Directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
In this context matters that we are specifically required to report to you as uncorrected material misstatements of the other information include where we conclude that Fair balanced and understandable  the statement given by the Directors that they consider the Annual Report and financial statements taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit or Audit committee reporting  the section describing the work of the audit committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the audit committee or Directors statement of compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code  the parts of the Directors statement required under the Listing Rules relating to the Companys compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code containing provisions specified for review by the auditor in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.10R2 do not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the Directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the Directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
USE OF OUR REPORT This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 73 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES REPORT ON OTHER LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS Opinions on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the Directors report for the financial year for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the Directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and of the parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified any material misstatements in the strategic report or the Directors report.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception Adequacy of explanations received and accounting records Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Directors remuneration Under the Companies Act 2006 we are also required to report if in our opinion certain disclosures of Directors remuneration have not been made or the part of the Directors remuneration report to be audited is not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have nothing to report in respect of these matters.
Other matters Auditor tenure Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the audit committee on 1 December 2016 to audit the financial statements for the year ending 28 July 2017 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement including previous renewals and reappointments of the firm is in excess of 20 years.
Consistency of the audit report with the additional report to the audit committee Our audit opinion is consistent with the additional report to the audit committee we are required to provide in accordance with ISAs UK.
Sukhbinder Kooner Senior statutory auditor for and on behalf of Deloitte LLP Statutory Auditor London United Kingdom 2 October 2017 74 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT 52 weeks to 28 July 2017 52 weeks to 29 July 2016
Statutory
Results
Results
Adjusted Adjusting Items Statutory restated Adjusting Items restated Results note 7 Results note 38 note 7 note 38 Revenue 3 393154  393154 367546  367546 Cost of sales 284342  284342 262468  262468 Gross profit 108812  108812 105078  105078 Selling costs 26843  26843 25011  25011 Administrative expenses 55277 70278 125555 46832 33472 80304 Share of results of joint arrangement Other operating incomeexpense 58 2760 2818 167 1651 1484 Operating profitloss 5 27105 67518 40413 33280 35123 1843 Net pension finance expense 8  638 638  972 972 Other finance expense 9 3017  3017 2899  2899 Profitloss before tax 24088 68156 44068 30381 36095 5714 Income tax chargecredit 10 4984 5694 710 6322 3931 2391 Net profitloss for the period 19104 62462 43358 24059 32164 8105 Attributable to Shareholders of the parent company 19104 62462 43358 24059 32164 8105 Basic earningsloss per share p 13 13.39 43.79 30.40 Diluted earningsloss per share p 13 13.39 43.79 30.40 17.49 23.38 5.89 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 75 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Loss for the period 43358 8105 Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Actuarial profit on defined benefits pension scheme 8958 83 Tax charge on items taken through other comprehensive income 1584 545 7374 462 Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Transfers of losses on cash flow hedges Losses on cash flow hedges Foreign exchange gain 36telOther comprehensive incomeexpense for the period 7907 228 Total comprehensive expense for the period 35451 8333 Attributable to shareholders of the parent company 35451 8333 76 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
Share Hedging and Share paidin ESOP Treasury option translation Other Retained capital capital reserve shares reserve reserve reserves earnings Total Balance at 31 July 2015 13089 55521  820 6773 427 61901 57892 132882 Loss for the period        8105 8105 Other comprehensive incomeexpense      234 234 462 228 Comprehensive incomeexpense      234 234 8567 8333 Dividends        10934 10934 Issue of shares 775 12716 135    12581  13356 Acquisitions 365 1334  657   1991 528 1828 Recognition of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration     5143  5143  5143 Transfer of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration  97   3295  3198 3382 184 Purchase of own shares   395    395  395 Recognition of sharebased payments     236  236  236 Settlement of sharebased payments 15 127 530  1431  774 868 109 Tax on sharebased payments     231  231 255 24 Balance at 29 July 2016 14244 69795  163 6723 661 77016 42368 133628 Loss for the period        43358 43358 Other comprehensive income      533 533 7374 7907 Comprehensive incomeexpense      533 533 35984 35451 Dividends        8705 8705 Recognition of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration     6969  6969  6969 Transfer of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration  225   5676  5451 5754 303 Recognition of sharebased payments     70  70  70 Settlement of sharebased payments 40 398   123  275 123 438 Tax on sharebased payments     63  63 16 47 Balance at 28 July 2017 14284 70418  163 7900 1194 79349 3572 97205 Additional paidin capital includes share premium merger reserve and capital redemption reserve note 31.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 77 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Note 000 000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 14 26235 35559 Investment property 15  6203
16 108676 135633 Other intangible assets 16 42792 53234 Available for sale asset Investment in joint arrangements Deferred tax assets Other noncurrent assets 178611 231332 Current assets
19 6253 7482 Trade and other receivables 20 91063 90761 Derivative financial instruments Income tax receivable 124 1246 Assets held for sale 15 11 1481 Cash and cash equivalents 20 25651 11835 123147 112805 Total assets 301758 344137
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 22 79539 76486 Derivative financial instruments Income tax payable Deferred consideration payable 15920 1772 Deferred income 24 7141 6206
104466 85030 Noncurrent liabilities
23 80245 92595 Retirement benefits obligations 27 16041 26394 Other noncurrent liabilities
25 1823 2185 Deferred tax liabilities 26 1296 3491 100087 125479 Total liabilities 204553 210509 Net assets 97205 133628
Capital and reserves Share capital 30 14284 14244 Other reserves 79349 77016 Retained earnings 3572 42368 Total equity 97205 133628 These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 2 October 2017 and signed on its behalf by Matt Armitage Brad Gray Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer 78 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS 52 weeks to 52 weeks to 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Operating activities Cash generated from operations 33 30686 23650 Interest paid 3017 2899 Income taxes paid 587 6286 Net cash generated from operating activities 27082 14465 Investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 3154 7124 Purchase of other intangibles Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment 11770 3315 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash acquired Deferred consideration paid for acquisitions made in prior periods 11 663 5790 Net cash generated fromused in investing activities 7642 31024 Financing activities Proceeds on issue of shares 438 13356 Dividends paid 12 8705 10934 Purchase of treasury shares Decreaseincrease in bank loans 15000 10000 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 23267 12027 Net increasedecrease in cash and cash equivalents 11457 4532 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the period 11835 16392 Effect of foreign exchange rate changes 2359 25 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the period 33 25651 11835 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 79 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GENERAL INFORMATION St Ives plc is a company incorporated in England and Wales under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of the registered office is One Tudor Street London EC4Y 0AH.
The nature of the Groups operations and its principal activities are set out in the Chief Executives Performance Review pages 6 to 9.
These consolidated financial statements the financial statements are presented in Sterling because this is the currency of the primary economic environment in which the Group operates.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS adopted by the European Union and IFRSs as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB and Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
In the current period the following revised Standards and Interpretations have been adopted IAS 1 amendments Disclosure Initiative beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IFRS 12 amendments Disclosure of Interest in Other Entities beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IAS 28 amendments Investment in Associates beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IAS 16 amendments Property Plant and Equipment this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IAS 27 amendments Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IFRS 11 amendments Joint Arrangements this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016 IAS 16 and IAS 38 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation amendments In addition Annual Improvements 20122014 Cycle includes amendments to a number of Standards and Interpretations including IFRS 5 IFRS 7 and IAS 19.
The effective date of all the amendments is for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2016.
At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following Standards Amendments and Interpretations which have not been applied in these financial statements were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU.
The Group has not applied these standards in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements IAS 7 amendments Disclosure initiative this standard is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 IAS 12 amendments Deferred Tax this standard is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments this standard is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers this standard is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 2 amendments Sharebased Payment Transactions this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 4 amendments Applying IFRS 9 Financial Instruments this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration this amendment is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases this standard was issued in January 2016 to replace IAS 17 this standard is mandatory for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 In addition Annual Improvements 20142016 Cycle includes amendments to a number of Standards and Interpretations including IFRS 1 IFRS 12 and IAS 28.
The effective date of the IFRS 1 and IAS 28 amendments is for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018 the amendment to IFRS 12 is for annual periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017.
It is not practicable to provide a reasonable estimate of the effects of IFRS 9 until a detailed review has been completed.
Further details related to IFRS 15 and IFRS 16 are discussed below.
80 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED GENERAL INFORMATION CONTINUED IFRS 15 The standard replaces IAS 18 Revenue and specifies how and when an entity shall recognise revenue as well as providing users of financial statements with more informative and relevant disclosures.
The Group is currently assessing the impact of the accounting changes that will arise under IFRS 15 however the Group does expect that changes in the new standard relating to the treatment of incentivebased revenues and revenue recognised in respect of license fees will impact the timing of the revenue recognition for a number of the Groups subsidiaries.
IFRS 16 The standard will primarily change lease accounting for lessees lease agreements will give rise to the recognition of an asset representing the right to use the leased item and a loan obligation for future lease payables.
Lease costs will be recognised in the form of depreciation of the right to use asset and interest on the lease liability.
Lessee accounting under IFRS 16 will be similar in many respects to existing IAS 17 accounting for finance leases but will be substantively different to existing accounting for operating leases where rental charges are currently recognised on a straightline basis and no lease asset or lease loan obligation is recognised.
Lessor accounting under IFRS 16 is similar to existing IAS 17 accounting and is not expected to have a material impact for the Group.
The Group is assessing the impact of the accounting changes that will arise under IFRS 16 however the following changes to lessee accounting will have a material impact as follows Rightofuse assets will be recorded for assets that are leased by the Group currently no lease assets are included on the Groups consolidated statement of financial position for operating leases.
Liabilities will be recorded for future lease payments in the Groups consolidated statement of financial position for the reasonably certain period of the lease which may include future lease periods for which the Group has extension options.
Currently liabilities are generally not recorded for future operating lease payments which are disclosed as commitments.
The amount of lease liabilities will not equal the lease commitments reported on 31 July 2019 but may not be dissimilar.
Lease expenses will be for depreciation of rightofuse assets and interest on lease liabilities interest will typically be higher in the early stages of a lease and reduce over the term.
Currently operating lease rentals are expensed on a straightline basis over the lease term within operating expenses.
Operating lease cash flows are currently included within operating cash flows in the consolidated statement of cash flows under IFRS 16 these will be recorded as cash flows from financing activities reflecting the repayment of lease liabilities borrowings and related interest.
A high volume of transactions will be impacted by IFRS 16 and material judgements are required in identifying and accounting for leases.
Therefore the Group is continuing to assess the impact of these and other accounting changes that will arise under IFRS 16 and cannot reasonably estimate the impact however the changes highlighted above will have a material impact on the consolidated income statement consolidated statement of financial position and consolidated statement of cash flows after the Groups adoption on 2 August 2019.
Going concern The Directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Further detail is contained in the Directors Report on pages 62 to 64.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES a Basis of consolidation The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company its subsidiary undertakings for each period.
Control is achieved where the Company has the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an investee entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
The results of subsidiaries acquired during the period are included in the Consolidated Income Statement from the effective date of acquisition.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the results of subsidiaries to bring their accounting policies into line with those of the Group.
All intraGroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 81 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES b Adjusting Items Statutory results Statutory Results presented in the Consolidated Income Statement include Adjusting Items.
Income statement items are presented in the middle column under the heading Adjusting Items where they are significant in size and either they do not form part of the underlying trading activities of the Group or in the opinion of the Directors their separate presentation enhances understanding of the financial performance of the Group and its businesses.
Items included as Adjusting Items are as follows Redundancies restructuring costs and empty property costs Redundancies and restructuring costs that occur as oneoff costs in the individual businesses that in aggregation can be significant in size are recorded as Adjusting Items.
Careful consideration is applied by management in assessing whether these costs relate to the restructure of a business within the Group or redundancies in the normal course of business which are not treated as Adjusting Items.
Redundancies and restructuring costs related to the closure or disposal of a site are recorded within this caption.
Empty property costs comprise expenses relating to the maintenance and security of leasehold property or property owned by the Group from which no ongoing activity takes place.
The costs do not relate to the continuing operations of the Group and are therefore recorded as Adjusting Items.
Operating results of a site arising after a formal decision on its closure Operating losses from noncontinuing sites where that site does not meet the definition of a discontinued operation under IFRS 5  Non Current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations include revenue operational and overhead expenses incurred after a formal decision on a sites closure has been taken.
These items also include settlement of onerous leases costs related to the transfer of assets and professional fees related to closure of the site.
The above items are recorded as Adjusting Items on the basis that they do not form part of the ongoing trading activities of the Group.
St Ives Defined Pension Benefits Scheme incomeexpense The Scheme was closed to new entrants in April 2002 and to the accrual of future benefits in August 2008.
Given the substantial change in the composition of the Group over the last seven years with a significant number of site closures and disposal of businesses which employed Scheme members the number of scheme members still employed by the Group has declined substantially and stood at 161 as at 28 July 2017 representing less than 5% of the total Scheme membership.
After the closure of the Scheme all the inservice members at that time were transferred to a defined contribution scheme.
Payments to the defined contribution scheme are expensed to the Consolidated Income Statement and are treated as part of ongoing activities and not as an Adjusting Item.
Therefore the Group classifies the income or expenses relating to the Scheme as an Adjusting Item.
Noncash impairment charges related to goodwill and other assets Impairment charges relate to noncurrent and current assets are noncash items do not occur in the normal course of business and tend to be significant in size and irregular in nature.
The presentation of this item as an Adjusting Item further enhances the understanding of the ongoing performance of the Group.
Costs related to acquisitions made in prior periods The Group has grown both organically with the development of new operating subsidiaries and through acquisition.
However there is significant inconsistency between the accounting treatment of the goodwill and intangibles associated with the acquisition of businesses and those generated internally.
The treatment of acquired goodwill and intangibles is further complicated by the differences in accounting rules prevailing at the time of various acquisitions pre and post introduction of IFRS 3 Business Combinations.
On an unadjusted basis a business acquired under IFRS 3 would report substantially lower operating profits and a lower return on capital than a business acquired prior to the introduction of IFRS 3 and also to those businesses which have been developed by the Group thus making comparison of performance of the businesses and segments difficult.
Therefore the following items are recorded as Adjusting Items to provide a more realistic and comparable view of the businesses and enhance the clarity of the performance of the Group and its businesses to the readers of the accounts i Amortisation charges related to intangible assets identified through acquisition accounting ii Expenses related to contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration for acquired businesses iii Charges and credits arising from the reestimation of deferred consideration payable in respect of acquisitions and iv Charges related to the acquisition of businesses or the setting up of new subsidiaries.
Gain or loss associated with disposal of trade subsidiaries or assets The gain or loss on disposal of trade subsidiaries or assets tends to be significant in size and irregular in nature.
The disposal of property plant and equipment is primarily associated with closed sites or businesses that have been disposed of by the Group.
Therefore the gain or loss on the disposal of these assets is treated as an Adjusting Item.
When reviewing these items the Directors considered the guidelines issued by the European Securities and Markets Authority ESMA.
The results excluding Adjusting Items are presented in the Consolidated Income Statement under the heading Adjusted Results in order to provide a consistent and comparable view of the performance of the Groups ongoing business.
A reconciliation of Statutory Results to Adjusted Results can be found in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Further details relating to the Adjusting Items are available in note 7.
82 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED c Revenue recognition Revenue from supply of goods and services is measured at the fair value of consideration received or receivable and comprises amounts receivable for goods and services net of trade discounts upfront payments VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Revenue for goods is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement when all the following conditions are satisfied the significant risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the customer normally on shipment of the product the amount of revenue can be measured reliably it is probable that the economic benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the entity and the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the transaction can be measured reliably.
Revenue for service is recognised as services that are delivered or in proportion to the level of services performed.
Revenue for the level of services performed is recognised using the stage of completion method when the outcome can be measured reliably.
The stage of completion is determined using relevant criteria including Services performed as a percentage of total services Costs incurred to date as a proportion to the estimated total cost of the transaction such as market research fees.
Services performed on time basis i. is recognised over the subscription period on a straightline basis.
Services that are linked to delivering goods to fulfil the contract the revenue is recognised when the goods are delivered to the customer.
The goods can be delivered in full or inpart quantities.
The Group uses two main inputs in the measurement of the services performed and the total services i Time spent by staff The stage of completion is determined by the time incurred by operational staff to date compared to the total estimated on an individual project basis.
Where applicable the value of time spent by staff is further validated against the relevant output measures such as project milestones achieved as contracted number of reports delivered to the customer compared to the total reports contracted.
Income from advance billings is deferred and released to the Consolidated Income Statement when conditions for its recognition have been fulfilled.
Interest income Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and at the effective interest rate applicable.
Goodwill
Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a subsidiary represents the excess of the cost of the acquisition over the net fair value of the identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities of the subsidiary at the date of the acquisition.
Fair value is finalised within twelve months of the date of the acquisition.
Goodwill is not amortised but reviewed for impairment annually in accordance with the impairment of goodwill policy set out in note 2 g below.
Other intangible assets  computer software Computer software that is not integral to an item of property plant or equipment is classified as an intangible asset and is held on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at cost less amortisation and impairments.
These assets are amortised over their estimated useful lives which are generally two to five years.
Other intangible assets  customer relationships Customer relationships identified as separable intangible assets in the context of business combinations are capitalised at their fair value at the date of acquisition.
They are amortised over their estimated useful lives which are generally two to ten years.
Other intangible assets  proprietary techniques Proprietary techniques identified as separable intangible assets in the context of business combinations are capitalised at their fair value at the date of acquisition.
They are amortised over their estimated useful lives which are generally three to ten years.
Other intangible assets  trademarks Trademarks identified as separable intangible assets in the context of business combinations are capitalised at their fair value at the date of acquisition.
They are amortised over their estimated useful lives which are generally ten years.
All intangible assets with finite lives are amortised on a straightline basis.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 83 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES e Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment held for use in the production or supply of goods and services or for administration purposes is stated in the Consolidated and Company Balance Sheets at deemed cost less any accumulated depreciation and impairment losses.
Costs are recognised as an asset only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the cost of the item can be measured reliably.
All repairs and maintenance are charged to the Consolidated Income Statement during the period in which they are incurred.
Assets in the course of construction are carried at cost less any recognised impairment loss.
Cost includes professional fees.
Depreciation of these assets commences when the assets are ready for their intended use.
Freehold land is not depreciated.
Depreciation is charged other than on freehold land and assets under the course of construction so as to write off the cost or valuation of assets over their estimated useful lives using the straightline method on the following basis Freehold buildings 2%  4% Long leases Period of lease Plant and machinery 10%  33 % Fixture fittings and equipment 10%  33 % Motor vehicles 20%  25% An item of property plant and equipment is derecognised upon disposal or when no future economic benefits are expected to arise from the continued use of the asset.
The gain or loss arising on the disposal or scrappage of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in income.
At each balance sheet date the Group reviews the carrying amounts of its property plant and equipment and intangible assets to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered any impairment loss.
If any such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
Where the asset does not generate cash flows that are independent from other assets the Group estimates the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit to which the asset belongs.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and valueinuse.
In assessing valueinuse the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessment of the time value of money and the risks specific to the assets for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
If the recoverable amount of an asset or cashgenerating unit is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset cashgenerating unit is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised immediately as an expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Where an impairment loss subsequently reverses the carrying amount of the asset cashgenerating unit is increased to the revised estimate of its recoverable amount but so that the increased carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset cashgenerating unit in prior periods.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised as income immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is allocated to the Group of cashgenerating units that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
A cashgenerating unit represents the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored by the Groups Board of Directors for internal management purposes.
The recoverable amount of the Group of cashgenerating units to which goodwill has been allocated is tested for impairment annually on a consistent date during each financial period or more frequently when such events or changes in circumstances indicate that it may be impaired.
If the recoverable amount of the cashgenerating unit is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Impairments of goodwill are not subsequently reversed.
On disposal of a cashgenerating unit the attributable amount of goodwill is included in the determination of the profit or loss on disposal.
84 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED h Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and those production overheads that have been incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Cost is valued on a first in first out FIFO basis.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price less the estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in selling and distribution.
The tax expense in the Consolidated Income Statement comprises tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The tax currently payable is based on the taxable profit for the period.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the Consolidated Income Statement because it excludes items of income and expense that are taxable or deductible in other periods and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
Deferred tax is recognised on differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities in the accounts and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary differences arise on nondeductible goodwill or from the initial recognition other than business combinations of other assets or liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the tax profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and is reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the Consolidated Income Statement except when it relates to items charged or credited in other comprehensive income in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income or when it relates to items that are charged or credited to the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income or directly to the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current assets against current liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Current tax and deferred tax for the year Current tax and deferred tax are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement except when they relate to items that are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income or directly to the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
Where current tax or deferred tax arises from the initial accounting for a business combination the tax effect is included in the accounting for the business combination.
Provisions are recognised when the Group has a present obligation as a result of a past event and it is probable that the Group will be required to settle the obligation and its value can be reliably estimated.
When a provision needs to be released the provision is taken back to the Consolidated Income Statement within the line where it was initially booked.
Provisions for repairs Provisions for repairs are made where the Group is committed under the terms of the lease to make repairs to leasehold property.
The provision is made for the estimated cost over the period of the lease.
Provisions for restructuring costs Provisions for restructuring costs are recognised when the Group has a detailed formal plan for the restructuring that has been communicated to affected parties.
The individual statements of each Group company are presented in the currency of the primary economic environment in which it operates its functional currency.
For the purpose of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position of each Group company are expressed in Sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the presentation currency for the consolidated financial statements.
Transactions in foreign currencies other than Sterling are translated at the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the balance sheet date are translated to Sterling at the exchange rate ruling at that date.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 85 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Exchange differences are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in the period in which they arise except for exchange differences on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks and exchange differences on monetary items receivable from or payable to a foreign operation for which settlement is neither planned nor likely to occur in the foreseeable future therefore forming part of the net investment in the foreign operation which are recognised initially in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income and reclassified to the Consolidated Income Statement on disposal or partial disposal of the net investment.
Foreign currency differences arising on translation or settlement of monetary items are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction and not retranslated each period end.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at fair value are translated to Sterling at exchange rates ruling at the date the fair value was determined.
Exchange gains and losses arising on the retranslation of nonmonetary assets and liabilities are recognised directly in a separate component of Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation are treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign operation and translated at the period end closing rate.
Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised in the Consolidated Balance Sheet when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
The Group classifies its investments in the following categories Fair value measurement Financial instrument category Note Classification Measurement hierarchy Investment property 15 Investment property Amortised cost 2 Available for sale investments 17 Availableforsale financial assets Fair value through profit and loss 3 Trade and other receivables 20 Loans and receivables Amortised cost NA Cash and cash equivalents 20 Loans and receivables Amortised cost NA Trade and other payables 22 Other financial liabilities Amortised cost NA Derivative financial instruments 21 Derivative instrument Fair value through profit and loss 2 Deferred consideration payable 11 Other financial liabilities Fair value through profit and loss 3 Bank borrowings 23 Other financial liabilities Amortised cost NA The fair value measurement hierarchy is only applicable for financial instruments measured at fair value.
Fair value measurements where applicable are categorised into Level 1 2 or 3 based on the degree to which the inputs to the fair value measurements are observable and the significance of the inputs to the fair value measurement in its entirety which are described as follows Level 1 inputs are quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Group can access at the measurement date Level 2 inputs are inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly or indirectly and Level 3 inputs are unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
The Groups primary categories of financial instruments are listed below Trade and other receivables Trade receivables do not carry any interest and are stated at their nominal value as reduced by appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts.
Allowances are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement when there is objective evidence that their asset is impaired.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand and demand deposits.
Bank borrowings Interestbearing bank loans and overdrafts are recorded as the proceeds receivable net of direct issue costs.
Finance expenses are accounted for on an accruals basis in the Consolidated Income Statement using the effective interest rate method and are included in creditors to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Available for sale investments Unlisted shares held by the Group are classified as being availableforsale and are stated at fair value.
Fair values of unlisted shares are calculated with reference to exit price.
All availableforsale investments carried at fair value have been fair valued using a level 3 measurement as per the fair value hierarchy defined in IFRS 7.
Gains or losses arising from changes in fair value are recognised directly in equity until the security is disposed of or is determined to be impaired at which time the cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is included in the Consolidated Income Statement for the period.
86 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED l Financial instruments continued Trade and other payables Trade payables are not interest bearing and are stated at their nominal value.
Investment properties Investment properties are properties which are held to earn rental income and are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Depreciation is charged between 2% to 4% per annum so as to write off the cost or valuation of assets over their estimated useful lives using the straightline method.
An investment property is derecognised upon disposal or when the investment property is permanently withdrawn from use and no future economic benefits are expected from the disposal.
Any gain or loss arising on derecognition of the property calculated as the difference between the net disposal proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset is included in the Consolidated Income Statement in the period in which the property is derecognised.
Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting The Groups activities expose it primarily to the financial risks of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.
The Group uses derivative financial instruments to hedge its exposure to foreign exchange for the purchase of subsidiaries goods and services denominated in foreign currencies and the sale of goods and services similarly denominated.
The use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board of Directors which provide written principles on the use of financial derivatives consistent with the Groups risk management strategy.
The Group does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
Changes in the fair value of derivative financial instruments that are designated and effective as cash flow hedges of forecast transactions are recognised directly in equity and the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement.
If the cash flow hedge of a firm commitment or forecast transaction results in the recognition of an asset or liability then at the time the asset or liability is recognised the associated gains and losses on the derivative that had previously been recognised in equity are included in the initial measurements of the asset or liability.
For the hedges that do not result in the recognition of an asset or liability amounts deferred in equity are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in the same period as gains or losses are recognised on the hedged item.
The gain or loss on hedging instruments relating to the effective portion of a net investment hedge is recognised in equity and the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Gains or losses accumulated in equity are included in the Consolidated Income Statement when the foreign operations are disposed of.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
At that time any cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument recognised in equity is retained in equity until the forecast transaction occurs.
If a hedge transaction is no longer expected to occur the net cumulative gain or loss previously recognised in equity is included in the Consolidated Income Statement for the period.
Derivatives embedded in other financial instruments or other host contracts are treated as separate derivatives when their risks and characteristics are not closely related to those of their host contracts and the host contracts are not carried at fair value with unrealised gains or losses reported in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Those derivatives which are not designed as hedges are classified as held for trading and gains and losses on those instruments are recognised immediately in the Consolidated Income Statement.
A derivative with a positive fair value is recognised as a financial asset whereas a derivative with a negative fair value is recognised as a financial liability.
Deferredcontingent consideration payable Deferredcontingent consideration payable and consideration required to be treated as remuneration are typically determined based on a multiple of future incremental EBITDA and the related amounts are based on forecasts that have been derived from the most recent budgets and forecasts.
Any change in the fair value of the outcome is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement as an Adjusting Item.
The deferred consideration payable and accrued contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration are recognised as financial liabilities where amounts are expected or required to be cash settled.
Where amounts are payable in the issuance of future PLC shares amounts required to settle the liability are recorded in equity.
The Directors consider that the carrying value of all financial assets and liabilities is approximately equal to their fair value except for investment properties which are recorded at amortised cost.
Further details are provided in note 28.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 87 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES m Retirement benefits The Group operates both defined benefits and defined contribution schemes for its employees.
Payments to the defined contribution schemes are expensed to the Consolidated Income Statement as they fall due.
For the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme full actuarial calculations are carried out every three years using the projected unit credit method and updates are performed for each financial period end.
Actuarial gains and losses are recognised in full in the period in which they occur.
They are recognised outside the Consolidated Income Statement and presented in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The retirement benefits obligation recognised in the Consolidated Balance Sheet represents the present value of the defined benefits obligations and unrecognised past service costs and as reduced by the fair value of the schemes assets.
Any asset resulting from this calculation is limited to past service costs plus the present value of available refunds and reductions to the scheme.
Past service cost is recognised immediately to the extent that the benefits are already vested and otherwise is amortised on a straightline basis over the average period until the benefits become vested.
The Scheme was closed to new entrants in 2002 and to the future accrual of benefits in 2008.
The composition of the Group has changed significantly since 2008 with a number of Companies sold or closed and from June 2010 to date the Group has made twelve acquisitions.
Given the closure of the Scheme and the change in the composition of the Group the Board has concluded that the Schemes income and expenses do not relate to the underlying trading activities of the Group.
Furthermore the underlying assumptions used in the Schemes valuation are determined by reference to external market data notably discount and inflation rates that are outside the Groups control and can vary significantly between periods.
The Groups accounting policy is to record the income and expenses related to the Scheme as an Adjusting Item.
Defined benefit income and expenses are split into three categories gains and losses on curtailments and settlements and costs incurred in the running of the Scheme net pension finance charge and remeasurement of gains and losses.
The Group presents the first two components of the Schemes costs within Adjusting Items in its Consolidated Income Statement and the remeasurement costs within the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Past service costs are recognised as an Adjusting Item in the Consolidated Income Statement n Sharebased payments The Group makes equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees which are measured at fair value at the date of the grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimate of the number of equity instruments expected to vest as a result of the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions.
The impact of the revision of the original estimates if any is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement such that the cumulative expense reflects the revised estimate with a corresponding adjustment to equity reserves.
The fair value of share options issued is measured using a binomial model for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
SAYE share options granted to employees are treated as cancelled when employees cease to contribute to the scheme.
This results in accelerated recognition of the expenses that would have arisen over the remainder of the original vesting period.
The cumulative expense is reversed when an employee in receipt of the share options terminates service prior to the completion of the vesting period.
Where the terms of an equitysettled award are modified on termination of the employment the total fair value of the sharebased payments is recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Rental costs under operating leases are charged to the Consolidated Income Statement in equal amounts over the terms of the lease.
In the event that lease incentives are received to enter into operating leases such incentives are recognised as a liability.
The aggregate benefit of incentives is recognised as a reduction of rental expense on a straightline basis over the lease term.
88 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES CONTINUED p Business combinations Acquisitions of subsidiaries and businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The consideration for each acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed by the Group together with the equity instruments equivalent to the midmarket share price on the date of completion in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement as incurred.
Where applicable the consideration for the acquisition includes any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement measured at its acquisitiondate fair value.
Subsequent changes in such fair values are adjusted against the cost of acquisition where they qualify as measurement period adjustments see below.
All other subsequent changes in the fair value of contingent consideration classified as an asset liability or equity are accounted for in accordance with relevant IFRSs.
Contingent consideration payable to selling shareholders who continue to be employed by the Group but which is automatically forfeited upon termination of employment is classified as remuneration for postcombination services and is recorded in the Consolidated Income
The contingent consideration is satisfied in cash and equity instruments equivalent to the midmarket share price on the date of the consideration payable.
The cashsettled contingent consideration treated as remuneration for postcombination services is recognised in accordance with IAS 19 revised Employee Benefits and has been recorded as deferred consideration payable in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimate for the contingent consideration payable which is to be settled in cash.
The impact of the revision if any is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement such that the cumulative expense reflects the revised estimate with a corresponding adjustment to the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The equity settled contingent consideration treated as remuneration for postcombination services is recognised in accordance with IFRS 2 ShareBased Payments and is recorded in equity reserves.
Further details can be found in the sharebased payments accounting policy.
At each balance sheet date the Group revises its estimate of the consideration payable which is to be settled in shares.
The impact of the revision if any is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement such that the cumulative expense reflects the revised estimate with a corresponding adjustment to equity reserves.
The acquirees identifiable assets liabilities and contingent liabilities that meet the conditions for recognition under IFRS 3  are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date except that deferred tax assets or liabilities and liabilities or assets related to employee benefit arrangements are recognised and measured in accordance with IAS 12 Income Taxes and IAS 19 Employee Benefits respectively liabilities or equity instruments related to the replacement by the Group of an acquirees sharebased payment awards are measured in accordance with IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment and assets or disposal groups that are classified as held for sale in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations are measured in accordance with that Standard.
If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the reporting period in which the combination occurs the Group reports provisional amounts for the items for which the accounting is incomplete.
Those provisional amounts are adjusted during the measurement period see below or additional assets or liabilities are recognised to reflect new information obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date that if known would have affected the amounts recognised as of that date.
The measurement period is the period from the date of acquisition to the date that the Group obtains complete information about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date and is subject to a maximum of one year.
The value of noncontrolling interests in subsidiaries is calculated initially as their share of identifiable net assets and is subsequently adjusted by their share of comprehensive income.
Joint arrangements are entities where no one party is able to exercise overall control in which the Group has an interest.
The Groups share of the posttax results of its joint arrangements is included in the Consolidated Income Statement using the equity method of accounting.
Where the Group transacts with a joint arrangement profits and losses are eliminated to the extent of the Groups interest in the joint arrangement.
Investments in joint arrangements are carried in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at cost plus postacquisition changes in the Groups share of net assets of the entity less any provision for impairment.
Noncurrent assets classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of amortised cost and fair value less costs of disposal.
Noncurrent assets are classified as held for sale if their carrying value will be recovered through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use.
This condition is regarded as met only when the sale is highly probable and the asset is available for immediate sale in its present condition.
The sale should be completed within one year from the date of classification as an asset held for sale.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 89 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES s Critical accounting judgements and key sources of estimation uncertainty In the course of applying the Groups accounting policies the following estimations and accounting judgements have been made which could have a significant effect on the results of the Group were they subsequently found to be inappropriate.
Critical accounting judgements In certain cases judgement is required in assessing whether amounts payable on acquisition and subsequently should fall to be treated as consideration or subsequent remuneration.
Based on the substance of the agreement and historical experience of settlement the third tranche of deferredcontingent consideration payable for Solstice of 19903000 is treated as contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration.
11610000 is recognised in the consolidated income statement in the current period and the remaining amount of 8293000 will be charged to the Consolidated Income Statement in future financial periods.
The total amount is contingent on the achievement of the incremental EBITDA and on the continued employment of certain Group employees.
Based on the substance of the agreement and historical experience of settlement the third tranche of deferredcontingent consideration for TAB of 16087000 is treated as contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration.
7277000 is recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in the current period and the remaining amount of 8810000 will be charged to the Consolidated Income Statement in future financial periods.
The total amount is contingent on the achievement of the incremental EBITDA and on the continued employment of certain Group employees.
The key sources of estimation uncertainty in relation to the estimated deferredcontingent consideration payable can be found below.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty Impairment of goodwill Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the valueinuse of the cashgenerating units for which goodwill has been identified.
In arriving at the value in use the forecast of future cash flows of cashgenerating units and selection of appropriate discount rates is required to calculate present values a process which involves estimation.
The recoverability analysis indicates that other than as indicated in note 16 the carrying amount of goodwill will be recovered in full.
The situation will be monitored closely should future developments indicate that adjustments are appropriate.
The carrying value of goodwill at the balance sheet date was 108.7 million 2016  135.6 million.
A sensitivity analysis can be found in note 16.
Impairment of acquired intangibles and property plant and equipment The Group considers the recoverability of acquired intangibles and property plant and equipment which are included within the Consolidated Balance Sheet at 42.8 million and 26.2 million respectively.
The key areas of judgement when assessing the recoverability of these assets are in relation to the discount rates terminal growth rates budgets and forecasts to be applied to forecast cash flows.
A sensitivity analysis can be found in note 16.
Retirement benefits obligations The calculation of retirement benefits obligations requires estimates to be made of discount rates inflation rates future salary and pension increases and mortality.
The net deficit in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for the retirement benefits scheme was 16.0 million 2016  26.4 million.
A sensitivity analysis can be found in note 27.
Deferredcontingent consideration payable Estimated deferredcontingent consideration for Solstice and TAB of 15.5 million  excluding the working capital consideration payable recorded at the balance sheet date is dependent upon the incremental level of EBITDA to be achieved by the respective businesses which are based on the forecasts approved by the Board.
The critical accounting judgement in relation to the estimated deferredcontingent consideration payable can be found above.
Further details and a sensitivity analysis can be found in note 11.
REVENUE
An analysis of the Groups revenue from continuing operations as defined by International Accounting Standard 18  Revenue is as follows 2017 2016 Sale of goods 230206 223391 Rendering of services 162948 144155 Revenue from the sale of goods and rendering of services 393154 367546 90 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SEGMENT REPORTING The Group manages its business on a market segment basis based on the Groups internal reporting to the Chief Operating Decision Maker
The CODM has been determined to be the Chief Executive and Chief Financial Officer as they are primarily responsible for the allocation of resources to the segments and the assessment of performance of the segments.
The Strategic Marketing segment comprises of the Groups Digital Data and Insight businesses.
The Marketing Activation segment includes businesses which deliver marketing communications through a combination of print and instore marketing services.
The Books segment comprises of Clays.
Corporate costs are allocated to revenuegenerating segments as this presentation better reflects their profitability.
Business segments 52 weeks to 28 July 2017 Strategic Marketing Marketing Activation Books Total
External sales 161196 154258 77700 393154 Group sales 3807 11215 77 15099 Intercompany eliminations 2055 11732 1312 15099 Total revenue 162948 153741 76465 393154 Operating profit before Adjusting Items 20214 4310 2581 27105 Adjusting Items 33427 28455 5636 67518 Statutory loss from operations 13213 24145 3055 40413 Net pension finance expense Other finance expense Statutory loss before tax Income tax credit Statutory net loss for the period 52 weeks to 29 July 2016
Marketing
Marketing Activation Books Total
External sales 138745 159694 69107 367546 Group sales 6987 10411 17 17415 Intercompany eliminations 1577 15298 540 17415 Total revenue 144155 154807 68584 367546 Operating profit before Adjusting Items 19354 8084 5842 33280 Adjusting Items 18140 15752 1231 35123 Statutory profitloss from operations 1214 7668 4611 1843 Net pension finance expense Other finance expense Statutory loss before tax Income tax charge Statutory net loss for the period 8105 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 91 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Other information 52 weeks to 28 July 2017
Marketing
Marketing Activation Books Total Capital additions 2131 627 618 3376 Depreciation and amortisation charges 12434 2011 2328 16773 Impairment charges 241 29939 2878 33058 52 weeks to 29 July 2016
Marketing
Marketing Activation Books Total Capital additions 3161 1358 2244 6763 Depreciation and amortisation charges 10928 3130 3159 17217 Impairment charges 12712  12712 Balance sheet 52 weeks to 28 July 2017
Marketing
Marketing Activation Books Total
Segment assets 190860 54460 30660 275980 Unallocated corporate assets Consolidated total assets
Segment liabilities 46019 39691 19800 105510 Unallocated corporate liabilities Consolidated total liabilities 52 weeks to 29 July 2016
Marketing
Marketing Activation Books Total
Segment assets 199813 87041 44199 331053 Unallocated corporate assets Consolidated total assets
Segment liabilities 32209 41188 14632 88029 Unallocated corporate liabilities Consolidated total liabilities 210509 92 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SEGMENT REPORTING CONTINUED Reconciliation of segment assets and liabilities 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Unallocated corporate assets comprise Financial assets Income tax receivable 124 1246 Cash and cash equivalents 25651 11835 Unallocated assets as per balance sheet 25778 13084 Unallocated corporate liabilities comprise Deferred tax liabilities 1296 3491 Current tax payable Loans and bank overdrafts noncurrent 80245 92595 Retirement benefits obligations 16041 26394 Unallocated liabilities as per balance sheet 99043 122480 Geographical segments The Strategic Marketing Marketing Activation and Books segments operate primarily in the UK the Group derives 83% of the total revenue from customers located in the UK and 13% of the total revenue from customers located in the US.
28 July 29 July 2017 2016 United Kingdom 326702 313817 United States of America 49813 36575 Rest of the world 16639 17154 Total revenue 393154 367546 The largest customer of the Group accounted for 30.0 million 2016  25.9 million of revenue in the current period.
PROFITLOSS FROM OPERATIONS Profitloss from operations has been arrived at after chargingcrediting 2017 2016 Auditors remuneration Audit fees Audit of the Company accounts Audit of the accounts of the Companys subsidiaries Other assurance Nonaudit fees Tax compliance services Corporate finance services Staff costs note 6 183738 155624 Depreciation of property plant and equipment note 14 5959 7003 Depreciation of investment property note 15 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets note 16 27438 12712 Amortisation of intangible assets note 16 10624 10016 Operating lease rentals land and buildings 4628 4954 plant and equipment 1119 107 other 1056 1805 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment Adjusted results Profitloss on disposal of property plant and equipment Adjusting Items 2760 1651 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 93 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES STAFF COSTS The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was 2017 2016 Number Number
2641 2546
Administration
3508 3418 Their aggregate remuneration comprised 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 149990 134149 Social security costs 13013 12660 Other pension costs 5115 3908 168118 150717 Contingent consideration deemed as remuneration 8581 3077 Sharebased payment 7039 4907 183738 158701 ADJUSTING ITEMS Adjusting Items disclosed on the face of the Consolidated Income Statement included in respect of continuing operations are as followstel 2016
Restructuring items Redundancies and other charges Costs associated with empty properties St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme costs Administrative costs Curtailment credit
Costs related to acquisitions made in prior periods Amortisation of acquired intangibles Impairment of goodwill and other assets Costs associated with prior period acquisitions and setup of subsidiaries Contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration Increasedecrease in deferred consideration Adjusting Items in administrative expenses Profitloss on disposal of property plant and equipment Adjusting Items before interest and tax Net pension finance expense in respect of defined benefits pension scheme Adjusting Items before tax Income tax credit Adjusting Items after tax 32164 94 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED ADJUSTING ITEMS CONTINUED Restructuring items Current period The restructuring items in the current period include redundancy and restructuring costs of 1505000 relating to the Books segment and 1306000 relating to the Marketing Activation segment.
During the period redundancy costs of 192000 relating to the restructuring of Digital businesses were incurred in the Strategic Marketing segment.
The profit on disposal of property plant and equipment of 2760000 relates to the sale of the Groups properties in Burnley Peterborough and
These items are recorded in the Marketing Activation segment.
Prior period The restructuring items in the prior period include redundancy costs of 521000 relating to the Books segment 574000 relating to the restructure of the Marketing Activation segment 31000 of costs related to subsidiaries disposed of in prior periods and redundancy costs of 486000 relating to the Strategic Marketing segment.
The loss on disposal of property plant and equipment of 1651000 relates to the sale of the Groups properties in Bradford and Birmingham.
These items were recorded in the Marketing Activation segment.
St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme costs Current period The Scheme charges include service costs of 756000 a net pension finance charge of 638000 and costs in relation to running the scheme of 497000.
These items are recorded in the Books segment.
Prior period In the prior period the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme charges include service costs of 582000 a net pension finance charge of 972000 and other costs of 327000 partially offset by a curtailment credit of 198000.
These items were recorded in the Books segment.
Costs related to acquisitions made in current and prior periods Current period Charges relating to the amortisation of acquired customer relationships proprietary techniques and software intangibles of 9747000 and 206000 are recorded in the Strategic Marketing and Marketing Activation segments respectively.
The impairment charge of 33058000 includes impairments to goodwill of 27130000 impairments to property plant and equipment of 4974000 impairments to software of 308000 and impairments to inventory of 646000.
The impairment charge is recorded against the following assets within the businesses 2017 2017 SP Group
Property plant and equipment
Service Graphics  Goodwill Tactical Solutions  Goodwill
Inventory
Property plant and equipment Occam  Software Total Impairment Charge Impairment charges of 23938000 and 3500000 are recorded against SP Group and Tactical Solutions respective assets due to continued decline in operating profit as a result of a lower level of promotional activities in the grocery retail sector.
Subsequent to the period end the Group was informed by Sainsburys that it would not renew its contract for the provision of marketing materials.
As a result an impairment charge of 2500000 has been recorded against the goodwill of Service Graphics in the 2017 financial period.
These charges have been recorded in the Marketing Activation segment.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 95 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Following the loss of the HarperCollins contract an impairment charge of 2879000 was recorded against noncurrent assets and inventories in the Books segment.
An impairment charge of 241000 relating to obsolete software was recorded within the Strategic Marketing segment.
Prior period In the prior period charges related to the amortisation of acquired customer relationships proprietary techniques and software intangibles of 9031000 and 206000 were recorded in the Strategic Marketing and Marketing Activation segments respectively.
Contingent consideration of 8220000 in respect of acquisitions required to be treated as remuneration rather than consideration and a credit of 781000 related to the decrease in consideration in respect of past acquisitions were recorded within the Strategic Marketing segment.
The impairment charge of 12712000 includes an impairment to SP Groups goodwill of 10192000 Tactical Solutions goodwill of 2155000 and to Tactical Solutions customer relationship assets of 365000.
This was due to the decline in revenue from the grocery retail sector and the loss of a customer resulting in a decline in operating profit.
These items were recorded in the Marketing Activation segment.
The Group incurred costs related to the acquisitions of FSP and TAB of 135000 and 496000 respectively together with other costs of 60000 related to acquisitions made in prior periods.
Setup costs of 94000 relate to new offices.
These items are recorded in the Strategic Marketing segment.
Tax
In the current period the tax credit of 5694000 2016  3931000 relates to the items discussed above.
This tax credit includes an adjustment of 786000 relating to the disposal of a subsidiary in a prior period.
PENSION FINANCE CHARGE 2017 2016 Investment income on defined benefit pension scheme assets note 27 8436 11348 Interest costs on defined benefit pension scheme obligations note 27 9074 12320 OTHER FINANCE COSTS 2017 2016 Interest on bank overdrafts and loans 3017 2899
Income tax on the lossprofit as shown in the Consolidated Income Statement is as follows 2017 2016 Total current tax charge Current period 4512 5468 Adjustments in respect of prior periods Total current tax charge 3830 5495 Deferred tax on origination and reversal of temporary differences Deferred tax credit 4761 3181 Adjustments in respect of prior periods Total deferred tax credit note 26 4540 3104 Total income tax creditcharge 710 2391 Income tax on the lossprofit before and after Adjusting Items is as follows 2017 2016 Tax charge on Adjusted profit before tax 4984 6322 Tax credit on Adjusting Items 5694 3931 Total income tax creditcharge 710 2391 The blended tax rate used above of 24.02% is based predominantly upon UK Corporation Tax 19.67% US Federal Tax 35% and US State taxes.
Taxation for other jurisdictions is calculated at the statutory rates prevailing in the respective jurisdictions.
96 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED TAX CONTINUED The creditcharge can be reconciled to the loss before tax shown in the Consolidated Income Statement as follows 2017 2016 Loss before tax 44068 5714 Tax calculated at a rate of 24.02% 2016  22.66% 10585 1295 Nondeductible charges on impairment of assets 5336 2469 Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 7486 2675 Effect of tax deductible goodwill Effect of change in United Kingdom corporate tax rate Credit on research and development activities Other foreign taxes Movement in deferred tax on industrial buildings 1824 430 Utilisation of tax losses not previously recognised Adjustments in respect of prior periods Total income tax creditcharge 710 2391 Income tax as shown in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income is as follows 2017 2016 United Kingdom corporation tax credit at 19.67% 2016  20% Deferred tax on origination and reversal of temporary differences note 26 2132 960 Total income tax charge 1584 545 The Finance Act 2015 which provides for reductions in the main rate of corporation tax from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
In the Finance Act 2016 the Government announced further reductions in the main tax rate down to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 which was substantively enacted on 6 October 2016.
These rate reductions have been reflected in the calculation of deferred tax at the balance sheet date.
ACQUISITIONS
Solstice Consulting LLC In March 2015 the Group acquired 100% of the equity stock of Solstice Consulting LLC Solstice.
The deferred consideration is payable in three tranches dependent upon the level of EBITDA achieved by Solstice for the calendar years ending 2016 2017 and 2018. consideration payable for the third tranche is 19903000.
The App Business Limited In January 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the share capital in The App Business Limited TAB.
The deferred consideration is payable in four tranches dependent upon the level of EBITDA achieved by TAB for the years ending 30 April 2016 30 April 2017 30 April 2018 and 30 April 2019.
The estimated deferred consideration for the second third and fourth tranches is 16087000.
A further 424000 of deferred consideration payable is relation to the working capital of The App Business Limited.
This is payable based on the submission of tax returns.
The estimated deferred consideration is treated as follows
Deferred accrued as Deferred consideration share based consideration payable as at payment in treated as 28 July current and remuneration in 2017 prior periods future periods Total
9670 1940 8293 19903
5826 1451 8810 16087 TAB  working capital 15920 3391 17103 36414 As at 28 July 2017 deferredcontingent consideration of 15920000 has been recorded in the Groups Consolidated Balance Sheet.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 97 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES The movement in deferred consideration is as follows Deferred consideration as at 29 July 2016 Amounts paid in current period Deferred consideration charged in current period Deferred consideration as at 28 July 2017 Sensitivity analysis The significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement of the deferredcontingent consideration payable is future incremental EBITDA of the acquired entity.
Significant increases in incremental EBITDA would result in an increase in deferred consideration payable.
As at the balance sheet date the Group has recorded the maximum possible level of deferred consideration in respect of Solstice.
A sensitivity analysis in respect of deferredcontingent consideration payable for TAB is as follows
Maximum remaining deferredcontingent consideration payable % increase in CGUs current EBITDA required to achieve maximum deferredcontingent consideration payable 27% Cash outflow related to acquisitions made in prior periods The total impact on investing cash outflows in the current period related to acquisitions made in prior periods is as follows TAB  working capital Hive  working capital
Per
2017 2016 share 000 000 Final dividend paid for the 52 weeks ended 31 July 2015 5.55p  7515 Interim dividend paid for the 26 weeks ended 29 January 2016 2.35p  3419 Final dividend paid for the 52 weeks ended 29 July 2016 5.45p 7777 Interim dividend paid for the 26 weeks ended 27 January 2017 Dividends paid during the period 8705 10934 Proposed final dividend at the period end of 1.30p per share 2016  5.45p per share 1.30p 1857 The proposed final dividend is subject to the approval by shareholders at the 2017 Annual General Meeting and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
EARNINGS PER SHARE The calculation of the basic and diluted earningsloss per share is based on the following data Number of shares 2017 2016 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of basic earnings per share 142642 136633 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares Share options Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of diluted earnings per share 142642 137563 98 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED EARNINGS PER SHARE CONTINUED Earnings per share 2017 2016
Earningsloss
Earningsloss per share Earningsloss per share 000 pence 000 pence Earningsloss and basic earningsloss per share Adjusted earnings and Adjusted basic earnings per share 19104 13.39 24059 17.61 Adjusting Items 62462 43.79 32164 23.54 Loss and basic loss per share 43358 30.40 8105 5.93 Earningsloss and diluted earningsloss per share Adjusted earnings and Adjusted diluted earnings per share 19104 13.39 24059 17.49 Adjusting Items 62462 43.79 32164 23.38 Loss and diluted loss per share 43358 30.40 8105 5.89 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Land and Land and Fixtures fittings buildings buildings Plant and equipment and Freehold Long leases machinery motor vehicles Total Cost or valuation At 31 July 2015 36718 4425 88291 8357 137791
Additions
134 1150 3800 1193 6277
6367 150 2886 731 10134 Reclassification  investment property 13241    13241 Reclassification  software Foreign exchange At 29 July 2016 17244 5671 89339 8767 121021
256 2283 526 3065
6 150 1939 154 2249 Reclassification  investment property 1733    1733 Reclassification  freehold property Foreign exchange At 28 July 2017 15684 5601 89664 9156 120105 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 31 July 2015 11051 2292 70107 6100 89550 Charge for the period 411 627 5195 770 7003
2122 145 2788 729 5784 Reclassification  investment property 5359    5359 Foreign exchange At 29 July 2016 3981 2766 72531 6184 85462 Charge for the period 297 572 4053 1037 5959
217 4350 407 4974
2 137 1913 142 2194 Reclassification  freehold property Reclassification  investment property Foreign exchange At 28 July 2017 4135 3236 79013 7486 93870 Net book value At 28 July 2017 11549 2365 10651 1670 26235 At 29 July 2016 13263 2905 16808 2583 35559 The Group has freehold land included within property plant and equipment with a net book value of 2165000 2016  3934000 which has not been depreciated.
The amount of fully depreciated property plant and equipment is 61990000 2016  47772000.
Impairments to property plant and equipment are detailed in note 7.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 99 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Property
Cost or valuation At 29 July 2016 Reclassification from freehold property Reclassification to assets held for sale
At 28 July 2017 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 29 July 2016
Reclassification from freehold property Reclassification to assets held for sale
At 28 July 2017 Net book value At 28 July 2017 At 31 July 2016 As at 29 July 2016 the fair value of investment properties was 9550000.
This was arrived at on the basis of a valuation carried out by Matthews and Goodman independent valuers not connected with the Group.
The valuation conforms to International Valuation Standards.
An amount in relation to rental income from investment properties of 926925 2016  909000 has been recorded in the Consolidated Income
GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS Cost and carrying amount of goodwill At 31 July 2015
Impairment
Foreign exchange At 29 July 2016
Foreign exchange At 28 July 2017 The goodwill impairment charge in the current period is detailed in note 7.
The impairment charge of 12347000 in the prior year comprises 10192000 in respect of SP Group and 2155000 in respect of Tactical Solutions.
The exchange rate movement of 173000 is related to Solstices goodwill which is denominated in US Dollars.
100 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED Goodwill is allocated amongst the following cashgenerating units CGUs 2017 2016
11551 11551
7774 7774 Data Marketing 15748 15748 Fripp Sandeman and Partners
15062 15062
Pragma
Realise
19743 19743 Service Graphics 12452 14952 SP Group
14449 14276 The App Business 8378 8378 Tactical Solutions 2032 5532 108676 135633 SP Group Service Graphics and Tactical Solutions are reported within the Marketing Activation segment.
All other CGUs are reported within the Strategic Marketing segment.
The Data Marketing CGU represents Occam and Response One.
The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment or more frequently if there are indications that goodwill might be impaired.
Current period The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined using a valueinuse calculation.
The key assumptions for the valueinuse calculations are those regarding discount rates terminal growth rates and cash flow forecasts in the medium term.
Management estimates discount rates using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the CGUs.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts derived from five year forecasts.
These include Board approved two year forecasts for the financial periods 2018 and 2019 and forecasts based on a revenue growth rate of 2.6% for the financial periods 2020 2021 and 2022.
In addition a terminal value has been included in the valueinuse calculation for each CGU.
The terminal growth rate used for each entity and the growth rate used for the financial periods 2020 2021 and 2022 was 2.6% except for SP Group and Tactical Solutions where Nil terminal growth was assumed.
The terminal growth rate for CGUs other than SP and Tactical Solutions is calculated using a growth rate of 0.6% and a longterm inflation rate of 2.0% in line with the Bank of Englands target for this measure giving a nominal growth rate of 2.6%.
The key assumptions used in the valueinuse calculations and the sensitivities to the shortterm growth key revenue growth and pretax discount rate assumptions are detailed below.
Fripp
Data
Service
Tactical The App Sandeman Amaze Branded3 Marketing Hive Incite Pragma Realise Graphics Solstice Solutions Business and Partners Valueinuse assumptions Pretax discount rate 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% 11.8% 10.7% 10.7% 10.7% Excess of valueinuse over carrying value 000 9145 13414 2089 4593 27473 11680 8845  87051  44931 6099 Sensitivity of valueinuse to changes in key growth assumption Cumulative revenue decline in five year forecast calculation resulting in potential impairment 6.3% 21.1% 1.1% 6.7% 139.7% 151.6% 5.0% 0.0% 27.3% 0.0% 24.1% 39.4% Increase to pretax discount rate resulting in potential impairment 5.2% 14.1% 0.5% 3.5% 70.0% 80.2% 2.8% 0.0% 28.1% 0.0% 19.9% 43.2% The goodwill in respect of SP Group has been fully impaired in the current period.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 101 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Reasonably possible changes in key assumptions The projected revenue growth for Service Graphics is highly dependent on a limited number of key clients and is subject to the risk of pricing pressure exerted by retail clients.
In event of the further loss of a key customer this could result in a further impairment of between 4500000 and 6500000.
The projected revenue growth for Tactical Solutions is highly dependent on a limited number of key clients and is subject to the risk of further pricing pressure exerted by retail clients.
A number of contracts are currently being retendered and the loss of a key customer could result in the full impairment of the goodwill and other intangible assets.
During the period the Data Marketing businesses were consolidated under a single management team in order to best support the expanding digital and data requirements of customers.
The current priority within our Data Marketing businesses is to ensure that our offerings are fully compliant with and so able to benefit from the new General Data Protection Regulation GDPR being implemented from May 2018.
The impact of these new rules could have the potential to negatively impact the sector and so affect our five year forecasts and projected revenue growth rates.
As outlined in the table above the valueinuse calculation is highly sensitive to changes in forecast revenue and a reasonably possible reduction in revenue growth rates is likely to result in an impairment in goodwill and other intangible assets.
At the present time the impact of the introduction of GDPR cannot be quantified.
The US operations for the Hive CGU are currently at an early stage and are growing organically as such the forecasts and projected revenue growth rates are very sensitive.
As outlined in the table above anything more than a 6.7% cumulative reduction in the five year growth forecast of Hive could result in an impairment of the Hive goodwill.
Prior period The terminal revenue growth rate used for each entity in the prior period was 2.6% except for SP Group where a terminal growth of Nil was assumed.
The pretax discount rate used in the prior period for Solstice a US based subsidiary was 10.01%.
The pretax discount rate used for all the other entities was 10.23%.
Other intangible assets
Customer Proprietary software relationships techniques Trademarks Total
At 31 July 2015 10465 34993 31235 1999 78692
125 1192 13187 1073 15577
Reclassifications
Disposals
Foreign exchange 38 281 1493 159 1971 At 29 July 2016 11046 36466 45915 3231 96658
Disposals
Foreign exchange At 28 July 2017 11150 36489 46036 3244 96919 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 31 July 2015 9148 17752 5989 151 33040 Charge for the period 847 3938 4954 277 10016 Impairment note 7
Foreign exchange At 29 July 2016 9767 22125 11090 442 43424 Charge for the period 675 3769 5834 346 10624 Impairment note 7
Foreign exchange At 28 July 2017 10543 25887 16910 787 54127 Net book value At 28 July 2017 607 10602 29126 2457 42792 At 29 July 2016 1279 14341 34825 2789 53234 Impairments to other intangibles are detailed in note 7.
102 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED GOODWILL AND OTHER INTANGIBLE ASSETS CONTINUED Other intangible assets continued Customer relationship assets include customer contracts order backlogs and noncontractual customer relationships.
Proprietary techniques include models algorithms and processes that are used to generate revenue from customers.
These assets are recorded at fair value at the date of acquisition and are amortised over their estimated useful lives.
Material customer relationships and proprietary techniques are disclosed below.
Remaining amortisation period 2017 2016 months 000 000 Customer relationships
56 2249
31 2553 Response One 49 4398
Solstice
Other customer relationships
2017 2016 months 000 000 Proprietary techniques
21 3026
62 1244
79 5768
91 7679
102 10450 Other proprietary techniques AVAILABLE FOR SALE ASSETS 2017 2016 Carried at fair value Unlisted shares As at 28 July 2017 the Group held a noncontrolling interest of 9.0% in Ebeltoft Corporation Limited.
These shares are not held for trading and accordingly are classified as available for sale.
The Company previously also held a held a noncontrolling interest of 10.0% in Wiforia Limited at Nil Wiforia Limited was dissolved during the period.
INVESTMENT IN JOINT ARRANGEMENT Net assets of joint arrangement Balance at 29 July 2016
Settlement
Share of results of joint arrangement Foreign exchange Balance at 28 July 2017 The Group holds a 50% interest in Loop LLC incorporated in Chicago USA.
The principal operation of the Company is a commerce consultancy specialising in Hybris software integration.
During the period the Group loaned additional funds of 156000 to Loop LLC.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 103 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES
2017 2016 Raw materials 3762 5170
1927 2235 Finished products 6253 7482 An impairment of 646000 to raw materials was recorded in the Books segment following the loss of the HarperCollins contract.
There were no material writedowns of inventories in the prior period.
OTHER FINANCIAL ASSETS Trade and other receivables 2017 2016 Amounts receivable for the sale of goods and services 72501 70153 Allowance for doubtful debts 1991 1326 Trade receivables 70510 68827 Accrued income 11905 11374 Other receivables 2396 4103 Prepayments and other assets 6252 6457 91063 90761 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables is approximately equal to their fair value.
Noncurrent assets 2017 2016 Other receivables Cash and cash equivalents 2017 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 25651 11835 Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash held by the Group and shortterm bank deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
The carrying amounts of these assets approximate to their fair value.
DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Derivative financial assets 2017 2016 Forward foreign currency contracts Derivative financial liabilities 2017 2016 Forward foreign currency contracts All forward foreign currency contracts are designated and effective as hedging instruments.
104 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES 2017 2016 Trade payables 41733 40259 Accruals for goods and services 14860 16048 Other taxes social security and employee related liabilities 16981 13078 Other payables 5965 7101 79539 76486 The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
LOANS
2017 2016 Bank loans all repayable within six months 80245 92595 Bank loans During the current period the Group reduced its revolving credit facility to 95 million supplemented by a term loan of 30 million and increased its maximum leverage covenant condition net debt to Adjusted EBITDA for the remaining duration of the facility.
Up to 15 million may be drawn as an overdraft facility.
Interest on loan drawdowns is charged at LIBOR plus a margin which varies between 1.65% and 2.60% depending on the ratio of the Groups net debt to EBITDA excluding Adjusting Items.
Interest on overdraft drawdowns is charged at 2.00% over UK base rate.
As at 28 July 2017 the Groups outstanding loans within this facility were 80.2 million 2016  92.6 million.
The undrawn portion of this facility at 28 July 2017 was 44.8 million 2016  32.4 million.
Subsequent to the period end the Group reduced its term loan facility by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the loans approximates to their fair value.
DEFERRED INCOME 2017 2016 Advance billings and other deferred income  current 7141 6206
Provision for Provision for repairs reorganisation Other Total Balance at 31 July 2015 1969 71 100 2140 Charged to the Consolidated Income Statement
Utilised during the period Balance at 29 July 2016 2185 31  2216 Charged to the Consolidated Income Statement Utilised during the period Balance at 28 July 2017 2211   2211
Noncurrent
1823   1823 2211   2211 Provision for repairs Where the Group is committed under the terms of a lease to make repairs to leasehold premises a provision for repairs is made for these estimated costs over the period of the lease.
It is anticipated that these liabilities will crystallise between 2018 and 2025.
Provision for reorganisation The provision for reorganisation related primarily to the remaining costs in respect of plant closures and reorganisation and comprises redundancy payments plant relocation onerous property and other costs and was settled by the end of the 2017 financial period.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 105 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES DEFERRED TAX Deferred income taxes are calculated in full on temporary differences under the liability method using a principal tax rate of 17% for UK operations 2016  18% and 40% for US operations 2016  40%.
The total movement in the deferred tax liability is as follows 2017 2016 At the beginning of the period 3259 2679
Credit to the Consolidated Income Statement note 10 4540 3104 Items taken to Other Comprehensive Income note 10 2132 960 Items taken directly to equity Foreign exchange At the end of the period 921 3259 The individual movements in deferred tax liabilitiesassets are as follows Accelerated Retirement
Acquired tax benefits Rolled over timing Share intangible depreciation obligations capital gains differences options assets Total Balance at 31 July 2015 2660 5520 80 815 749 7023 2679 Acquisitions 65  1 2619 2685 Creditcharge to the Consolidated Income Statement 820 191  3 411 2502 3105 Items taken directly to Other Comprehensive Income Items taken directly to equity Foreign Exchange 30     161 191 Balance at 29 July 2016 1875 4751 81 818 107 6979 3259 Creditcharge to the Consolidated Income Statement 2078 108 12 242 14 2114 4540 Items taken directly to Other Comprehensive Income 2132     2132 Items taken directly to equity Foreign Exchange 2     5 7 Balance at 28 July 2017 201 2727 69 1060 30 4870 921 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as follows 2017 2016 Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities 1296 3491 921 3259 Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income taxes relate to the same fiscal authority.
The deferred tax assets in respect of losses at current tax rates all of which have an unlimited life are as follows 2017 2016 Unrecognised deferred tax in respect of trading losses Unrecognised deferred tax in respect of capital losses 1833 1643 2234 2044 106 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED RETIREMENT BENEFITS Defined contribution schemes The Group operates defined contribution schemes for all qualifying employees.
The assets of the schemes are held separately from those of the Group in funds under control of the trustees.
Payments to the schemes are expensed to the Consolidated Income Statement as they fall due.
The total expense recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement for continuing operations of 3826000 2016  3859000 represents contributions payable to these schemes by the Group at rates specified in the rules of the schemes.
At 28 July 2017 contributions of 628000 2016  615000 due in respect of the 2017 reporting period had not been paid over to the schemes.
The amounts were paid over subsequent to the balance sheet date within the requisite time limits.
St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme The Group operates the St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme the Scheme with assets held in separate trustee administered funds.
Pension benefits are linked to a members final salary at retirement and their length of service.
The Scheme was closed to new entrants from 6 April 2002 and closed to future benefit accruals with effect from 31 August 2008.
The Scheme is a registered scheme under UK legislation and is contracted out of State Second Pension.
The Scheme has two current participating employers St Ives plc and Clays Limited.
St Ives plc is responsible for paying all contributions to the Scheme.
Each participating employer is liable for its share of the liabilities on windup or withdrawal from the Scheme in accordance with the Schemes trust deed and rules.
The Scheme was established from 30 September 1988 under trust and is governed by the Schemes trust deed and rules dated 23 April 1991 and subsequent amendments.
The Directors of St Ives Pension Scheme Trustees Limited the Trustees are responsible for the operation and the governance of the Scheme including making decisions regarding the Defined Benefits Pension Schemes funding and investment strategy in conjunction with the Company.
The most recent full actuarial valuations of the scheme assets and the present value of the defined benefits obligations were carried out as at April 2016 by Jonathan Punter Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries of Punter Southall and Co Limited who is independent of the Group.
The valuation was updated as at 28 July 2017 and has been calculated on the method and principles agreed for the 6 April 2016 valuation but allowing for the market prices and yields at 28 July 2017 and updated membership data as at 28 July 2017.
The present value of the defined benefits obligation and the related current service cost and past service cost were measured using the projected unit credit method.
The principal assumptions used for the purpose of the actuarial valuations are as follows 2017 2016 Per annum Per annum Discount rate 2.60% 2.50% Expected rate of inflation 3.05% 2.60% Expected rate of salary increases nil nil Future pension increases 2.90% 2.55% Assumed life expectancies for retirement at age of 65 are as follows 2017 2016 Male Female Male Female Members retiring immediately Members retiring in 20 years time The amount recognised in the Consolidated Balance Sheet in respect of the Schemes liabilities is as follows 2017 2016 Present value of funded obligations 370535 370472 Fair value of scheme assets 354494 344078 Retirement benefits obligations 16041 26394 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 107 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Amounts recognised in the Consolidated Income Statement in respect of the Scheme as Adjusting Items are as follows 2017 2016 Scheme administrative costs note 7 Settlement credits note 7 Interest costs on defined benefit pension scheme obligations note 8 9074 12320 Investment income on defined benefit pension scheme assets note 8 8436 11348 1394 1356 Amounts recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income in respect of the Scheme are as follows 2017 2016 Net measurement  losses  financial 14225 52091 Net measurement  gains  experience 2440 21129 Net measurement  gains  demographic Return on assets in excess of interest income recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement 15056 31045 8958 83 Changes in the present value of the Scheme obligations are as follows 2017 2016 Opening Scheme obligations 370472 338634 Interest cost 9074 12320 Net measurement  losses  financial 14225 52091 Net measurement  gains  demographic Net measurement  gains  experience 2440 21129 Settlement adjustments Benefits paid 15109 10111 Closing Scheme obligations 370535 370472 No additional liability is recognised in respect of the recovery plan as the Group has an unconditional right to a refund of any surplus in the Defined Benefits Pension Scheme at the end of the Schemes duration.
Changes in the fair value of the Scheme assets are as follows 2017 2016 Opening fair value of Scheme assets 344078 311037 Interest income on Scheme assets 8436 11348 Return on asset in excess of interest income recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement 15056 31045 Contributions by employer 2789 2476 Benefits paid 15109 10111 Settlement adjustments Scheme administrative cost Closing fair value of Scheme assets 354494 344078 108 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED RETIREMENT BENEFITS CONTINUED St Ives Defined Benefits Pension Scheme continued The fair value of the Scheme assets at the balance sheet date is analysed as follows Value at Value at 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Equity instruments 196080 183789
151381 151948
7033 8341 354494 344078 The Schemes assets do not include any of the Groups own financial instruments nor any property occupied by or other assets used by the Group.
The Scheme exposes the Group to actuarial risks such as market investment risk interest rate risk inflation risk and longevity risk.
The Scheme does not expose the Group to any unusual schemespecific or companyspecific risk.
Investment risk the Scheme holds some of its investments in asset classes such as equities which have volatile market values and while these assets are expected to provide the best returns over the longterm any shortterm volatility could cause additional funding to be required.
Derivative contracts are used from time to time which would limit losses in the event of a fall in equity markets.
Interest rate risk the Schemes liabilities are assessed using market rates of interest to discount the liabilities and are therefore subject to any volatility in the movement of the market rate of interest.
The net interest income or expense recognised as an Adjusting Item in the Consolidated Income Statement is also calculated using the market rate of interest.
The Schemes swap investments are expected to provide a degree of protection from any movement in the market rate of interest.
Inflation risk a significant proportion of the benefits under the Scheme are linked to inflation.
Although the Schemes assets are expected to provide a hedge against inflation over the long term rising inflation over the shortterm could lead to an increase in the deficit.
The Schemes swap investments are expected to provide a degree of protection from any shortterm inflationary movements.
Mortality risk in the event that members live longer than assumed the liabilities may be understated and thus increasing any deficit.
A sensitivity analysis of the principal assumptions used to measure the Schemes obligation as at 28 July 2017 is analysed as follows Change in Impact on the defined assumption benefits pension obligation Discount rate Increase by 0.5% Decrease by 9% Rate of Inflation RPI Increase by 0.5% Increase by 7% Assumed life expectancy at age 65 Increase by 1 year Increase by 4% The Schemes investment strategy is to invest broadly 65% in returnseeking assets and 35% in matching assets mainly government bonds.
The strategy reflects the Schemes liability profile and the Trustees and Groups attitude to risk.
As at 28 July 2017 55% of the plan assets are quoted in active markets and 45% are unquoted.
The last funding valuation of the Scheme was as at 6 April 2016 and revealed a funding deficit of 42800000.
The Company has agreed to pay 3400000 over the year to 31 March 2018 and then 2600000 per year with a view to eliminating the shortfall by August 2026.
The Company has also agreed to pay 400000 per year towards the cost of running the Scheme.
The liabilities of the Scheme are based on the current value of expected benefit payment cash flows to members of the Scheme over the next 75 years.
The average duration of the liabilities is approximately 20 years.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 109 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The fair value measurement hierarchy for financial instruments is as follows Fair value Amortised through cost profit and loss Financial instrument category Note Classification 000 000 Investment property 15 Investment property Available for sale investments 17 Availableforsale financial assets  3 Trade and other receivables 20 Loans and receivables 91063 Cash and cash equivalents 20 Loans and receivables 25651 Trade and other payables 22 Other financial liabilities 79539 Derivative financial instruments  Assets 21 Derivative instrument  45 Derivative financial instruments  Liabilities 21 Derivative instrument  17 Deferred consideration payable 11 Other financial liabilities  15920 Bank borrowings 23 Other financial liabilities
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
The Groups Treasury function is responsible for managing the Groups exposure to financial risk and operates within a defined set of policies and procedures reviewed and approved by the Board.
These risks include market risk including currency risk fair value interest rate risk and price risk credit risk liquidity risk and cash flow interest rate risk.
The Group does not enter into or trade financial instruments including derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
As at 28 July 2017 the Groups borrowings consisted of various loan drawdowns under the Groups revolving multicurrency banking facility.
All of the Groups borrowings were repayable within three months and so were set to mature within twelve months of the period end.
The loan drawdowns are interest bearing and are recorded on an undiscounted basis.
Under the terms of the current facility the Group has the right to renew these borrowings until the expiration of the facility.
Interest rate risk The Group carries a cash flow risk where there are changes in the interest rate levied on the Groups borrowings as currently interest on the Groups borrowings is at floating rates.
The Group finances its operations through a mixture of retained earnings and bank borrowings.
Group policy is to constantly review the exposure risk to interest rate fluctuations in relation to the risk as a proportion of Group earnings and wherever possible with matching shortterm deposits of surplus funds.
The Group is not subject to fair value interest rate risk as the majority of debt is at floating rates.
Interest rate management An analysis of financial assets and liabilities exposed to interest rate risk by currency is set out below Financial assets subject to interest rate risk 2017 2016
18341 5262 US Dollar 5563 3716
1477 2734 Singapore Dollar Argentine Peso Chinese Yuan The Groups financial assets comprise cash and cash equivalents all of which attract interest at the relevant base rate.
Financial liabilities subject to interest rate risk 2017 2016 Sterling bank loans 65000 70000 US Dollar bank loans 15245 22595 80245 92595 The Groups financial liabilities comprise loan borrowings which bear interest at floating rates based upon LIBOR and overdraft borrowings which bear interest at floating rates based upon UK base rate.
110 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Interest rate sensitivity analysis The analysis shows the additional charge to the Consolidated Income Statement assuming that the amount of the liability outstanding at the balance sheet date was outstanding for the entire period.
2017 2016 100% movement in Sterling LIBOR The changes would not have impacted other equity reserves as all interest bearing financial assets and liabilities are subject to floating interest rates and their fair values do not fluctuate with changes in interest rates.
Foreign exchange risk From time to time the Group enters into contracts to supply goods and services to customers trading in following regions Europe at prices denominated in Euros USA at prices denominated in US Dollars Singapore at prices denominated in Singapore Dollars China at prices denominated in Chinese Yuan Forward foreign exchange contracts The Group enters into forward foreign exchange contracts to cover specific foreign currency payments and receipts and to manage the risk associated with anticipated sale and purchase transactions.
Basis adjustments are made to the carrying amount of nonfinancial hedged items when the anticipated sale or purchase transaction takes place.
Forward foreign exchange contracts have been used to hedge the exchange rate risk arising from these commitments which are designated as cash flow hedges.
As at 28 July 2017 the aggregate amount of unrealised profits under forward foreign exchange contracts deferred in the hedging reserve relating to the exposure on trade receivables and anticipated sale transactions amounted to 28000.
It is anticipated that the sales receipts will occur in the twelve months following the balance sheet date.
The following table details the forward currency contracts outstanding at the period end
Sterling  foreign currency value value currency 000 000 000 Sell US Dollars up to 12 months Sell Euros up to 12 months 1.1telExchange rate sensitivity analysis As at 28 July 2017 20 million dollars were drawn in US Dollars on the revolving credit facility.
The cash element of the third tranche of the deferred contingent consideration payable in respect of Solstice up to 19903000 is likely to be settled between March 2018 and August 2018 and is payable in US Dollars and St Ives ordinary shares.
Both of these liabilities are subject to exchange rate risk.
If the value of Sterling were to decrease by 4% versus the US Dollar the amount payable would change as follows US Dollar bank loan Solstice deferredcontingent consideration Subsequent to the period end the Group is highly likely to increase the maximum deferredcontingent consideration payable for the third tranche for Solstice acquisition at 19903000.
The Group entered into a combination of forward contracts and options to hedge the currency risk associated with the deferredcontingent consideration estimated which is to be settled in St Ives ordinary shares and cash in US Dollars.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 111 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Credit risk The Groups principal financial assets are bank balances and cash trade and other receivables which represent the Groups maximum exposure to credit risk in relation to financial assets.
The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade receivables.
The amounts presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheet are net of allowances for doubtful receivables estimated by the Groups management based on prior experience and their assessment of the current economic environment.
The Groups credit risk is relatively low as the Group maintains credit insurance for all of its UK and US operations up to a maximum aggregate claim in any one year of 15 million.
In addition its UK subsidiaries sales are principally with a large number of counterparties and customers in the UK and are denominated in Sterling.
Before accepting any new customer the Group uses an external credit scoring system to assess the potential customers credit quality and defines credit limits by customer.
Limits and scoring attributed to customers are reviewed regularly.
Included in the Groups trade receivables balance are debtors with a carrying amount of 6.0 million 2016  7.2 million which are past due at the reporting date for which the Group has not provided as there has not been a significant change in credit quality and the amounts are still considered recoverable.
The Group does not hold any collateral over these balances.
Ageing of impaired receivables 2017 2016 Between 0 and 59 days Between 60 and 89 days Between 90 and 119 days 120 days and above 1338 418 1991 1326 Movement in the allowance for doubtful debts 2017 2016 Balance at the beginning of the period 1326 1408 Impairment losses recognised 1126 208 Amounts written off as uncollectible Impairment losses reversed Balance at the end of the period 1991 1326 In determining the recoverability of a trade receivable the Group considers any change in the quality of the trade receivable from the date the credit was initially granted up to the reporting date.
The concentration of credit risk is limited due to the customer base being large and unrelated and being covered by credit insurance arrangements.
Accordingly the Directors believe that there is no further credit provision required in excess of the allowance for doubtful debts.
Ageing of past due but not impaired receivables 2017 2016 Ageing of past due but not impaired Between 0 and 59 days 4826 6353 Between 60 and 89 days 1108 885 Between 90 and 119 days 6034 7238 Liquidity risk The Groups policy is to maintain flexibility with respect to its liquidity position by utilising shortterm cash deposits and where necessary short term bank borrowings for working capital and longerterm borrowings for capital expenditure requirements.
The Group renegotiated its revolving multicurrency facility from 115 million to 125 million in the prior period.
The agreement includes an overdraft facility of 15 million to fund short term working capital requirements.
The contractual maturities of drawn down borrowings as well as undrawn facilities are detailed in note 23.
112 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED
FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT CONTINUED
Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that entities in the Group will each be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to stakeholders through the optimisation of the debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of debt which includes the borrowings disclosed in note 23 cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the parent comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
The Board have reviewed and discussed the Groups funding requirements and concluded that the Group is well served by its current funding arrangements and do not see any need to adjust the Groups capital in order to meet its objectives.
During the current period the Group reduced its revolving credit facility to 95 million supplemented by a term loan of 30 million and increased its maximum leverage covenant condition net debt to Adjusted EBITDA for the remaining duration of the facility.
Up to 15 million may be drawn as an overdraft facility.
Interest on loan drawdowns is charged at LIBOR plus a margin which varies between 1.65% and 2.60% depending on the ratio of the Groups net debt to EBITDA excluding Adjusting Items.
Interest on overdraft drawdowns is charged at 2.00% over UK base rate.
Subsequent to the period end the Group reduced its term loan facility by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
The Group is subject to covenants on its borrowings further discussed in the financial review on page 21 which could be considered an externally imposed capital requirement.
The Board continually monitor the Groups performance against its banking covenants and undertake monthly reviews of working capital cash forecast deferredcontingent consideration and headroom on banking covenants.
At the period end the Groups leverage ratio was 1.6 times and interest cover of 9 times.
The Group has fully complied with the requirement of these covenants during the period under review and expects to continue to do so.
SHARE CAPITAL Ordinary shares Number of 10p each of shares 000 Issued and fully paid At 29 July 2016 142440923 14244 Issued in the period 403753 40 At 28 July 2017 142844676 14284 All authorised and issued share capital is represented by equity shareholdings.
The number of issued St Ives plc ordinary shares as at 2 October 2017 was 142844676.
The 403753 shares issued during the period were in relation to the exercise of SAYE options as detailed in note 35.
ADDITIONAL PAIDIN CAPITAL
Share
Merger redemption premium reserve reserve Total Balance at 31 July 2015 46996 7287 1238 55521 Issue of share capital 12716   12716
1334  1334 Transfer of contingent consideration deemed as remuneration Recognition of sharebased payments Balance at 29 July 2016 59839 8718 1238 69795 Transfer of contingent consideration deemed as remuneration Settlement of sharebased payments Balance at 28 July 2017 60237 8943 1238 70418 The additional paid in capital includes share premium the capital redemption reserve and the merger reserve.
The capital redemption reserve represents the buyback of the St Ives plc ordinary shares in prior periods.
The merger reserve was derived from acquisitions made in prior periods.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 113 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES OTHER RESERVES Other reserves in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity is made up of additional paid in capital as detailed in note 31 opposite along with the following ESOP reserve representing St Ives ordinary shares held in the Groups Employee Benefit Trust.
A portfolio of treasury shares consisting of 90637 St Ives plc ordinary shares held by the Company as at 28 July 2017 2016  90637 St Ives plc ordinary shares.
Share option reserve representing cumulative charge related to the options granted to Groups employees on St Ives plc ordinary shares.
Hedging and translation reserve which includes amounts relating to foreign translation differences arising on the retranslation of reserves due to the Groups presentation in Sterling.
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT Reconciliation of cash generated from operations 2017 2016 Loss from continuing operations 40413 1843 Adjustments for Depreciation of property plant and equipment 6149 7201 Share of profitloss from joint arrangement Impairment losses 33058 12712 Amortisation of intangible assets 10624 10016 Profitloss on disposal of property plant and equipment 2818 1484 Sharebased payment chargecredit Settlement of sharebased payments Net increase in derivative liabilities Decrease in Defined Benefits Pension Scheme obligations note 27 2789 2278 Remeasurement of deferred consideration 7362 781 Charge for contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration 15550 8220 Decreaseincrease in provisions Operating cash inflows before movements in working capital 26433 34603 Increase in receivables 130 9572 Decreaseincrease in inventory Increase in payables 2852 3992 Increasedecrease in deferred income Net decrease in provision for deemed remuneration Cash generated from operations 30686 23650 Analysis of net debt
29 July exchange 28 July 2016 Cash flow gainslosses 2017 Cash and cash equivalents 11835 11457 2359 25651 Bank loans 92595 15000 2650 80245 80760 26457 291 54594 Cash and cash equivalents which are presented as a single class of assets on the face of the Consolidated Balance Sheet comprise cash at bank and other shortterm highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less.
The effective interest rates on cash and cash equivalents are based on current market rates.
114 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED CAPITAL AND OTHER COMMITMENTS At 28 July 2017 the Group had outstanding commitments for the future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases as follows Land and 2017 Land and 2016 buildings Other buildings Other Within one year Between one and five years After five years SHAREBASED PAYMENTS The Company operates a number of sharebased payment schemes for certain employees of the Group.
IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment has been applied to all sharebased rewards made after 11 November 2013 that did not vest before 31 July 2004 as detailed below LongTerm Incentive Plan 2010 LTIP Executive Directors and certain members of senior management have been granted nilcost share options under the Companys long term incentive plan.
Details of the LTIP are included on page 48 of the Directors Remuneration Report.
2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period 2643 2961 Granted during the period 1536 1208 Lapsed during the period Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period 3230 2643 Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 0% 0% The fair value of the options granted in the current period under the LTIP scheme were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model are
Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 3 years Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2.00% Dividend yield 5.00% Weighted average fair value of the options St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 115 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Save As You Earn Share Option Plan Sharesave Plan The Company has granted share options to eligible employees under an HMRCapproved allemployee Sharesave Plan.
Details of the plan are included on page 49 of the Directors Remuneration Report.
A reconciliation of the movement in the share options is shown below Weighted average Number of options exercise pricetel 2016 Outstanding at the beginning of the period Granted during the period 1335  1.18 Lapsed during the period Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period Exercisable at the end of the period In addition the Group recognised a charge of 70000 2016  credit of 236000 relating to equitysettled sharebased payments other than in the context of acquisitions.
The exercise price of options outstanding at 28 July 2017 ranges between Nil and 1.18.
Sharebased contingent consideration required to be treated as remuneration The Group recognised a sharebased charge of 6969000 2016  5143000 relating to contingent consideration for the acquisition of Strategic Marketing businesses which is recorded as part of deemed remuneration in Adjusting Items note 7.
The Group acquired several entities in prior periods for which consideration was paid partly in the form the of St Ives ordinary shares.
The shares were contingent on continuous employment of certain former shareholders and are treated as sharebased payment in accordance with IFRS 2.
These are as described as follows Realise Limited 2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period 1042 1495 Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period 273 1042 Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 100% 100% The fair value of the options granted were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model were Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 2436 months Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2% Dividend yield 0% Weighted average fair value of the options 116 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED SHAREBASED PAYMENTS CONTINUED The Health Hive Group Limited 2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period 1358 1941 Lapsed during the period Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period 384 1358 Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 100% 100% The fair value of the options granted were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model were Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 2436 months Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2% Dividend yield 0% Weighted average fair value of the options Solstice Consulting LLC 2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period 7873 8220 Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period 7058 7873 Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 100% 100% The fair value of the options granted were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model were Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 2448 months Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2% Dividend yield 0% Weighted average fair value of the options St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 117 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES Fripp Sandeman and Partners Limited 2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period Granted during the period Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 100% 100% The fair value of the options granted were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model were Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 2436 months Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2% Dividend yield 0% Weighted average fair value of the options The App Business Limited 2017 2016 Number of options Outstanding at the beginning of the period Granted during the period Exercised during the period Outstanding at the end of the period 6984 7587 Exercisable at the end of the period Estimated % of options vesting over next three years 100% 100% The fair value of the options granted were measured using a BlackScholes option pricing model.
The inputs to the model were Weighted average midmarket share price Weighted average exercise price
Expected life 2448 months Expected volatility 28.31% Risk free rate 2% Dividend yield 0% Weighted average fair value of the options 118 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED HEDGING AND TRANSLATION RESERVES Hedging reserve and translation reserve The reserve represents the cumulative amount of gains and losses on hedging instruments deemed effective in cash flow hedges and the translation of the net assets of the Groups foreign operations which relate to subsidiaries only from their functional currency into the parents functional currency being Sterling.
Gains and losses transferred from the hedging and translation reserves into Consolidated Income Statement during the period are included in the following line items in the Consolidated Income Statement 2017 2016
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Transactions between the Company and its subsidiaries which are related parties have been eliminated on consolidation and are not disclosed in this note.
No material related party transactions have been entered into during the current period which might reasonably affect the decisions made by the users of these financial statements.
No other executive officers of the Company or their associates had material transactions with the Group during the period.
The Group earned revenue of 805000 from Loop Integration LLC and the Group incurred Nil charges for services received.
At the reporting date Loop Integration LLC owed the Group 26000.
Aggregate Directors remuneration The total amounts for Directors remuneration were as follows 2017 2016 Shortterm employee benefits Postemployment benefits 1057 1034
Previously the Group reported the employee costs of the Insight businesses part of Strategic Marketing segment under administrative expenses.
The Groups accounting policy is to include these types of costs within cost of sales and accordingly the comparatives have been restated to ensure consistency.
The impact of the prior period adjustments on the previously reported Consolidated Income Statement are summarised as follows 52 weeks to 29 July 2016
Adjustments Adjustments Restated Adjusted Results Cost of sales 249730 12738 262468 Administrative expenses 59570 12738 46832 Statutory Results Cost of sales 249730 12738 262468 Administrative expenses 93042 12738 80304 There is no impact on the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Balance Sheet or Consolidated Cash Flow for the comparatives.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENT Subsequent to the period end the Group reduced its termloan by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
In addition the Group was informed by Sainsburys that it would not renew its contract for the provision of marketing materials as a result an impairment charge of 2500000 has been recorded against goodwill in the Marketing Activation segment in the 2017 financial period.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 119 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES LIST OF UNDERTAKINGS The principal trading subsidiaries of the Company held directly or indirectly as at 28 July 2017 are shown below Nature of business Location Place of incorporation Amaze Limited a Strategic Marketing Manchester and other UK sites England and Wales Amaze Europe Limited a Strategic Marketing Manchester and other UK sites England and Wales Amaze Communication Services Limited a Strategic Marketing Manchester and other UK sites England and Wales My Bench Limited a Strategic Marketing Chilcompton England and Wales Branded3 Search Limited a Strategic Marketing Leeds England and Wales Clays Limited a Books Bungay England and Wales eBee Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales Flare Limited a Strategic Marketing Flintshire England and Wales Fripp Sandeman and Partners Limited a Strategic Marketing High Wycombe England and Wales Incite Marketing Planning Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales Incite Marketing Planning Shanghai Co.
Ltd b Strategic Marketing Shanghai China Incite Marketing Planning Singapore PTE.
LTD c Strategic Marketing Singapore Singapore Incite New York LLC d Strategic Marketing New York United States of America Occam DM Limited a Strategic Marketing Chilcompton England and Wales Pollen Health Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales Pragma Consulting Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales Realise Limited e Strategic Marketing Edinburgh Scotland Response One Limited a Strategic Marketing Bath England and Wales Service Graphics Limited a Marketing Activation London and other UK sites England and Wales Solstice Consulting LLC f Strategic Marketing Illinois United States of America Solstice Mobile Argentina Srl g Strategic Marketing Buenos Aires Argentina SP Group Limited a Marketing Activation Redditch England and Wales St Ives Management Services Limited a Marketing Activation London England and Wales The App Business Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales The Health Hive Limited a Strategic Marketing London England and Wales The Health Hive US LLC a Strategic Marketing New York United States of America Tactical Solutions UK Limited a Marketing Activation Flintshire England and Wales In addition the Company held directly or indirectly a number of nontrading companies as at 28 July 2017 Amaze Holdings Limited a St Ives Direct Edenbridge Limited a Amaze Communication Services Holdings Limited a St Ives Direct Leeds Limited a Amaze Technology Limited a St Ives Financial Limited Okana Systems Limited a St Ives Holdings Limited a Pragma Holdings Limited a St Ives Illinois LLC a Realise Holdings Limited e St Ives Marketing Services Delaware LLC a Response One Holdings Limited a St Ives Marketing Services Limited a Solstice Consulting Argentina LLC f St Ives Pension Scheme Trustees Limited a Solstice Consulting Latin America LLC f St Ives Westerham Press Limited a SouthWest Mailing Limited a Pollen Health US LLC a St Ives Blackburn Limited a The Health Hive Group Limited a St Ives Direct Limited a a  Registered office One Tudor Street London EC4Y 0AH United Kingdom b  Registered office Room 2207B 22F Tower III No.
1228 Middle Yan An Road Jing An District Shanghai Peoples Republic of China c  Registered office 36 Armenian Street 0402 Singapore d  Registered office 125 Park Avenue New York NY10017 United States of America e  Registered office Quay House 142 Commercial Street Edinburgh EH6 6LB United Kingdom f  Registered office 111 N Canal St Suite 500 Chicago IL 60606 United States of America g  Registered office Solstice Argentina Aguirre 1169 Ciudad Autonoma de Buenos Aires Argentina 120 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES COMPANY BALANCE SHEET 28 July 29 July 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Fixed assets Tangible assets Intangible assets Investment property 7 11617
8 277595 Current assets
Due within one year 9 6495 Due after more than one year 9 1762 Assets held for sale Creditors amounts falling due within one year Trade and other creditors 11 42410 52492 Derivative financial instruments Net current liabilities 34023 39224 Total assets less current liabilities Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year Bank loans and overdrafts 11 80245 92595 Provision for repairs Retirement benefits obligations 13 16041 26394 Net assets Capital and reserves Share capital 14 14284 Share premium account 14 60237 Other reserves Profit and loss account Total equity These financial statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 2 October 2017 and signed on its behalf by Matt Armitage Brad Gray Chief Executive Chief Financial Officer St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 121 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY
Capital
Share
Profit
Share premium Merger redemption ESOP Treasury option Hedging and loss capital account reserve reserve reserve shares reserve reserve account Total Balance at 31 July 2015 13089 820 6773 54 59242 Profit for the period Other comprehensive income Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Actuarial profit on defined benefits pension scheme Tax charge on items taken directly to other comprehensive income Total comprehensive income Issue of shares 775
10934 10934 Recognition of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration 365 528 1828 Transfer of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration Purchase of own shares Recognition of sharebased payments Tax on sharebased payments Gains on cash flow hedges 15 Transferred to underlying hedged items Arising on forward currency contracts Balance at 29 July 2016 14244 163 6723 Loss for the period Other comprehensive expense Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Actuarial profit on defined benefits pension scheme Tax charge on items taken directly to other comprehensive income 1568 1568 Total comprehensive income
8705 8705 Recognition of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration Transfer of sharebased contingent consideration deemed as remuneration Recognition of sharebased payments Settlement of sharebased payments 40 Tax on sharebased payments Balance at 28 July 2017 14284 163 7900 122 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS ACCOUNTING POLICIES The separate financial statements of the Company are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
The Company meets the definition of a qualifying entity under Financial Reporting Standard FRS 100 issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
Accordingly the financial statements have therefore been prepared in accordance with FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework as issued by the Financial Reporting Council.
Financial Reporting Standard 101  reduced disclosure exemptions The Company has taken advantage of the applicable disclosure exemptions permitted by FRS 101 in its financial statements which are summarised below Standard Disclosure exemption IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment  Para 45b  number and weighted average exercise prices of share options Para 4652  fair value disclosures for share options IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures  Full exemption IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement  Para 9199  disclosure of valuation techniques and inputs used for fair value measurement of assets and liabilities IAS 1 Presentation of the Financial
Para 10d  statement of cash flows Para 10f  a statement of financial position as at the beginning of the preceding period when an entity applies an accounting policy retrospectively or makes a retrospective statement of items in its financial statements or when it reclassifies items in its financial statements Para 16  statement of compliance with all IFRS Para 38  present comparative information in respect of paragraph 79aiv of IAS 1 Para 38A  requirement for minimum of two primary statements including cash flow statements Para 38BD  additional comparative information Para 40AD  requirements for a third statement of financial position Para 111  cash flow statement information Para 134136  capital management disclosures IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows  Full exemption IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors Para 30 and 31  requirement for the disclosure of information when an entity has not applied a new IFRS that has been issued but is not yet effective IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures  Para 17 and 18A  key management compensation The requirements to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group provided that any subsidiary which is a party to the transaction is wholly owned by such a member The disclosures are given in the consolidated financial statements on pages 74 to 119 and notes 1 to 40.
The principal accounting policies adopted are the same as those set out in note 2 to the consolidated financial statements except as noted below.
The Directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
Further detail is contained in the Directors Report on page 62.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less where appropriate provisions for impairment.
PROFIT FROM OPERATIONS As permitted by Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 no profit and loss account of the Company is included in these financial statements.
The loss for the financial period for the Company was 0.6 million 2016  profit of 11.5 million.
AUDITORS REMUNERATION Fees paid to the auditors in respect of their audit of the Company were 143000 2016  135000.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 123 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES EMPLOYEE INFORMATION The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was 2017 2016 Number Number
Administration
Their aggregate remuneration comprised 2017 2016 Wages and salaries Social security costs Other pension costs Sharebased payment Disclosure of individual Directors remuneration share options longterm incentive schemes pension contributions and pension entitlements required by the Companies Act 2006 and those elements specified for audit by the Financial Conduct Authority are shown in the tables in the Remuneration Report on pages 45 to 61 and form part of these parent company financial statements.
Further details of sharebased payments are contained in note 35 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
TANGIBLE FIXED ASSETS Land and Fixtures fittings buildings Plant and Asset under equipment and Short leases machinery construction motor vehicles Total Cost or valuation At 31 July 2015
Disposals
Transfer to Intangible Assets  Software Transfer from Asset under construction Transfers from subsidiaries At 29 July 2016
Disposals
At 28 July 2017 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 31 July 2015
Disposals
At 29 July 2016
Disposals
At 28 July 2017 Net book value At 28 July tel At 29 July tel 124 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Cost or valuation At 31 July 2015
Transfer from tangible fixed assets At 29 July 2016
Disposals
At 28 July 2017 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 31 July 2015
At 29 July 2016
Disposals
At 28 July 2017 Net book value At 28 July 2017 At 29 July 2016 INVESTMENT PROPERTY
Cost or valuation At 31 July 2015
Transfers from subsidiaries Reclassification to assets held for sale At 29 July 2016
Reclassification to assets held for sale Transfers from subsidiaries At 28 July 2017 Accumulated depreciation and impairment At 31 July 2015
Disposals
Reclassification to assets held for sale At 29 July 2016
Disposals
Reclassification to assets held for sale At 28 July 2017 Net book value At 28 July 2017 At 29 July 2016 The Company has freehold land with a book value of 2165000 2016  3862000 which has not been depreciated.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 125 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES There were noncurrent assets held for sale of 147000 as at 28 July 2017 relating to a property at Bungay.
The sale is highly probable to occur within twelve months.
In the prior period the property at the Burnley site was classified as held for sale and was disposed in the current period.
The investment properties are leased out to Group subsidiaries and parties external to the Group.
The following amounts have been recognised in the profit or loss account 2203000 2016  2164408 in relation to rental income from investment properties.
In the prior period direct operating expense of 293883 was incurred in relation to investment properties that did not generate rental income.
INVESTMENTS HELD AS FIXED ASSETS Shares in subsidiaries Loans to at cost subsidiaries Total At 30 July 2016
Impairment
Loan advances Loan repayments 19939 19939 Foreign exchange revaluation At 28 July 2017 All of the above are unlisted investments.
The principal trading subsidiaries are listed in note 40 of the consolidated financial statements.
St Ives Direct Limited has in the period since the balance sheet date been liquidated with no further transactions taking place between it and the Company post the balance sheet date.
As a result the Company recorded a full impairment of its interest in St Ives Direct Limited during the current period amounting to 5833000 the Company also recorded an impairment to the loans receivable from St Ives Direct Limited of 1674000 reducing them to Nil.
Also the outstanding loan payable to St Ives Direct Limited of 5487000 has been released to the income statement.
The net effect of these transactions is a charge recorded in the profit and loss account of the Company of 2020000.
DEBTORS
2017 2016 Within one year Amounts owed by Group undertakings Other debtors Corporation tax recoverable Prepayments and accrued income After more than one year Deferred tax The amounts of deferred tax provided in the financial statements are as follows 2017 2016 Capital allowances in excess of depreciation 438 2243 Temporary differences on share options Other timing differences Retirement benefits obligations The Finance Act 2015 provides for reductions in the main rate of corporation tax from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 18% effective from 1 April 2020.
In the Finance Act 2016 the Government announced further reductions in the main tax rate down to 17% effective from 1 April 2020.
126 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Derivative financial liabilities 2017 2016 Forward foreign currency contracts
2017 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Amounts owing to Group undertakings Bank loans and overdrafts note 12 Consideration payable on purchase of subsidiaries Trade creditors Other creditors including tax and social security Accruals and deferred income 52tel Amounts falling due after more than one year Bank loans and overdrafts note 12 BORROWINGS AND FINANCE OBLIGATIONS 2017 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Bank overdrafts 25843 37063 Bank loans 80245 92595 Bank overdrafts and loans During the period the Company has reduced its revolving credit facility to 95 million supplemented by a term loan of 30 million and increased its maximum leverage covenant condition net debt to Adjusted EBITDA for the remaining duration of the facility.
Up to 15 million may be drawn as an overdraft facility.
Interest on loan drawdowns is charged at LIBOR plus a margin which varies between 1.65% and 2.60% depending on the ratio of the Groups net debt to EBITDA excluding Adjusting Items.
Interest on overdraft drawdowns is charged at 2.00% over UK base rate.
Subsequent to the period end the Company reduced its term loan facility by 5.5 million to 24.5 million.
As at 28 July 2017 the Companys outstanding loans within this facility were 80.2 million 2016  92.6 million.
The undrawn portion of this facility at 28 July 2017 was 44.8 million 2016  32.4 million.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the loans approximates to their fair value.
The Companys overdraft is guaranteed by certain United Kingdom subsidiary undertakings and the Company guarantees the loans and overdrafts of those United Kingdom subsidiary undertakings.
At 28 July 2017 the aggregate liability for the Company under this guarantee amounted to 107970000 2016  130637801.
The aggregate value of overdraft liabilities belonging to these subsidiaries which are guaranteed by the Company amounted to 533000 2016  985000.
As at 28 July 2017 there was no loan or overdraft secured against the assets of the Company 2016  Nil.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of the loans and overdrafts approximates their fair value.
The Company has guaranteed amounts payable to certain property landlords and specific financial guarantees for obligations to suppliers and customers of its trading subsidiaries.
The maximum aggregate liability under these financial guarantees is 22260000 2016  19796000.
St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 127 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES PROVISIONS FOR LIABILITIES AND CHARGES 2017 2016 Provision for repairs Provision for reorganisation Retirement benefit obligation The provision for repairs at 28 July 2017 relates to dilapidations at Tudor Street the Groups London headquarters.
Provisions held as at 28 July 2017 are estimated to be utilised between financial periods ending 2018 and 2021.
The Company participates in both the defined benefits and defined contribution schemes operated by St Ives plc.
The defined benefits scheme is a multiemployer scheme the assets and liabilities of which are held in separate trusteeadministered funds.
The pension costs are based on pension costs across the Group as a whole.
For the defined contribution scheme the profit and loss charge represents contributions payable.
The Group is required to account for the defined benefits scheme under International Accounting Standard 19  Employee Benefits IAS 19.
The IAS 19 disclosures are included in note 27 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
CALLED UP SHARE CAPITAL AND SHARE PREMIUM ACCOUNT Ordinary shares Share premium
Allotted and fully paid At 29 July 2016 Issue of share capital At 28 July 2017 The share capital issued during the current period relates to the exercise of SAYE scheme options.
All authorised and issued share capital is represented by equity shareholdings.
Further information on equity can be found in note 30 of the consolidated financial statements.
OTHER RESERVES The movements in reserves are disclosed in the Companys Statement of Changes in Equity.
As at 28 July 2017 the Company held a portfolio of treasury shares consisting of 90637 St Ives ordinary shares 2016  90637 St Ives ordinary shares.
Details of dividends including the proposed final dividend for the period of 1.30 pence per share can be found in note 12 to the consolidated financial statements.
OPERATING LEASE COMMITMENTS At 28 July 2017 the Company had outstanding commitments for the future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases as follows Land and 2017 Land and 2016 buildings Other buildings Other Within one year Between one and five years 128 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 OUR FIGURES NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CONTINUED RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS Details on related party transactions can be found in note 37 to the consolidated financial statements.
POST BALANCE SHEET EVENTS Subsequent to the balance sheet date St Ives Direct Limited entered liquidation.
This provides evidence that the Companys investment in and loans to St Ives Direct Limited were impaired at the balance sheet date and both have been reduced to Nil in the current period on this basis the Company also released to the Income Statement the full amount of the loan to St Ives Direct Limited in the current period see note 8 for further information.
There were no further transactions between the Company and St Ives Direct Limited between the balance sheet date and the date of liquidation.
STATEMENT OF GUARANTEE The Company has signed a statement of guarantee in respect of a number of subsidiary companies under section 479C of the Companies Act 2006.
As a result the following subsidiaries are exempt from the requirements of the UK Companies Act 2006 in relation to the audit of individual accounts by virtue of section 479A of that Act
Company registration number Amaze Europe Limited Amaze Holdings Limited Amaze Communication Services Holdings Limited Amaze Communication Services Limited My Bench Limited Branded3 Search Limited eBee Limited Flare Limited Fripp Sandeman and Partners Limited The Health Hive Limited Okana Systems Limited Pollen Health Limited Pragma Consulting Limited Pragma Holdings Limited Realise Holdings Limited SC Response One Holdings Limited Tactical Solutions Limited St Ives Blackburn Limited St Ives Burnley Limited St Ives Direct Leeds Limited St Ives Holdings Limited St Ives Marketing Services Limited St Ives Westerham Press Limited  St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 129 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES OUR FIGURES FINANCIAL CALENDAR AND SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION FINANCIAL CALENDAR Financial year ended 29 July 2016 Annual General Meeting 2016 1 December 2016 Record date for final dividend 25 November 2016 Payment date for final dividend of 5.45p per ordinary share 19 December 2016 Financial year ended 28 July 2017 Half year end 27 January 2017 Announcement of Half year results 7 March 2017 Record date for interim dividend 7 April 2017 Payment date for interim dividend of 0.65p per ordinary share 5 May 2017 Financial year end 28 July 2017 Announcement of Full year results 3 October 2017 Annual General Meeting 2017 30 November 2017 Exdividend date 23 November 2017 Record date for proposed final dividend 24 November 2017 Payment date for proposed final dividend of 1.30p per ordinary share 18 December 2017 Financial year ending 3 August 2018 Half year end 2 February 2018 Announcement of Half year results March 2018 Financial year end 3 August 2018 If approved by shareholders at the 2017 Annual General Meeting the proposed final dividend will be paid on 18 December 2017.
Dividend Reinvestment Plan The Dividend Reinvestment plan can be a convenient and easy way to build up your shareholding by using your cash dividends to buy more shares in the Company.
The Plan is provided by Capita Asset Services Capita a trading name of Capita IRG Trustees Limited which is authorised and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority FCA.
Should you require any further information please do not hesitate to contact Capita Asset Services ontel.
Calls are charged at the standard geographic rate and will vary by provider.
Calls outside the United Kingdom are charged at the applicable international rate.
Lines are open between 9.00 a. to 5.30 p.
Monday to Friday excluding public holidays in England and Wales.
Alternatively please email email or log on to site Unauthorised brokers Boiler Room Scams It is very unlikely that a reputable authorised firm that a shareholder has had no relationship with would make contact out of the blue offering to buy St Ives shares or offer other investment opportunities.
Therefore shareholders are advised to be wary of anyone offering to give unsolicited advice buy shares at a discount or give free company reports.
These calls are typically from overseasbased brokers who target UK shareholders offering to sell them what are often worthless or high risk shares in US or UK investments.
This sharp practice is commonly known as a boiler room scam.
If you receive any unsolicited investment advice make sure you get the correct name of the person or organisation check that they are properly authorised by the FCA before taking any action by visiting www. sa. iteregisterhome. at www. ca. if calls persist hang up.
130 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate information Further information about the Group can be found on our website site This years Annual Report and Accounts as well as copies of past years Annual Reports and Accounts Half year Statements and Shareholder circulars are available to view and download from our website.
Regulatory announcements and press releases made during the year and in past years are also available to view in the Regulatory News section of the Investor Relations area of the website.
Should you wish to receive further copies of the Annual Report and Accounts or a copy of our Environmental Performance report please contact the Company Secretary St Ives plc One Tudor Street London EC4Y 0AH.
Shares
St Ives plc ordinary shares of 10 pence each are listed on the London Stock Exchange and trade under the symbol SIV.
Our International Securities Identification Number ISIN is GBtel and our Stock Exchange Daily Official List SEDOL number is .
Share price information and our latest regulatory announcements can be obtained from the Stock Exchange website www. ondonstockexchange. com.
Shareholding enquiries St Ives plcs register is maintained by Capita Asset Services who are able to deal with shareholders queries including in respect of any of the following matters transfer of shares change of name or address registering the death of a shareholder lost share certificates lost or out of date dividend warrants and the payment of dividends directly into a bank or building society accounts.
Their contact details are St Ives plc Shareholder Services Capita Asset Services The Registry 34 Beckenham Road Beckenham Kent BR3 4TU.
Capitas shareholder helpline telephone number istel calls cost 12 pence per minute plus network extras.
If calling from overseas please telephone  44 0tel.
Lines are open from 9.00 a. to 5.30 p.
Monday to Friday.
Alternatively you can email your query to our registrars at shareholder. subsequently require you to confirm any instruction in writing.
Our principal advisers
Numis Securities Limited The London Stock Exchange Building 10 Paternoster Square London EC4M 7LT Financial advisers
Rothschild and Sons Limited New Court St.
Swithins Lane London EC4N 8AL
HSBC Bank plc 60 Queen Victoria Street London EC4N 4TR The Royal Bank of Scotland plc 280 Bishopsgate London EC2M 4RB
Herbert Smith Freehills LLP  Exchange House Primrose Street London EC2A 2EG FINANCIAL CALENDAR AND SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION SHAREHOLDER INFORMATION St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 131 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE STRATEGIC REPORT OUR FIGURES OUR FIGURES NOTES 132 St Ives plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 NOTES Design and Production site St Ives plc Registered in England and Wales
Registered office One Tudor Street London EC4Y 0AH This publication is printed on Galerie Satin.
The material used is derived from sustainable and renewable sources.
The Paper and Printer are both FSC and ISO14001 accredited  all inks are vegetable based and all pulp is Elemental Chlorine free ECF.
One Tudor Street
EC4Y 0AH
Email email
