Annual Report and Accounts 2017 1 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Highlights
These figures are for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 and 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016 unless stated otherwise.
Achieving growth The Company has delivered resilient UK sales in a deflationary market with the impact of UK retail food market deflation in the period offset by the impact of innovation in cake and growth in speciality bakery ranges.
Adjusted operating profit and profit before tax exclude significant nonrecurring and other items as shown in the tables above and includes amortisation of intangibles.
The adjusted operating profit has been given as in the opinion of the Board this will allow shareholders to gain a clearer understanding of the trading performance of the Group.
Like for like growth is calculated using financial data for the prior year for a 52 week period.
The 52 week period is calculated by eliminating the result for the 53rd week in the financial year ended 2 July 2016.
Adjusted diluted EPS has been calculated using earnings excluding the 53rd week in the prior year amortisation of intangibles significant nonrecurring and other items as shown in the tables above.
The adjusted diluted EPS has been given as in the opinion of the Board this will allow shareholders to gain a clearer understanding of the trading performance of the Group.
The Financial Review section within the Strategic Report provides further details on the adjusted profits.
Adjusted Operating Profit 52 weeks 53 weeks Results from operating activities 13564 12791 Significant nonrecurring items SNR refer to Note 4 for detail Difference between defined benefit pension scheme charges and cash cost Movement in the fair value of foreign exchange contracts Adjustments SNR and other items 3871 4307 Adjusted results from operating activities 17435 17098 Impact of 53rd week  371 Adjusted results from operating activities for 52 weeks 17435 16727 Adjusted Profit Before Tax 52 weeks 53 weeks Profit before tax 13038 11804 Significant nonrecurring items SNR refer to Note 4 for detail Difference between defined benefit pension scheme charges and cash cost Movement in the fair value of interest rate swaps Movement in the fair value of foreign exchange contracts Adjustments SNR and other items 3520 4236 Adjusted profit before tax 16558 16040 Impact of 53rd week  358 Adjusted profit before tax for 52 weeks 16558 15682 2 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Highlights
Chairmans Statement
Chief Executives Report
Strategic Report Report on Corporate Governance The Directors 23 Directors Report Audit Committee Report
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy Report
Statement of Directors Responsibilities in Respect of the Annual Report and the Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Finsbury Food Group Plc Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Cash Flow Statement Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in Equity Notes to the Companys Financial
Advisers
Adjusted Profit before Tax 5.6% Adjusted EBITDA 2.7% Capital Investment 3.3% Adjusted EPS 2.1% Total Dividend 7.1% Net Debt 11.2% Adjusted Operating Profit 4.2% Group Revenue 0.2%
Strategic Highlights
Capital investment including a new state of the art cake line which will be fully operational in financial year 1718 an exciting new cupcake capability to augment the Groups licensed product range and a range of packing automation investments.
New artisan bread facility opened baking for retail and foodservice customers.
Sales to continental Europe up 15% to 38.1m.
Entered into consultation to close Grain DOr the loss making site in North London which manufactures premium baked goods in the UK pastry sector.
Employee engagement programme commences following on from successful roll out of vision and values throughout the Group.
A new multiyear licensing agreement with Thorntons and new brand licence engagements with Mary Berry and Mars with a range of Mary Berry cakes launched in the second half of the year.
Winner of Celebration Cake Business of the year for 2016 at the Bakery Industry Awards and multiple food quality awards Quality food award Caf Quality food award Grocer Own Label innovation award and International Licensing award.
Unless stated otherwise stated the figures quoted for the prior year are for a 53 week period.
3 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chairmans Statement
Achieving our objectives We will continue to work hard to run our existing businesses as efficiently and effectively as possible whilst investing for the future Peter Baker NonExecutive Chairman 4 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We continue to make good progress in line with our stated aim of becoming a leading speciality bakery group in the UK.
We have delivered a resilient performance despite the changing consumer and customer dynamics and the challenging economic environment for food manufacturers across the industry which has made the journey somewhat slower and harder than expected.
The Board has reviewed the Groups strategy in the light of these external changes and has concluded that there is no need for any radical change of direction and we still firmly believe we are set on the right path to achieve our goal.
We will continue to work hard to run our existing businesses as efficiently and effectively as possible whilst investing for the future and keeping a solid balance sheet that can be utilised as and when the right opportunities present themselves.
The Board welcomed Bob Beveridge as a NonExecutive Director in July and he will be joining the Audit Committee.
The new Group management structure has bedded in well and is delivering the scale opportunities and benefits expected whilst preserving our largely decentralised site system.
The Results The Groups revenue for the 52 weeks was 314.3m up 0.3% on a like for like basis compared to last years adjusted 52 week figure.
Profit before tax at 13.0m is up from 11.8m in the prior period which on an adjusted and like for like basis is 16.6m versus 15.7m representing a 5.6% increase.
Debt is at 0.7 times EBITDA.
This result delivers on our expectations and has been achieved against a deflationary UK retail food market which is changing in terms of channel balance as consumers shop in less traditional ways.
This has led to an upswing in the discounters market share and online gains.
Specific cost issues that relate to the current weakness of Sterling and increased costs of the new national living wage have also had to be overcome through efficiency gains and price adjustment.
The European business has performed strongly this year and has demonstrated the benefit of having a diversified portfolio.
A full financial review is available further on in the Report.
This outcome has not been easy to achieve and has only been possible because of our Boards longterm focus on driving efficiency and managing costs as well as the hard work of Finsburys committed team.
This was demonstrated when the Board was presented with the results of the first Group employee engagement survey.
The participation was excellent and the results gratifying with only a few areas marked for improvement.
Investing for the Future The Groups capital investment of 12.5m means we have completed or are in the throes of completing some very important strategic projects.
A new cake line is coming on stream in Cardiff and there is a new IT system being rolled out which will give a common platform for the whole business.
The benefits of these and other projects will help improve our overall productivity and offset increases in our cost base.
In light of the current environment we maintain a strong focus on investing in our future.
With this in mind we plan to invest in new plant equipment and systems to further improve efficiency product quality and our capability in sustainable and environmentallyresponsible manufacturing.
We continually assess our role within various product markets and are committed to critically reviewing our presence in those that are less successful.
To this end the Company has entered into consultation with the workforce of Grain DOr the Groups loss making pastry factory in North London to close the site.
This consultation will conclude midOctober.
Strategy for Continued Growth The licensing of brands is an important part of the business and we have worked hard to improve and strengthen our relationships with existing licensees and we were delighted to launch a range of Mary Berry cakes in the second half of the year.
We continue to win awards for our products and to add to our capabilities such as in a new cupcake line and an artisan bread production facility both meeting the needs of changing consumer demands.
In the same way our new product development is increasingly directed towards providing healthier and more convenient products.
Development of the foodservice channel is also an ongoing target for growth alongside any business acquisitions that meet our criteria.
Finally on behalf of the Board I would like to thank everyone who works at Finsbury for delivering another successful year.
Their passion energy and contribution continues to drive the business forward.
Dividends
The final dividend per share of 2.0p will take the total dividend for the year to 3.0p per share up 7% from last years dividend of 2.8p per share.
The Groups revenue for the 52 weeks was 314.3m up 0.3% on a like for like basis compared to last years adjusted 52 week figure.
Total net debt is 17.5m down 2.2m from 19.7m reported in the prior year.
The total dividend for the year is 3.0p per share up 7% from last years dividend of 2.8p per share.
Adjusted profit before tax is 16.6m up 5.6% from 15.7m in 2016 on a like for like basis.
5 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executives Report
The Group is now one of the largest speciality bakery groups in the UK with a small but fast growing European business.
John Duffy
Chief Executive Officer
Achieving e ffi ci e n cy 6 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Since joining the Company in 2009 our team has been keenly focused on creating strong foundations and a competitive cost base to ensure that we are in a solid position to weather industrywide challenges.
Driving efficiency and scale has been a longterm focus for Finsbury and has represented the rationale behind a range of initiatives we have implemented over recent years.
With this in mind having been operating within a deflationary UK grocery food market during the period under review the effectiveness of these initiatives has been tested.
Therefore I am pleased to report on the solid performance and trading resilience the Group has demonstrated against the headwinds posed by sustained Sterling devaluation and high input costs experienced during FY 2017 .
This performance which includes growth in both Group sales and profit in the year on a like for like basis follows several years of very strong organic and acquisitionled growth and demonstrates the benefits of the investment and diversification strategy implemented over recent years.
Additionally our strong cashflow and robust balance sheet allowed us to both reduce debt and increase our dividend whilst continuing to invest to strengthen our business for the future.
The Group is now one of the largest speciality bakery groups in the UK with a small but fast growing European business.
The latter performed particularly strongly as it benefited from improved celebration cake and free from product ranges and was boosted by the exchange rate tailwind from a weaker Sterling.
All food manufacturers and their customers have had to navigate the transition from the deflationary food market of recent years to the inflationary environment evident throughout the second half and beyond.
Sterlings structural decline amplified typically cyclical commodity input cost increases for UK manufacturers importing many of their ingredients.
The National Living Wage has similarly amplified annual labour cost inflation throughout the labour intensive food and agriculture sector and indeed beyond.
This trend looks set to continue for some time with high profile butter price hikes driven by increased demand and a supply shortfall the most significant example in recent months.
This market transition has seen us work proactively with our brand partners and customers to revise our product pricing and promotional portfolio to strike the right sustainable balance of providing value for consumers whilst delivering on margin requirements.
These are difficult customer conversations and whilst diminished promotional spend reduced sales growth in the shortterm operating margin was successfully maintained in FY17 in conjunction with our internal efficiency improvement initiatives and recent capital investment.
Strategic Investment Underpinning the Future Finsburys goal is to ensure that the Group is well positioned to maintain pricing for consumers and to remain a low cost producer for customers.
These resilient results are testament to the importance of continually investing in our operations in order to improve overall productivity and offset increases in the Groups cost base.
FY17 saw the second consecutive year of record capital investment at 12.5m some 181% of depreciation as we further strengthen the Groups growth capacity product capability efficiency and cost competitiveness.
This has seen the installation of a new automated whole cake line in an upgraded bakery at our Cardiff site.
This is currently undergoing product commissioning for full production in FY18.
We have also opened a new artisan bread bakery at our Salisbury site.
Both of these will enable future growth aligned to changing consumer demand for premium healthy and authentic product ranges across different market channels.
The second major investment area is focused on redesigning our business processes to drive scale and efficiency across the Group businesses.
This standardisation of process across all sites in the Group establishes agreed best practice and this is then embedded within the roll out of our new ERP IT platform across the Group during the first half of FY18.
The third major investment area largely non capital expenditure is our people strategy.
Having successfully rolled out our vision and values last year we completed our first Group employee engagement survey with an engagement score of 68% to establish a base for future improvement.
A new Groupwide talent management system and an associated management development programme were also successfully deployed during the year to nurture the development of both todays and importantly tomorrows leaders.
68% FY17 saw the second consecutive year of record capital investment at 12.5m some 181% of depreciation as we further strengthen the Groups growth capacity product capability efficiency and cost competitiveness.
Having successfully rolled out our vision and values last year we completed our first Group employee engagement survey with an engagement score of 68% to establish a base for future improvement.
A 15% rise in sales to continental Europe demonstrating the benefits of geographic diversification.
7 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executives Report
Finally we have entered into consultation for the closure of Grain DOr the Groups lossmaking pastry factory.
Over the two and a half year period since acquisition we have been working closely with management of this site to stem the losses it experienced.
However although improvements have been made the ongoing pressures from commodity and labour cost increases has made it difficult to maintain customer contracts.
The cost to close if seen as an investment will be justified by the reduction in losses.
The Group will update the market following the completion of the consultation process and depending on the outcome will outline the financial consequences of any decision.
A Consistent Strategy for Uncertain Times Our vision is to be a leading speciality bakery Group which produces a broad range of high quality products for growing channels and market niches delivers growth and differentiation for our major customers and fulfills endconsumer requirements.
Our focus is on the UK but increasingly we are extending our reach into Europe.
We operate in competitive sectors and markets supplying brand partners and customers with innovative safe and high quality bakery products which anticipate and fulfil consumer trends are efficiently and sustainably made and offer great value.
These results show that this strategy has delivered results for the Group.
Additional investment to better understand consumer needs and category growth opportunities complements the product business process and people investment outlined previously.
Our ability to leverage scale and best practice intellectual property across the Group whilst delivering for individual customers and brand partners is central to our continued competitiveness and underpins our growth ambitions.
It is rewarding to see Group businesses winning a number of externally recognised industry and customer food awards whilst also extending and deepening our licensed brand relationships with both existing partners such as Thorntons and Mars as well as new partners such as Mary Berry.
In line with our stated growth strategy the Group has continued to explore acquisition opportunities that fit strategically and meet our value criteria.
However none were successful in the year as valuations remained unrealistic given known market headwinds.
More challenging market conditions may provide new acquisition opportunities in the year ahead and we remain patient.
Meanwhile there are ample opportunities identified to further strengthen and optimise our current Group businesses.
I would like to thank my Board Executive teams and the thousands of colleagues across Finsbury for their continued commitment and hard work in baking great food products every day and in particular to those individuals which drive the investment and change programmes on top of their other day job responsibilities.
The business environment isnt going to get any easier but I remain confident that Finsbury has the right people investment approach and MandA strategy to deliver growth in the years ahead delivering value for employees customers and shareholders alike.
Finsburys goal is to ensure that the Group is well positioned to maintain pricing for consumers and to remain a low cost producer for customers.
8 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our business expertise and our baking skills continue to win industry accolades.
The Bakery Industry Awards crowned us Celebration Cake Business of the year while the International Licensing industry awarded us Best Licensed Food Product.
Among many other successes were the Quality food award the Caf Quality food award and the Grocer Own Label Innovation award.
9 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Our vision is to be a leading speciality bakery group producing a broad range of high quality products targeted at growing channels and market niches and which deliver growth and differentiation for our customers whilst fulfilling the needs of end consumers.
Our focus is the UK but increasingly we are extending our reach into Europe particularly for cake products.
Our growth strategy will be delivered by a combination of organic growth and targeted acquisitions.
We will invest to consolidate and grow within existing areas such as round cakes and artisan bread.
We will also invest to expand our capabilities into new product formats and capability.
This investment will accompany and facilitate the diversification of our product capability into new channels such as foodservice cake and gluten free.
Further acquisitions will introduce new product customer or channel diversification or accelerate market consolidation in our core product areas.
Our Markets The total UK ambient cake market including prepacked cake and instore bakery ISB is valued at over 938 million source Symphony IRI 52 we 19 August 2017.
The annual retail bread and morning goods market has a value of 4.0 billion source Kantar Worldpanel 52 weeks to 16 July 2017.
The UK foodservice bread and morning goods bakery sector is worth approximately 836 million per annum.
The UK foodservice cake and sweet treat bakery sector is worth approximately 494 million per annum source UK foodservice data derived from NPD Crest we 30 June 2017.
Our Business The Group consists of the UK bakery and the overseas sector businesses.
UK Bakery UK bakery has eight factories each with its own range of products and manufacturing capabilities and employing in excess of 3000 people across the following bakery companies Lightbody of Hamilton Ltd is based in Hamilton and is the UKs largest supplier of celebration cakes.
Memory Lane Cakes Ltd is based in Cardiff and is the leading manufacturer of the UK retailers own label sharing cake.
Fletchers Group of Bakeries has three factories located in Sheffield Manchester and London.
It produces a wide range of fresh and frozen bread and morning goods products which are distributed to leading UK retailers and foodservice customers.
Johnstones Food Service Ltd is based in East Kilbride and produces bite style cake products including its renowned caramel shortcake.
It supplies foodservice customers particularly national coffee shop chains.
Nicholas and Harris Ltd is based in Salisbury and produces a range of speciality bread and morning goods which are distributed to UK retailers and foodservice customers.
Campbells Cake Company Ltd is based in Twechar near Glasgow and produces cold set products such as caramel shortbread and tiffin for retailers.
The Groups bakery product range is comprehensive and includes Large premium and celebration cakes.
Small snacking cake formats such as cake slices and bites.
Artisan healthy lifestyle and organic breads through to rolls muffins sweet and savoury and morning pastries all of which are available fresh and frozen dependent on customer channel requirements.
Overseas
Our overseas business is a 50% subsidiary Lightbody Stretz based in France and run by Philippe and Valerie Stretz.
The Companys focus is primarily France and the Benelux nations and together we are beginning to make inroads into Austria Switzerland and Germany.
Lightbody
Stretz procures supplies and distributes a range of products to its customers.
The product range includes licensed celebration and bite style cakes manufactured in the Groups UK bakeries.
The company has also developed an expertise in gluten free bakery which it resources in both the UK and in Europe and sells under its brand Wiso or as own label into retailer instore bakery.
10 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We continually develop new lines to meet new consumer demand trends such as healthier and more convenient bakery products and innovation is key to this.
This year we invested in new cupcake production methods and another artisan bread production facility.
11 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Brands and Licences The Group is proud to have a well balanced portfolio of retailer own label business and a strong and evolving licensed branded portfolio all supported by collaborative and strategic partnerships.
We also have our own cake brand Memory Lane and the Kara foodservice brand.
Kara
Kara is the innovative foodservice brand of the Finsbury Food Group distributing to more than 300 wholesalers and end users such as UK pubs hotels and restaurant chains as well as exporting to countries including Germany France Denmark Portugal Spain and Holland.
The Kara brand is 100% dedicated to foodservice.
Kara began its journey in 1985 with its famous floured baps and today the range includes new premium additions such as artisan breads brioche buns traybakes and large premium cakes.
Kara has successfully built an evergrowing portfolio of sweet and savoury baked goods continuing to focus on the latest consumer trends and developing new and innovative products that enable foodservice customers to stay ahead.
The year to 1 July 2017 was one of consolidation for the foodservice business after several consecutive years of growth.
Revenues marginally ahead of the prior year in a challenging foodservice market.
New business was secured on the new cake ranges with the two major UK foodservice wholesalers as well as major cafes and pub groups.
Market leading Kara brioche buns continue to grow in line with demand for more premium product traditional doughnuts continued their renaissance and artisan bread products continued to grow in both sales and outlet penetration.
There was strong growth in the top four customers somewhat offset by reduced trading in export markets particularly France and also in some smaller customer business closures.
The foodservice business also continued to grow its Kara branded sales whilst still being a key supplier of own brand to core customers.
Thorntons
The Group has recently completed the renewal of its successful long standing partnership with Thorntons which will extend this collaboration over two decades.
The agreement will see the Group continue to produce and market cakes under the much loved Thorntons brand.
Thorntons is still one of the fastest growing premium brands within cakes where continued success has come through strong product innovation across both celebration and snacking cakes.
Mary Berry We are delighted to announce the partnership and launch of the new Mary Berry range in the Spring of this year.
The full product range extends to loaf sharing and celebration cakes which have all been developed in partnership to stay true to Mary Berrys original recipes.
The range brings a new dynamic to the cake category by providing a branded solution that appeals to a broader age demographic.
Character Licensed Portfolio Our character licences portfolio is a key focal point to the business which allows us to develop and produce products that meet consumer trends and occasions.
We have a long standing relationship within the licensed industry which we are very proud of.
Every licensed partnership is dear to our business and we take pride in being able to work together to bring popular characters to life across different cake formats.
Successful licences for the Group this year have included Batman vs Superman Minions Star Wars and Emoji which have been linked to big movie releases together with well established evergreen properties such as Me to You Peppa Pig and Paw Patrol.
The full product range extends to loaf sharing and celebration cakes which have all been developed in partnership with Mary Berrys original recipes.
12 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
As a longterm partner of the Disney brand we have taken a leading role in supporting Disneys strategy to inspire healthier choices for families and we have recently relaunched our celebration cake range with an innovative reduced sugar recipe.
Our new range is the first in the UK to launch with Disney Kitchen branding and we continue to drive innovation and consumer enjoyment of the Disney brand in cake.
Mars
Mars has a wide portfolio of confectionery brands and we have worked in collaboration to develop an innovative cake range.
The Galaxy and MandM cakes are built around key elements of these classic brands which provide the consumer cakes that meets most consumer occasions.
Vogels
Vogels range of clean label breads are crammed to bursting with seeds and grains.
Alfred Vogel was a pioneering Swiss nutritionist who created the first Vogels recipe in the 1950s.
He passionately championed natural ingredients which is why Vogels loaves are baked without added sugar emulsifiers enzymes or artificial preservatives or flavourings.
To this day we share his commitment to tasty food and healthy living inspired by nature.
The unique way we bake Vogels means its tremendously tasty toasted.
Village Bakery The range of organic fresh rye bread brands are perfect if you are looking to avoid wheat.
We keep it simple only using the best organic natural ingredients The Loyal range of rossisky and seeded rye breads will have the addition of a new Village Bakery pumpernickel rye loaf made with molasses and a blend of kibbled ryes to give a distinct sweet and sour flavour.
Keeping to minimal ingredients of organic flours water a little sea salt with the benefit that they are all made with no added yeast emulsifiers or enzymes.
Cranks
Cranks aspires to wholesome simple nutritious food.
Our organic wholemeal loaf with organic stoneground flour is fermented for longer.
Baked using specific baking processes that produces a loaf with great flavour through its fermentation process is made without any additives such as emulsifiers and enzymes.
The popular stoneground wholemeal loaf will be joined by the new Cranks organic wholemeal seeded loaf.
Consumer Trends Differentiation for our customers whilst fulfilling the needs of the end consumers is key to the Groups success it follows that innovation and product development is an essential part of the Groups strategy.
We have worked under the four broad banners to be able to focus on the macro consumer trends.
The continuing challenge for the Group is to match the consumer trends with our dynamic product portfolio.
The Groups new product development team reinforces Finsburys expertise as a leading speciality bakery and provides increased differentiation from our competitors.
Broad Consumer Trends Better for You On the Go Indulgence Artisan Ongoing work in cake to meet sugar reduction targets and also butter fat mitigation evidenced by the Groups work on a reduced sugar Disney range of cakes.
Low carb and protein rich bread products fall into this category.
Portability individually wrapped and ready made on the go solutions are all areas of focus including the Groups focus on sharing formats such as bites and tubs in store bakery brownies and crispies and Kara brand and Johnstones Food Service cakes.
Small portions of indulgent cakery treats such as Thorntons caramel shortcake seasonal treats such as Yule log and Costa cake and the new Mary Berry range.
Organic and premium niche bread products.
13 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Licensed brand relationships are key to maintaining product differentiation and growing our specialist product portfolio and we aim to extend and deepen these partnerships.
This year we signed a new multiyear agreement with longstanding partner Thorntons while entering new licence engagements with Mars and with Mary Berry for whom we launched a range of cakes.
14 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Principal Risks and Uncertainties The Board recognises the need for a robust system of internal controls and risk management.
The assessment of risks and the development of strategies for dealing with these risks are achieved on an ongoing basis through the way in which the Group is controlled and managed internally.
A formal review of these risks is carried out by the Group on an annual basis.
The review process involves the identification of risks assessment to determine the relative likelihood of them impacting the business and the potential severity of the impact and determination of what needs to be done to manage them effectively.
Risk management
The Directors have identified the following as the principal risks and uncertainties that face the Group Economic Environment The market place remains challenging and there is an uncertain macroeconomic outlook following the vote to leave the EU.
Currency hedging and longterm contracts give the Group time to plan and formulate strategies to face future challenges.
The Group will continue to focus on quality and value and will explore new channels new products and new formats to gain competitive advantage.
Forging strong customer relationships and aligning strategic business plans through innovation and category management helps create mutual growth opportunities.
The Impact of Brexit Brexit brings uncertainty in the following areas Labour The food industry employs many nonUK nationals the sector in general could see a shortfall in workers.
Increasing reliance on UK workers which may push up wage costs may prompt a change in business model.
Material The weakening of the pound post Brexit has had an impact on ingredient prices.
Regulations All current regulations on food safety labelling or health and safety will continue to apply to UK businesses.
Product standards will need to be observed by UK companies when trading with the EU.
The Group will respond to the challenges that Brexit brings once negotiations are advanced.
Competitive Environment and Customer Requirements The environment remains competitive within the bakery sector.
The monitoring of key performance indicators at customer level such as service levels and customer complaints is part of the risk management process associated with this specific risk.
Providing quality products investing in innovation and competing on value helps to strengthen customer relations and support growth initiatives.
The Group invests heavily in category management new product development and marketing skills.
This investment has helped create an insight into customers and consumer demands.
Product Quality Product quality is a key strength of the Group and failure to maintain a high standard of safety and food quality would have a severe impact on service levels and customer relationships.
The Groups technical function is responsible for the implementation and maintenance of high standards for food safety striving for best practice.
Quality assurance procedures are managed at site level and are reviewed continuously with improvements made as appropriate.
The operating subsidiaries are subject to regular internal and independent food safety and quality control audits including those carried out by or on behalf of our customers.
The Group maintains product recall insurance cover to mitigate the potential impact of such an occurrence.
Providing quality products investing in innovation and competing on value helps to strengthen customer relations and support growth initiatives.
15 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report The National Living Wage is driving forward the cost of labour ahead of inflation and demand related adjustments.
More recently the future availability of labour has become a concern.
Ongoing capital investment and improvements in operational efficiency help reduce the impacts of both labour availability and cost as well as material inflation.
Pension Fund Deficit The Group has one defined benefit pension scheme within its Memory Lane Cakes Limited business in Cardiff.
The scheme was closed to new members in 2010 to reduce the funding risk to Memory Lane Cakes.
The valuation of the scheme on a technical provision basis as well as the underlying performance of the invested assets can cause large fluctuations in valuations.
There is an agreed deficit recovery plan fixed until September 2023 or until a new schedule is agreed based on the next valuation which will be at 31 December 2018.
Cyber Security The Group is exposed to random and malicious attacks from cyber criminals.
The maintenance of protections software is one tool in the fight to protect our data.
In addition the Group is investing to implement common information systems across all companies with standardised protection operating requirements and security protection.
Finally real time backup training and regular communication pulls the Groups defences together.
Group Systems The Group will during the next financial year complete the upgrade of its business systems across UK bakery.
The ERP system is the latest version of the existing system within the Fletchers business acquired in 2014.
Recognising the inherent risks to a systems upgrade an appropriate Corporate Governance structure has been put in place a Steering Committee comprising senior operational management from both businesses and chaired by an independent implementation specialist with KPMG engaged to independently assess and advise the Board on progress and risks to the business associated with the program.
The fact that the new ERP system is the latest version of the existing system in operation within the Fletchers business is also a significant risk reduction factor.
Dividend
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 22nd November 2017 the final dividend of 2.0 pence per share will be paid on 22 December 2017 to all shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017 and will be recognised in the financial year ending 30 June 2018.
Financial Review
Continuing Group revenue for the 52 week period to 1 July 2017 was up 0.3% to 314.3 million 2016 313.5 million 52 weeks 319.7 million 53 weeks.
Operating profit margins were 5.5% 2016 5.3%.
Capital investment improvement in operational efficiency and product mix are the main drivers for the improvement in margin.
Administrative expenses have decreased despite inflationary pressures.
This decrease is driven by continued focus on overhead control operational improvements and efficiencies from record levels of capital investment.
The prior year also included a charge of 2.8 million for the cancellation of legacy share options.
Grain DOr Business The Groups Grain DOr business was acquired as part of the Fletchers acquisition in October 2014 it is a producer of premium baked products for the UK pastry sector and based in London.
The business has been historically loss making and despite the implementation of a range of initiatives to improve the business including strict cost control and new working practices the site remained loss making in the year to 1 July 2017.
The Company now proposes to close the site.
A formal consultation with representatives of the workforce commenced on 1 September 2017.
The consultation is expected to conclude mid October 2017.
Until this consultation period concludes uncertainty remains over the use of the assets.
In light of this a decision has been taken to impair the assets used in the business by 4.0 million in the year to 1 July 2017.
Commodity and Labour Pressures Bakery entails the use of commodities whose price is determined by worldwide demand and macroeconomic factors.
Commodity pressures have increased as a consequence of a number of factors 1 A step change in the value of Sterling against both the Euro and Dollar following the Brexit vote.
2 The commodity cycle which in the recent past has been relatively low.
The cycle has seen significant increases in the price of a number of commodities which are over and above any exchange rate deterioration.
Finally 3 European policies particularly in the areas of butter and sugar.
The Group maintains a high level of expertise in its buying team and will consider longterm contracts where appropriate to reduce uncertainty in input prices.
The team also cultivates strong relationships with major suppliers to ensure continuity of supply at competitive prices.
Regular renovation and innovation in our product range can help to manage margin pressures in an effective manner as far as the competitive environment allows.
The Group also purchases forward foreign currency in order to minimise the fluctuation of input costs linked to future currency conversion rates.
16 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our foodservice business provides differentiation from our bakery retail sector business by servicing wholesalers and end users  such as pubs hotels and restaurant chains  with ranges of convenient bread and cakes products.
It also has a healthy export trade.
Developing our foodservice channel is part of our strategy for growth.
17 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report The tables below show what the Directors consider to be the underlying performance of the Group the adjustments eliminate the impact of significant nonrecurring items and other accounting items.
52 Week Period ended 1 July 2017
Significant nonrecurring items
Fair value of interest rate swaps foreign exchange contracts As per
Statement of
Income
Revenue
Cost of sales Gross profit Other costs excluding depreciation and amortisation
Depreciation and amortisation Results from operating activities 17435 4000 200 71 13564 Finance income Finance costs Profit before tax 16558 4000 4 484 13038 Share of losses of equity accounted investees after tax 22    22 Taxation 3578 680 1 62 2959 Profit for the year 12958 3320 3 422 10057 53 Week Period ended 2 July 2016
Significant nonrecurring items
Fair value of interest rate swaps foreign exchange contracts As per
Statement of
Income
Revenue
Cost of sales Gross profit Other costs excluding depreciation and amortisation
Depreciation and amortisation Results from operating activities 17098 4290 117 134 12791 Finance income Finance costs Profit before tax 16040 4290 31 85 11804 Share of losses of equity accounted investees after tax 14    14 Taxation 3272  6 20 3286 Profit for the year 12754 4290 25 65 8504 Details of significant nonrecurring items are detailed in Note 4.
18 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 During the next financial year the Group will complete the upgrade of its business systems across UK bakery.
Earnings Per Share EPS EPS comparatives to the prior year can be distorted by significant nonrecurring items and other items highlighted on the previous page as well as the impact of the 53rd week for the previous financial year.
The Board is focused on growing adjusted diluted EPS which is calculated by eliminating the impact of the items highlighted on the previous page as well as amortisation of intangibles and incorporates the dilutive effect of share options.
Adjusted diluted EPS is 9.5p 2016 9.5p for the 52 week period.
52 week 52 week 52 week Basic EPS Adjusted basic EPS Diluted basic EPS Adjusted diluted EPS Further details can be found in Note 9.
Diluted EPS takes basic EPS and incorporates the dilution effect of share options.
The prior year to 2 July 2016 was a 53 week period.
Like for like figures have been calculated using financial data by excluding the 53rd week.
Cash Flow There was an increase in our working capital requirement of 2.5 million 2016 1.6 million in the financial year corporation tax payments made in the financial year totalled 2.7 million 2016 1.6 million the payments in the current and prior year took account of the research and development tax relief due to the Group and tax losses being utilised.
Capital expenditure in the year amounted to 12.5 million 2016 12.1 million.
Debt and Bank Facilities The Groups total net debt is 17.5 million 2016 19.7 million down 2.2 million from the prior year.
Within this total 11.6 million is due within one year including cash at bank and invoice finance 2016 10.9 million.
The Groups debt facility is a bilateral facility with HSBC Bank Plc and Lloyds Bank Plc totalling 50.9m the key features of the facility are as follows Overdraft 2.0m Term loan 13.4m Confidential invoice discounting facility Mortgage facility 3.5m Rolling asset finance facility 2.0m Revolving credit facility 8.0m Note 18 gives details of the amounts drawn on these facilities and maturity dates.
The Group is able to offer strong asset backing to secure its borrowings.
The Group owns freehold sites at Memory Lane in Cardiff Fletchers site at Sheffield and Lightbody and Campbells in
In addition the Group has a strong trade debtor book to support the invoice discounting facility made up primarily of the UKs major multiple retailers.
This debtor book stood at 45.2 million 2016 44.9 million at the period end date.
The Group recognises the inherent risk from interest rate rises to mitigate these risks the Group uses interest rate swaps.
There was no interest rate swap coverage in place at the year end 2016 coverage of 9.0 million equivalent to 46% of total net bank debt.
The Group has one forward dated interest rate swap for five years from 3 July 2017 with a coverage of 20 million 2016 9 million the forward dated swap has a rate of 0.455% 2016 weighted average rate 1.8%.
The effective interest rate for the Group at the year end taking account of the interest rate swap in place with base rate at 0.25% and LIBOR at 0.42% was 2.15% 2016 3.0%.
A 3.0 million swap fixed at 1.65% expired on 22 May 2017 and a 6.0 million swap fixed at 1.89% expired on 2 June 2017.
Financial Covenants The Board reviews the Groups cash flow forecasts and key covenants on a regular basis to ensure that it has adequate facilities to cover its trading and banking requirements with an appropriate level of headroom.
The forecasts are based on managements best estimates of future trading.
There has been no breach of covenants during the year.
Interest cover based on adjusted earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation EBITDA for the 52 weeks to 1 July 2017 was 28.4 2016 23.4.
Net bank debt to EBITDA based on adjusted EBITDA for the year to 1 July 2017 was 0.7 2016 0.8.
Taxation
The Group taxation charge for the year was 3.0 million 2016 3.3 million.
This represents an effective rate of 21.4% on profits before significant nonrecurring items 2016 20.4%.
Further details on the tax charge can be found in Note 8 to the Groups Financial Statements.
NonFinancial Key Performance
A range of nonfinancial key performance indicators are monitored at site level covering amongst others customer service quality and health and safety.
The Group Board receives an overview of these on a regular basis.
19 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic Report Environmental Matters As part of the environmental activities site wide LED replacement programs are ongoing along with continued focus on energy usage such as oven burner efficiencies and insulated traywash facilities.
Trade effluent reduction initiatives are ongoing with investment in a new effluent treatment plant completed at one of our larger bakeries.
Employee Social and Community Issues With the successful roll out of the Groups vision and values the Group holds various family fun days as part of the employee engagement program.
We have links with employment agencies and continue to participate in employability work placements that help provide work placements for individuals who find it difficult to get back to full time employment.
Various charities are supported and in some instances the sites employee forum decides on the local charity.
In an attempt to promote health and wellbeing fitness and running clubs have been established at a local basis.
Technical Matters All sites hold grade A or the highest AA rating under the British Retail Consortium version 7 standard.
As a Group all technical functions have come together to establish a Group Technical Strategy which is a dynamic three year plan covering all aspects of people food safety legal compliance and the establishment of a quality culture underpinned by consistent process control.
Major investment has also taken place in the form of upgrading team member facilities to a best in standard and we have continued to invest in a strong visual good manufacturing programme on site.
Health continues to be a major focus for the business.
Dedicated resource continues to work on sugar and salt reduction targets as part of the Government Obesity Strategy and Public Health England recommendations.
In conjunction with a major brand owner the Group were first to market providing a range of licensed products which were 18 months in development and which exceed these requirements.
The Strategic Report was approved by the Board of Directors on 15 September 2017 and was signed on its behalf by Stephen Boyd
Dedicated resource continues to work on sugar and salt reduction targets as part of the Government Obesity Strategy and Public Health England recommendations.
20 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 The Board is committed to high standards of corporate governance and although the Company is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code the Companys corporate governance framework is based on the Codes main principles to the extent appropriate for the Company.
The Board reviews its corporate governance arrangements on a regular basis.
The Board directs the activities of the Group and develops its strategy and oversees implementation of strategy.
The Board meets at least five times during the year and reviews performance at each meeting.
There is a schedule of matters which are reserved to the Board for decision.
These matters include
Acquisition policy Corporate governance
Risk management
Health and safety Approval of major capital expenditure Approval of annual budgets Approval of Annual Reports Dividend recommendations Committee reports The Board comprises the NonExecutive Chairman Peter Baker two Executive Directors John Duffy Chief Executive and Stephen Boyd Finance Director and three NonExecutive Directors Raymond Duignan Marnie Millard and Zoe Morgan.
Bob Beveridge was appointed to the Board as a NonExecutive Director on 1 July 2017.
There is a clear division of responsibilities between the Chairman and the Chief Executive.
The Chairman is responsible for leadership of the Board setting its agenda and monitoring its effectiveness.
He meets regularly and separately with the Chief Executive and the other NonExecutive Directors.
The Board has a culture of constructive challenging and continuous improvement.
Board Committees The Board has delegated certain responsibilities to the Audit Nomination and Remuneration Committees.
The Audit Committee is chaired by Raymond Duignan with Zoe Morgan as the other member.
Further details of its activities are given in the Audit Committee Report on pages 25 to 26.
The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Raymond Duignan with Marnie Millard as the other member.
Further details of the Remuneration Committee activities are given in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 27 to 32.
Peter Baker chairs the Nomination Committee.
The Committees main responsibilities include Advising the Board on the appointment of Directors Reviewing the composition and size of the Board Evaluating the balance of skills knowledge experience and diversity of the Board Making recommendations on succession planning Internal Controls and Risk Management The Board has overall responsibility for the system of internal controls to safeguard shareholders investment and the Groups assets as well as reviewing the effectiveness of those controls.
The system of internal controls is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risks of failure to achieve the Groups objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material loss and misstatement.
The Group continues to progress with initiatives to improve managing its risks to create value.
Dialogue with Shareholders The Board maintains a general policy of keeping all interested parties informed by regular announcements and update statements.
In implementing this policy the Board keeps in mind the distribution of shareholders between direct nominee and institutional shareholders.
Communications are then distributed between these groups accordingly.
Specific methods of communication are Annual general meetings Broker briefings Broker and analysts visits to operating sites Letters to shareholders when appropriate Corporate website site Corporate Governance Report on Corporate Governance 21 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Peter Baker NonExecutive Chairman Peter joined the Board on 1 July 2014 and is Chairman of the Nominations Committee.
Peter has over 30 years senior CEO and Board level experience within the global bakery and consumer packaged goods industry.
He also chairs another Board and is a NonExecutive Director in one other business.
Peter held the position of Managing Director of Maple Leaf Bakery from 2009 to 2013 moving into this position after the sale of La Fornaia Bakeries where he was the CEO.
Prior to these roles Peter held COO and Divisional Managing Director positions at RHM in the Consumer Brands British Bakeries and Cereals Divisions including Rank Hovis Mills.
Peter was previously a NonExecutive Director at Jordans Cereals now a part of Associated British Foods.
He has also served as Vice President of CIAA a European trade association for food and drink and was on the Executive Board of FDF the UK Food and Drink Federation.
John Duffy
Chief Executive Officer
John was appointed CEO of Finsbury Food Group with effect from 30th September 2009 following a year as interim COO and has led the turnaround of an indebted Group with a market capitalisation of only 6m in 2009 to the restructured and fast growing 150m market cap growth business of today.
This transformation required significant operational improvements and new leadership throughout the Group as well as both a business disposal and several acquisitions.
The acquisition of Fletchers Bakery Group for 56m in 2014 delivered a step change in scale to 300m sales and diversification into the faster growing out of home eating channel.
Following an engineering degree Johns early career was in the oil industry in exploration and production with Shell International.
John then completed a fulltime MBA at the University of Strathclyde Business School before enjoying 10 years at Directorlevel in manufacturing and logistics roles at Mars the global FMCG business.
This was followed by private equity experience within the portfolio investments of both LandG Ventures and Bridgepoint e.
Director of WT Foods largest chilled foods subsidiary Noon Products before and after its sale to Kerry Foods.
John has NonExecutive experience in both startup and established businesses including Denby the household pottery manufacturer.
Marnie Millard NonExecutive Director Marnie was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2016.
Marnie is currently Group Chief Executive of Nichols Plc an AIM listed branded soft drinks group serving both the UK retail and out of home channels as well as achieving international sales across 70 countries.
Marnie joined the Nichols group in October 2012 as MD of Vimto Soft Drinks.
She has worked in the soft drinks industry for The Directors
Annual Report and Accounts 2017 the last 20 years in a number of senior roles with Macaw Soft Drinks Refresco Gerber Ltd.
She was appointed Nichols Plc Group Chief Executive in May 2013.
Stephen Boyd Group Finance Director Steve was appointed Group Finance Director in January 2010.
Steve has spent 21 years in the food manufacturing sector and previously was Group Finance Director at Golden Wonder subsequent to that was Group Finance Director and Chief Operating Officer at WT Foods Group Plc.
Steve worked with John Duffy at both Golden Wonder and WT Foods.
Bob Beveridge NonExecutive Director Bob was appointed to the Board on 1 July 2017.
He is a Chartered Accountant with extensive financial management city and corporate transaction experience in consumer goods and technology companies including Cable and Wireless Communications Plc Marlborough Stirling Plc and McBride Plc a European private label manufacturer.
For the last 6 years he has been a portfolio Independent Director and Audit Committee Chairman and is currently Senior Independent Director on the Boards of Brady Plc and Inspiration Healthcare Plc.
He also provides mentoring services to aspiring and existing Finance Directors via the Institute of Chartered Accountants.
Raymond Duignan NonExecutive Director Raymond was appointed to the Board in July 2013.
He has extensive industry experience having set up a specialist investment bank Stamford Partners in the mid 1990s advising the European food and drink industries with clients including many blue chip companies.
He is currently a NonExecutive Director of Science in Sport Plc where he chairs the Audit Committee and is a member of the Advisory Board of Active Private Equity Partners the consumer focused investment group.
He is Chairman of both the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Zoe Morgan NonExecutive Director Zoe was appointed to the Board on 4 July 2016.
Zoe has 15 years Executive Director experience with significant retail consumer and financial services businesses including the role of Group Marketing Director of The Cooperative Group HBoS Retail and Boots UK.
Zoe has developed a broad commercial background in multisite retail manufacturing and service businesses with key strengths in strategy brand management and customer relationship management.
For the last 10 years she has held a portfolio of NonExecutive Directorships and is currently a Board member of Moss Bros Kind Consumer and Kintell Ltd.
23 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
The Group is a speciality bakery group which is focused on premium celebration and wellbeing products.
These products are supplied both under the retailers own brands and through a number of licensed brands to which the Group has access.
A review of the activities and any likely future developments in the business of the Group is given in the Chairmans Statement Chief Executives Report and the Strategic Report on pages 3 to 19.
Dividend
An interim dividend for the six months to 31 December 2016 of 1.0p per share was paid on 21 April 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 31 March 2017.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 22 November 2017 the final dividend of 2.0p per share will be paid on 22 December 2017 to all shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017.
Directors and their Interests in the Company The Directors and brief biographies are detailed on pages 21 to 22.
In accordance with the Articles of Association Stephen Boyd and Raymond Duignan retire by rotation and being eligible offer themselves for reelection at the Companys forthcoming AGM.
In accordance with the Articles of Association Bob Beveridge is required to be reappointed as Director having been appointed as Director since the companys last AGM.
The beneficial interests of the Directors in the Ordinary Shares of the Company on 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016 are set out below Ordinary Shares 1 July 2017 2 July 2016 P Baker 86000 86000 S A Boyd 1011455 961034 J G Duffy 2269238 2197599 M Millard 9366 Z Morgan 70028 Details of Directors share options are set out in Note 6 to the Financial Statements.
There has been no change to the Directors share interests since 1 July 2017.
Details of the emoluments of the Directors are given in Note 6 to the Financial Statements.
Zoe Morgan was appointed as a NonExecutive Director on 4 July 2016.
Her shareholding on appointment was 20981.
Share Capital Details of the changes in the share capital of the Company during the year are set out in Note 23 to the Financial Statements.
Substantial Interests The following substantial interests 3 percent or more in the Companys issued share capital have been notified to the Company as at 28 August 2017
Ruffer LLP 20925616 16.00% Miton Asset Management Ltd 14012959 10.75% Hargreave Hale 12191357 9.35% Investec Wealth and Investment Limited 6848217 5.25% London Finance and Investment Group P .
6000000 4.60% Shroder Investment Mgt 5104702 3.92% Downing LLP 3907735 3.00% Research and Development Research and development RandD expenditure is written off in the year in which it is incurred.
Directors and Officers Liability Insurance The Company maintains a Directors and Officers liability insurance policy.
Directors Report 24 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Instruments The Groups financial instruments comprise mortgage asset finance facilities a confidential invoicing facility revolving credit facility cash and liquid resources and various items arising directly from its operations such as trade creditors.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to finance the Groups acquisitions and operations.
It is the Groups policy that no trading in financial instruments shall be undertaken.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are interest rate risk and liquidity risk.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing these risks which have remained substantially unchanged for the year under review.
The policies are summarised below Interest Rate Risk The Group finances its operations by retained profits and bank borrowings.
A suite of borrowing facilities totalling 50.9 million is available of which 17.5 million was drawn at the balance sheet date leaving a headroom of 33.4 million.
The interest rate risk is managed through interest rate swap transactions.
The Group entered into a forward dated swap for 20.0 million for five years from 3 July 2017 fixed at 0.455%.
The total balance of swaps at 1 July 2017 is nil 2016 9.0 million.
The counterparty to these transactions is HSBC Bank Plc.
Liquidity Risk Shortterm flexibility is available through existing bank facilities and the netting off of surplus funds.
Full details of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are given in Note 21.
Foreign Exchange Risk The Group uses forward foreign exchange contracts to manage its exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency rates.
Full details are given in Note 21.
Diversity
Finsbury Food Group is committed to encouraging diversity promoting a diverse culture where everyone is treated with respect and valued for their individual contribution and creating a work environment free of bullying harassment victimisation and unlawful discrimination.
We have a Diversity Policy in place to ensure that selection for employment promotion development or any other benefit is on the basis of merit and ability and does not impact negatively upon diversity.
It is a key objective to ensure that all employees are helped and encouraged to fulfil their potential.
Equal Opportunities It is our policy to ensure equal opportunity in recruitment selection promotion employee development training and reward policies and we have an equal opportunities and diversity policy in place.
It is a key objective to ensure that successful candidates for appointment and promotion are selected taking account of individual ability skills and competencies without regard to age gender race religion disability or sexual orientation.
Involvement of Employees Employees are key to the Companys success and we rely on a committed workforce to help us achieve our business objectives.
Employees are encouraged to operate in an open environment embracing teamwork and aligning personal development with the strategy of the business and their behaviours with Company Values.
We are keen to engage our employees by providing an environment where they can contribute their own ideas and challenge those of others.
We are committed to involving employees and consider that good communication helps to achieve this.
All sites have regular briefings employee forums and communication mechanisms which are designed to keep colleagues informed of amongst other things the financial and economic factors that affect the Companys performance.
Many sites also hold open days to allow employees families to see the environment in which their family members work.
Political and Charitable Contributions During the year charitable donations amounting to 75000 2016 13000 were made.
No political donations were made.
Going Concern On the basis of current financial projections and available funds and facilities the Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operation for the foreseeable future and therefore consider it appropriate to prepare the Financial Statements on the going concern basis.
Further details are set out in the basis of preparation.
Auditor
In accordance with Section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution for the reappointment of KPMG LLP as auditor is to be proposed at the forthcoming AGM.
So far as each Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditor is unaware and Each Director has taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himself or herself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
The Directors Report was approved by the Board of Directors on 15 September 2017 and was signed on its behalf by Stephen Boyd Director 25 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Role and Responsibilities of the Audit Committee The principal responsibilities of the Committee are to Review and monitor the integrity of the Financial Statements of the Group and assist the Board in fulfilling its responsibilities relating to external financial reporting and similar announcements.
Review significant issues and the judgements of management and the methodology and assumptions used in relation to the Financial Statements.
Review and monitor the Groups financial control systems and risk management procedures.
Recommend the appointment andor reappointment of the external auditor and approve their terms of engagement.
Review and monitor the independence of the external auditor and the effectiveness of the audit process.
Implement and review policy on external auditor nonaudit services.
Review and monitor the Groups compliance with all regulatory legislation and current practice.
Report to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities.
The full terms of reference which can be found on the Companys website at site are reviewed periodically by the Board.
Membership
The Committee is chaired by me and the other member is Zoe Morgan a NonExecutive Director.
The Audit Committee met three times during the year.
The Finance Director is invited to attend Committee meetings together with other senior members of the finance team including those members of staff that conduct internal audits.
The external auditor attends those meetings involving the Financial Statements the annual audit and other significant matters.
Time is set aside during at least one meeting each year for the Committee to hold discussions in private with the external auditor in the absence of management and Executive Directors.
External Auditor The Committee carried out an assessment of the effectiveness of the external audit process which focused on criteria that the Committee considered to be important factors in an effective audit process.
These factors included the quality of audit staff the planning and execution of the audit and the role of management in the audit process.
Following this assessment the Committee concluded that the external audit process remained effective and that it provides an appropriate independent challenge.
The engagement of the auditor to carry out nonaudit services is approved in advance by me or in the case of a significant instruction by the
This enables the Committee to satisfy itself of the auditors independence and objectivity.
Internal Controls and Risk Management The Committee is responsible for reviewing the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls.
The system of internal control is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
Group management prepare an Annual Report for the Committees consideration that identifies the risks and uncertainties to which the Group is exposed the procedures in place to mitigate those risks and uncertainties and the potential impact on the Group.
The Committee reviews this Report and any concerns that it has over the adequacy of the controls in place or the level of risk accepted by the Group are reported to the Board.
The principal risks and uncertainties to which the Group is exposed are considered by the Board and are set out in the Strategic Report on pages Following this review the Committee is satisfied that the Group has in place effective internal control systems and risk management.
The Committee continues to keep under review the need for a separate dedicated internal audit function in the Group.
The Committee remains satisfied that the Groups system of internal control is appropriate for a Group of the size and nature of the Company and the Committees current view is that a separate formal independent internal audit function is not required at this time.
The Committee will monitor the situation closely as the Group continues to expand.
A programme of rolling internal control and risk reviews is monitored by the Committee which considers reports on these reviews at each meeting and monitors any follow up action that is required.
Audit Committee Report 26 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 External Reporting The Board delegates primary responsibility for the preparation of complete balanced and accurate Financial Statements and disclosures in accordance with Financial Reporting Standards and regulations to the Finance Director.
The responsibility of the Committee includes consideration of significant accounting policies any changes in policies and significant estimates and judgements taking into account the external auditors view and to report back to the Board on any concerns that it might have.
The Audit Committee reviews the clarity and completeness of disclosures within the Financial
Ultimate responsibility for reviewing and approving the annual Financial Statements and half yearly reports remains with the Board.
The Committee also reviews related information presented with the Financial Statements in particular the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the Report on Corporate Governance.
Key Agenda Items In addition to matters referred to elsewhere in this Report during the year the Committee also considered Revenue recognition New business system introduction and compliance Interest rate and currency hedging Pension disclosures Impairment reviews Group insurance programme Internal authorisation levels and procedures If any reader of these accounts has suggestions for improvement in the content or the presentation of the Financial Statements please can they let me know by writing to email Raymond Duignan Chairman of the Audit Committee 27 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Statement from the Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Dear Shareholder I am pleased to present the Directors Remuneration Report for the year ended 1 July 2017.
The Remuneration Committee believes that the Directors Remuneration Policy remains appropriate and will continue to apply it in 201718.
Accordingly we have not included the Directors Remuneration Policy in this Report however a copy is available in our investor section of the website at siteinvestorrelationsannualreports.
The Annual Report on Remuneration provides details of the amounts earned in respect of the year ended 1 July 2017 and how the Directors Remuneration Policy will be operated for the year commencing 2 July 2017.
Similar to last year and as a matter of best practice the Annual Report on Remuneration has been prepared taking into account the remuneration reporting regulations applicable to fully listed companies in the UK.
Review of the 201617 Financial Year As described earlier in the Annual Report the Company has delivered a solid performance with continued organic growth in 201617.
Alongside this growth our capital investment strategy together with our continued efficiency programme has resulted in improved operating margins.
The 2016 17 annual bonus was subject to an EBITDA performance metric.
The Company achieved 24.9 million EBITDA for 2016 17 which was above our forecast for the year.
Consequently this resulted in 87% of salary being earned as an annual bonus.
In line with the Committees commitment to align Executives interests with those of shareholders 50% of total bonuses earned in the year will be paid as cash and 50% in the form of shares in order to develop further the shareholdings of the Executive Directors.
Further details are set out on page 29.
The current personal shareholdings of J G Duffy and S A Boyd equate to circa 7.5 and 4.6 times salary respectively.
A new longterm incentive plan was introduced in 2015 following discussions with shareholders.
It was designed to motivate the senior management team over the longer term to deliver the Groups strategy and to reward appropriately reflecting the contribution to shareholder value creation.
The first awards granted under the Companys LTIP were made in 2015 and these vested in respect of performance in the three financial years to 1 July 2017.
The awards vested at 97.45% of the maximum due to strong share price and EPS performance over the period.
For continued alignment with shareholders the vested awards are subject to a further two year holding period.
Full details of the vested awards are provided on page 30.
Awards under the LTIP were made during the year in line with the Remuneration Policy and will vest based on relative Total Shareholder Return TSR performance and absolute EPS targets over the three year period to 2019.
These awards are subject to a two year post vesting holding period.
The Committee remains committed to a responsible approach to executive pay and believes that salary increases above wider workforce increases will only be awarded in limited circumstances.
S A Boyd and J G Duffy were both awarded a 1.8% salary increase which was in line with increases for the wider workforce.
Outlook for the 201718 Financial Year Details in relation to the application of the Directors Remuneration Policy in 201718 are set out on page 28.
Raymond Duignan Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 15 September 2017 28 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Directors Remuneration Policy Report
The full Policy can be viewed in the investor section of the website at siteinvestorrelationsannualreports.
The main aim of the Companys Policy is to align the interests of Executive Directors with the Companys strategic vision and the longterm creation of shareholder value.
The Company aims to provide returns to shareholders through both organic and acquisitive growth.
The Policy is intended to remunerate our Executive Directors competitively and appropriately for effective delivery of this and allows them to share in this success and the value delivered to shareholders.
The Policy is based on a broad set of remuneration principles Promote shareholder value creation Support the business strategy Promote sound risk management Ensure that the interests of the Directors are aligned with the longterm interests of shareholders Deliver a competitive level of pay for the Directors without paying more than is necessary to recruit and retain individuals Ensure that the Executive Directors are rewarded for their contribution to the success of the Group and share in the success delivered to shareholders and Motivate the Directors to deliver enhanced sustainable performance.
29 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Unaudited Annual Report on Remuneration Single Total Figure of Remuneration The tables below detail the total remuneration earned by each Director in respect of the financial years ended 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016
T axable benefits
Other
L TIP T otal remuneration Executive Directors J G Duffy 349 12 304  1238 1903 S A Boyd 253 12 220  784 1 2022 3172 NonExecutive Directors P Baker 75     75 E J Beale 23     23 R P E Duignan 60     60 M J Millard 53     53 P J Monk 23   13  36 Z Morgan 53     53 287   13   2022 3472
T axable benefits
Other
L TIP T otal remuneration Executive Directors S A Boyd 241 12 241     1190 NonExecutive Directors P Baker 75     75 E J Beale 45     45 R P E Duignan 50     50 M J Millard 17     17 P J Monk 40   30  70 227   30    1447 Longterm incentive awards vested with respect to the performance period ending 1 July 2017 and are subject to a two year holding period.
Directors Remuneration Policy Report unaudited 30 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Table Base Salaries The base salaries for the Executive Directors are set with effect from 1 October each year.
The salaries in the financial years ended 2 July 2016 and 1 July 2017 were as follows Executive Director From 1 October 2015 From 1 October 2016 Percentage increase J G Duffy 344072 350265 1.8% S A Boyd 250000 254500 1.8% Taxable Benefits The taxable benefits for the Executive Directors in the year included a car allowance and private medical insurance.
Annual Bonus The annual bonus is the total value of the bonus earned in respect of the financial year including the amount delivered in shares.
For the financial year ended 1 July 2017 Executive Directors were able to earn a bonus of up to 100% of annual base salary subject to the achievement of stretching EBITDA performance targets.
The following table sets out the bonus payout to the Executive Directors for 201617 and how this reflects EBITDA performance for the year.
Performance measure Actual performance Resulting level of award for each Executive as a percentage of salary Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation EBITDA EBITDA 24920000 87% Longterm Incentives Awards granted on 26 June 2015 were based on performance over the three financial years to 1 July 2017 and vested as to the amounts set out below.
These awards are subject to a two year holding period.
Performance conditions Actual performance % of this element vesting % of award 50% of the award subject to adjusted diluted Earnings Per Share in the final year of the performance period Below the threshold vesting target of 7.29p none of this component vests.
If adjusted diluted EPS is 7.29p 25% vests at 10.23p 100% vests.
Vesting is determined on a straightline basis between these figures.
10.03p 94.90% 47.45% 50% of the award based upon Relative T otal Shareholder Return against the FTSE Small Cap excluding investment trusts TSR over the performance period.
At below median relative TSR ranking none of this component of the award will vest.
25% of this component will vest at median ranking.
100% vesting at upper quartile or above ranking.
Vesting determined on a straightline basis between these points.
Above upper quartile 100.00% 50.00% T otal % of award vesting 97.45% Number of shares granted Number of shares vesting Value of L TIP shares vesting J G Duffy 1137898 1108881 1237741 S A Boyd 721217 702825 784499 The LTIP has been valued based on the three month average share price to the financial year end of 111.6 pence per share.
Details of the LTIP awards granted on 27 September 2016 are given in the table below Number of shares Basis of award Performance period Performance conditions J G Duffy 515464 200% of salary 3 financial years from 3 July 2016 50% subject to EPS growth and 50% subject to relative TSR further details overleaf.
S A Boyd 374532 200% of salary 3 financial years from 3 July 2016 The basis of award was calculated using the average price of the shares over the three business days following the announcement on 19 September 2016 of the Companys preliminary results for the year ended 2 July 2016.
31 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors Remuneration Policy Report unaudited Awards will be subject to a further two year holding period following the end of the performance period.
Vesting of 50% of the award will be based upon the amount of the adjusted diluted Earnings Per Share EPS delivered in the final Financial Year of the performance period.
Below the threshold vesting target of 10.23p none of this component of the award will vest.
25% of this component will vest if adjusted diluted EPS is 10.23p with 100% vesting at 11.80p and vesting determined on a straightline basis between these figures.
Vesting of 50% of the award will be based upon Relative TSR against the FTSE Small Cap excluding investment trusts over the performance period.
At below median relative TSR ranking none of this component of the award will vest.
25% of this component will vest at median ranking with 100% vesting at upper quartile or above ranking and vesting determined on a straightline basis between these points.
The awards are also subject to a general performance underpin assessing factors including ROCE and other financial indicators of performance over the performance period at the discretion of the Remuneration Committee.
Chairman and NonExecutive Director Fees Details of Chairman and NonExecutive Directors fees for 201617 are as set out below.
Chairman fee
Director fee Chairman of the Remuneration Committee Member of the Remuneration Committee Chairman of the Audit Committee Member of the Audit Committee 75000 50000 5000 2500 5000 2500 Payments Made to Former Directors during the Year No payments were made in the year to any former Director of the Company.
Payments for Loss of Office Made During the Year No payments for loss of office were made in the year to any Director of the Company.
Statement of Directors Shareholding and Share Interests The interests of the Directors and their immediate families in the Companys ordinary shares as at 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016 were as follows.
1 July 2017
2 July 2016
Executive Directors J G Duffy 2269238 2197599 S A Boyd 1011455 961034 NonExecutive Directors P Baker 86000 86000 R P E Duignan M J Millard 9366 Z Morgan 70028 The interests of the Directors and their immediate families in the Companys ordinary shares did not change between 1 July 2017 and the date these accounts were signed on 15 September 2017.
The interests of each Executive Director of the Company as at 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016 in the Companys share schemes were as follows Executive Director Number of options at 2 June 2016
Number of options at 1 July 2017 J G Duffy 1137898  1137898 J G Duffy 695095  695095 J G Duffy  515464 515464 S A Boyd 721217  721217 S A Boyd 505051  505051 S A Boyd  374532 374532 3059261 889996 3949257 32 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consideration by the Directors of Matters Relating to Directors Remuneration The Remuneration Committee comprises R Duignan Chairman and M Millard.
The Company Secretary attends the meeting as secretary to the
The Committees responsibilities are Maintaining the remuneration policy Reviewing the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors Monitoring the level and structure of the remuneration of Senior Management and Production of the Annual Report on Directors remuneration.
The Chief Executive Officer and Group Finance Director occasionally attend meetings and provide information and support as requested.
Advisors
During the financial year the Committee received advice from Deloitte LLP.
The Committee is satisfied that the advice received is independent and objective.
Deloitte is a founding member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and voluntarily operates under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
Implementation of Directors Remuneration Policy for the Financial Year Commencing 2 July 2017 Information on how the Company intends to implement the Directors Remuneration Policy for the financial year commencing on 2 July 2017 is set out below.
SalariesFees
Salary increases for 201718 will be reviewed in September and details provided in the Remuneration Report next year.
The NonExecutive Director basic fees remain at 50000 from 1 July 2017.
The Chairmans fee was increased to 85000 with effect from 1 July 2017.
Annual Bonus Annual bonus for the Executive Directors will continue to be subject to the achievement of stretching EBITDA performance targets with payment made 50% in cash and 50% in shares.
The Committee considers EBITDA to be the key shortterm financial measure.
Longterm Incentives Awards under the LTIP will be made following the announcement of our results and the Committee will discuss the performance conditions which will apply although anticipate that this will continue to be absolute EPS targets and relative TSR against the FTSE Small Cap.
The targets will be disclosed in the Remuneration Report next year.
Approval
This Report was approved by the Board on 15 September 2017 and signed on its behalf by Raymond Duignan Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 33 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Statement of Directors Responsibilities in Respect of the Annual Report and the Financial Statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and Parent Company Financial Statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM Rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare the Group Financial Statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU and applicable law and have elected to prepare the Parent Company Financial Statements in accordance with UK accounting standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the Financial Statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Parent Company and of their profit or loss for that period.
In preparing each of the Group and Parent Company Financial Statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable relevant reliable and prudent For the Group Financial Statements state whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU For the Parent Company Financial Statements state whether applicable UK Accounting Standards have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the Financial Statements Assess the Group and Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and Use the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Parent Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Parent Company and enable them to ensure that its Financial Statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of Financial Statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and have general responsibility for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
Under applicable law and regulations the Directors are also responsible for preparing a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that complies with that law and those regulations.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of Financial Statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
By Order of the Board Stephen Boyd
15 September 2017 34 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Finsbury Food Group Plc Our opinion is unmodified We have audited the Financial Statements of Finsbury Food Group Plc the Company for the 52 week period ended 01 July 2017 which comprise the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive Income Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity Consolidated Cash Flow Statement Company Balance Sheet Company Statement of Changes in Equity and the related Notes including the accounting policies in Notes 1 and 30.
In our opinion The Financial Statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Parent Companys affairs as at 01 July 2017 and of the Groups profit for the 52 week period then ended The Group Financial Statements have been properly prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRSs as adopted by the EU The Parent Company Financial Statements have been properly prepared in accordance with UK accounting standards including FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and The Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Basis for Opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities are described below.
We have fulfilled our ethical responsibilities under and are independent of the Group in accordance with UK ethical requirements including the FRC Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is a sufficient and appropriate basis for our opinion.
Key Audit Matters Our Assessment of Risks of Material Misstatement Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in the audit of the Financial Statements and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by us including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the Financial Statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
In arriving at our audit opinion above the key audit matters in decreasing order of audit significance were as follows unchanged from 2016 The risk Our response
2016 319.7m Refer to page 25 Audit Committee Report page 45 accounting policy and page 47  financial disclosures.
Accounting application Revenue is significant to the Group due to its size and the presumed fraud risk that the entity may overstate revenue to meet targets and budgets.
This fraud risk may occur through recognition of revenue in advance of the correct date or through the exercise of bias in the recognition of overriders and rebates provided to customers or promotional expenditure.
Our procedures included Control reperformance We tested the design implementation and operating effectiveness of manual controls including those controls in place over the matching of sales invoices to sales orders and delivery notes.
Test of detail For key customers at a number of the sites we reconciled revenue recognised through the year to cash receipts.
Test of detail For smaller customers and other sites we agreed a sample of sales transactions to invoice and cash received.
Test of detail We agreed a sample of revenue recorded around the year end to proof of delivery.
For a sample of postyear end credit notes we assessed whether these indicated a reversal of inyear revenue.
For a sample of debit notes and bank payments we evaluated whether these represented unrecognised deductions against in year revenue.
Expectation vs outcome An expectation was developed for sales rebate expenses and accruals based on sales volumes and rebate contracted rates or promotional terms and this was compared to actual sales rebate expenses recognised.
We challenged managements explanation of any significant differences arising.
Investments
2016 100.7m Refer to page 25 Audit Committee Report page 44 accounting policy and page 58  financial disclosures.
Forecastbased valuation Parent Company key audit matter The Parent Company holds significant investments in subsidiaries and whilst the valuation of these is not a significant risk it is an area of audit focus within the Parent as there is a risk that the value of the subsidiaries is less than the investment value.
Our procedures included Tests of detail We compared the carrying amount of the investments with the net assets value of the respective subsidiary being an approximation of their minimum recoverable amount to identify whether the net asset values were in excess of the carrying amounts.
Our sector experience Where the investment value was not supported by the net assets of the subsidiary we obtained the forecasts used by the Directors in their assessment of the recoverability of their investments.
We challenged the forecasts by agreeing the brought forward position to actual results and based on our understanding of the Company and sector assessed whether expected future conditions had been incorporated.
Benchmarking assumptions We challenged the discount rate used in the forecasts by benchmarking this against similar companies.
35 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our Application of Materiality and an Overview of the Scope of our Audit Materiality for the Group Financial Statements as a whole was set at 875000 2016 950000 determined with reference to a benchmark of Group profit before interest and tax of 17.6m of which it represents 5% 2016 Group profit before tax normalised to exclude certain oneoff costs including the writeoff of goodwill of 4.3m and payments for settlement of share options of 2.8m of which it represents 4.8%.
Materiality for the Parent Company Financial Statements as a whole was set at 656000 2016 712000 determined with reference to a benchmark of company total assets of which it represents 0.5% 2016 0.6%.
We agreed to report to the Audit Committee any corrected or uncorrected identified misstatements exceeding 43750 2016 47000 in addition to other identified misstatements that warranted reporting on qualitative grounds.
Of the Groups 8 2016 8 reporting components which include the Parent Company we subjected 7 2016 7 to audits for Group reporting purposes.
We conducted specified procedures over financial information including enquiry at a further one non financially significant component.
The component for which we performed work other than audits for Group reporting purposes was not individually significant but was included in the scope of our Group reporting work in order to provide further coverage over the Groups results.
The components within the scope of our work accounted for the following percentages of the Groups results.
The Group team instructed component auditors as to the significant areas to be covered including the relevant risks detailed on the previous page and the information to be reported back.
The Group team approved the component materialities which ranged from 20000 to 450000 2016 20000 to 712000 having regard to the mix of size and risk profile of the Group across the components.
The work on 4 of the 8 components 2016 4 of the 8 components was performed by component auditors and the rest by the Group audit team.
The Group audit team visited 7 2016 7 component locations in the UK.
At these visits the findings reported to the Group team were discussed in more detail and any further work required by the Group team was then performed by the component auditor.
Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Finsbury Food Group Plc 36 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Full scope for Group audit purposes 2017 Review including enquiry 2017 Full scope for Group audit purposes 2016 Review including enquiry 2016 Residual components Group Revenue Adjusted Profit before Interest and Tax 17.6m 2016 19.9m Group Profit after Tax Group Total Assets 90% 2016 91% % 2016 91% % 2016 97% Adjusted profit before interest and tax Group materiality Group Materiality 875000 2016 950000 Whole Financial Statements materiality 2016 950000 Range of materiality at 7 components 2016 20000 to 712000 Misstatements reported to the audit committee 2016 47000 37 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 We have nothing to Report on going Concern We are required to report to you if we have concluded that the use of the going concern basis of accounting is inappropriate or there is an undisclosed material uncertainty that may cast significant doubt over the use of that basis for a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the Financial Statements.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
We have nothing to Report on the other Information in the Annual Report The Directors are responsible for the other information presented in the Annual Report together with the Financial Statements.
Our opinion on the Financial Statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except as explicitly stated below any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
Our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether based on our Financial Statements audit work the information therein is materially misstated or inconsistent with the Financial Statements or our audit knowledge.
Based solely on that work we have not identified material misstatements in the other information.
Strategic Report and Directors Report Based solely on our work on the other information We have not identified material misstatements in the Strategic Report and the Directors Report In our opinion the information given in those reports for the financial year is consistent with the Financial Statements and In our opinion those reports have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
We have nothing to Report on the other Matters on which we are required to Report by Exception Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Parent Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or The Parent Company Financial Statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or Certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have nothing to report in these respects.
Respective Responsibilities Directors Responsibilities As explained more fully in their statement set out on page 33 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the Financial Statements including being satisfied that they give a true and fair view such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of Financial Statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error assessing the Group and Parent Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless they either intend to liquidate the Group or the Parent Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors Responsibilities Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the Financial Statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue our opinion in an auditors report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but does not guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the Financial Statements.
A fuller description of our responsibilities is provided on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
The Purpose of our Audit Work and to whom we owe our Responsibilities This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Ian Brokenshire Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 3 Assembly Square Britannia Quay Cardiff CF10 4AX 15 September 2017 Independent Auditors Report to the Members of Finsbury Food Group Plc 38 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Revenue 2 314296 319680 Cost of sales 216493 217092 Gross profit 97803 102588 Administrative expenses 3 84239 89797 Results from operating activities 13564 12791 Finance income 7 555 221 Finance cost 7 1081 1208 Net finance cost 526 987 Profit before tax and share of losses of equity accounted investees 13038 11804 Share of losses of equity accounted investees 22 14 Profit before tax 13016 11790 T axation 8 2959 3286 Profit for the financial year 10057 8504 Other comprehensive expenseincome Items that will not be reclassified to profit and loss Remeasurement on defined benefit pension scheme 13 4031 2595 Movement in deferred taxation on pension scheme liability 20 621 390 Other comprehensive expense for the financial year net of tax 3410 2205 T otal comprehensive income for the financial year 6647 6299 Profit attributable to Equity holders of the parent 9048 7791 Noncontrolling interest 1009 713 Profit for the financial year 10057 8504 T otal comprehensive income attributable to Equity holders of the parent 5638 5586 Noncontrolling interest 1009 713 T otal comprehensive income for the financial year 6647 6299 Earnings per ordinary shares Basic 9 7.1 6.1 Diluted 9 6.9 6.0 The Notes on pages 42 to 71 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive Income for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 and 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016 39 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016
Noncurrent assets Intangibles 10 80302 77596 Property plant and equipment 11 48857 50501 Investments in equity accounted investees 12 269 211 Other financial assets 12 28 28 Deferred tax assets 20 4063 3492 133519 131828 Current assets Inventories 14 12684 12577 T rade and other receivables 15 50018 50332 Cash and cash equivalents 16 3024 3024 Other financial assets  fair value of derivatives 12 560 66286 65933 T otal assets 199805 197761 Current liabilities Other interestbearing loans and borrowings 17 14586 13829 T rade and other payables 19 60461 64357 Provisions 18 247 Other financial liabilities  fair value of derivatives 12 234 157 Current tax liabilities 1650 1210 76949 79800 Noncurrent liabilities Other interestbearing loans and borrowings 17 5800 8740 Provisions and other liabilities 221 141 Deferred tax liabilities 20 1335 1547 Pension fund liability 13 10498 6463 17854 16891 T otal liabilities 94803 96691 Net assets 105002 101070 Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent Share capital 23 1304 1304 Share premium account 22 64956 64956 Capital redemption reserve 22 578 578 Employee share reserve 22 3585 3920 Retained earnings 22 39862 36569 103115 99487 Noncontrolling interest 1887 1583 T otal equity 22 105002 101070 These Financial Statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 15 September 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Stephen Boyd
Registered Number The Notes on pages 42 to 71 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
40 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 and 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016
Share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings
T otal equity Balance at 28 June 2015 1280 64952 578  34580 1206 102596 Profit for the financial year     7791 713 8504 Other comprehensive expenseincome Remeasurement on defined benefit pension 13     2595  2595 Deferred tax movement on pension scheme remeasurement 20     390  390 T otal other comprehensive expense     2205  2205 T otal comprehensive income for the period     5586 713 6299 T ransactions with owners recorded directly in equity Own shares acquired 23    3920   3920 Shares issued during the year 23 24 4   23  5 Impact of share based payments 23     306  306 Deferred tax on share options     575  575 Dividend paid 24     3305 336 3641 Balance at 2 July 2016 1304 64956 578 3920 36569 1583 101070 Balance at 2 July 2016 1304 64956 578 3920 36569 1583 101070 Profit for the financial year     9048 1009 10057 Other comprehensive expenseincome Remeasurement on defined benefit pension 13     4031  4031 Deferred tax movement on pension scheme remeasurement 20     621  621 T otal other comprehensive expense     3410  3410 T otal comprehensive income for the period     5638 1009 6647 T ransactions with owners recorded directly in equity Own shares acquired 23    335 158  177 Shares issued during the year 23 Impact of share based payments 23     1240  1240 Deferred tax on share options     47  47 Foreign exchange translation differences     171  171 Dividend paid 24     3645 705 4350 Balance at 1 July 2017 1304 64956 578 3585 39862 1887 105002 The Notes on pages 42 to 71 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
41 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 and 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016
Cash flows from operating activities Profit for the financial year 10057 8504 Adjustments for T axation 8 2959 3286 Net finance costs 7 526 987 Depreciation 11 6948 7090 Amortisation of intangibles 10 537 539 Noncash impairment of assets and goodwill 10 4000 4290 Share of losses of equity accounted investees after tax 12 22 14 Contributions by employer to pension scheme 13 200 117 Change in fair value of foreign exchange contracts 12 71 134 Operating profit before changes in working capital 24920 24727 Changes in working capital Decreaseincrease in inventories 39 1091 Decreaseincrease in trade and other receivables 153 2253 Decreaseincrease in trade and other payables 2566 1711 Cash generated from operations 22468 23094 Interest paid 892 1180 T ax paid 2650 1603 Net cash from operating activities 18926 20311 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of property plant and equipment 12542 12141 Purchase of companiesinvestments 80 Deferred consideration paid  50 Net cash used in investing activities 12622 12191 Cash flows from financing activities Net drawdown of invoice discounting 18 822 7427 Repayment of revolving credit 18  2000 Repayment of mortgage and bank loans 18 2937 3672 Repayment of asset finance liabilities 18 133 284 Issue of ordinary share capital  5 Options exercisedpurchase of shares by employee benefit trust 177 2835 Dividend paid to noncontrolling interest 24 705 336 Dividend paid to shareholders 35 3645 3305 Net cash from financing activities 6421 5000 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents 117 3120 Opening cash and cash equivalents 3024 61 Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash held 117 157 Cash and cash equivalents at end of period 16 3024 3024 The Notes on pages 42 to 71 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
42 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Presentation of Financial Statements Basis of Preparation These accounts cover the 52 week period ended 1 July 2017 prior financial year is the 53 week period ended 2 July 2016.
The Group Financial Statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group.
The Company is a public company which is incorporated domiciled and registered in the UK.
The Group Financial Statements have been prepared and approved by the Directors in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs.
The Financial Statements for the Company have been prepared in accordance with UK Accounting Standards and applicable law UK Generally Accepted Accounting Practice including Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 these are presented on pages 72 to 81.
It should be noted that current liabilities exceed current assets.
Having reviewed the Groups short and medium term plans and available financial facilities the Board has reasonable expectations that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
The Group meets its funding requirements through internal cash generation and bank credit facilities which are committed until October 2019.
Committed banking facilities are 50.9m of which 17.5m were drawn at the year end.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance including the possible effect of the UKs decision to withdraw from the EU show that the Group will be able to operate comfortably within its current bank facilities.
The Group has a relatively conservative level of debt to earnings.
As a result the Directors believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risks successfully despite the current uncertain economic outlook.
The Board reviews the Groups covenants on a regular basis to ensure that it has adequate facilities to cover its trading and banking requirements with an appropriate level of headroom.
The forecasts are based on managements best estimates of future trading.
There has been no breach of covenants during the year and none expected during the next 12 months.
All covenant tests were passed at the year end.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly they continue to adopt the going concern basis in the preparation of the Financial
Accordingly the Board continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the Financial Statements for both the Group and the Parent Company.
The Financial Statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention as modified by the revaluation of derivative financial instruments and pension scheme assets.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Judgements The Group is required to make estimates and assumptions concerning the future.
These estimates and judgements are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The resulting accounting estimates will by definition seldom equal the related actual results.
Accounting estimates and judgements have been required for the production of these Financial Statements.
The following are those that are deemed to require the most complex judgements about matters that have the most significant effect on the amounts recognised in the Financial Statements.
The carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets is significant.
The determination of the estimated recoverable amount is subjective due to the inherent uncertainty involved in forecasting and discounting future cash flows.
Impairment reviews in respect of intangibles are performed where there is indication of impairment.
Impairment of goodwill is carried out annually and can significantly impact the Groups Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss for the year.
The Group estimates the recoverable amounts based on historical experience of margin volumes and cost structure and expectations of future events.
The discount rate takes account of the current market conditions and is applied as a pretax discount factor to obtain a current value.
Refer to Note 10 for further details.
The Group has one defined benefit pension scheme.
The net deficit or surplus is the difference between the plan assets and plan liabilities at the period end date.
The valuation of the assets and liabilities is based on a number of judgements.
The assets are based on market value at the period end date the liabilities are based on actuarial assumptions such as discount inflation and mortality rates.
The assumptions applied are based on advice provided by the schemes actuary in accordance with IAS 19 Revised further detail can be found in Note 13.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
The deferred tax asset recognised for losses relate to acquired businesses.
Based on current and forecast levels of profitability the losses are expected to be utilised within 3 years.
The Grain DOr business unit has been historically loss making and despite the implementation of a range of initiatives to improve the business including strict cost control and new working practices the site remained loss making in the year to 1 July 2017.
The Company now proposes to close the site.
A formal consultation with representatives of the workforce commenced on 1 September 2017.
The consultation is expected to conclude mid October 2017.
Until this consultation period concludes uncertainty remains over the use of the assets.
In light of this a decision has been taken to impair the assets used in the business by 4.0 million in the year to 1 July 2017.
A degree of judgement has been exercised in calculating the level of impairment based on information available at the time of preparing these Financial Statements.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements forming part of the Financial Statements 43 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Significant Accounting Policies The accounting policies set out below have been applied consistently to all periods presented in these consolidated Financial Statements except as explained in the basis of preparation which addresses any changes in accounting policies resulting from new or revised standards.
Basis of Consolidation Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
The Group controls an entity when it is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
In assessing control the Group takes into consideration the potential voting rights.
The acquisition date is the date on which control is transferred to the acquirer.
The Financial Statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated Financial Statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
The accounting policies of new subsidiaries are changed when necessary to align them with the policies adopted by the Group.
Intragroup balances and transactions are eliminated in preparing the consolidated Financial Statements.
Lightbody Stretz Limited which is 50% owned by the Group has been consolidated into the Group accounts as a subsidiary with a corresponding noncontrolling interest on the basis that the Group has the controlling interest.
Control arises by virtue of the fact that Lightbody Group Limited a wholly owned subsidiary of Finsbury Food Group has a majority of voting rights arising from an agreement between Lightbody Group Limited and Philippe Stretz the owner of the remaining 50%.
Business Combinations The acquisition method of accounting is used in accounting for the acquisition of businesses.
In accordance with IFRS 3 Business Combinations the assets and liabilities of the acquired entity are measured at fair value.
When the initial accounting for a business combination is determined provisionally any adjustments to the provisional values allocated are made within twelve months of the acquisition date and are effected from the date of acquisition.
Foreign Currency Transactions in foreign currencies are translated to Sterling at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the period end date are retranslated to Sterling at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Any exchange differences arising on the settlement of monetary items or on translating monetary items at rates different from those at which they were initially recorded are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss in the period in which they arise.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation are translated to Sterling at foreign exchange rates ruling at the period end date.
The revenues and expenses of foreign operations are translated at an average rate for the year where this rate approximates to the foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates of the transactions.
Derivative Financial Instruments The Group has derivative financial instruments in respect of interest rate swaps and foreign exchange hedges.
The Group does not hold derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
The existing interest rate swaps and foreign exchange hedges used by the Group while they function as hedges do not meet the criteria for hedge accounting set out by IAS 39 and have thus been treated as financial assets and liabilities which are carried at their fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Fair value is deemed to be market value which is provided by the counterparty at the year end date.
Changes in the market value of interest rate swaps have been recognised through the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as finance income or cost.
Changes in the market value of foreign exchange hedges have been recognised through the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss within administrative costs.
Nonderivative Financial Instruments Nonderivative financial instruments comprise investments in equity and debt securities trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents loans and borrowings and trade and other payables.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
Trade and other Receivables The value of trade and other receivables is the amount that would be received if the receivable was paid on the period end date which is a close approximation to amortised cost.
Trade and other Payables The value of trade and other payables is the value that would be payable to settle the liability at the period end date.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and which form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents.
Interestbearing Borrowings Interestbearing borrowings are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
44 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant Accounting Policies continued Property Plant and Equipment Recognition and Measurement Items of property plant and equipment are measured at cost or fair value at the date of acquisition less accumulated depreciation and impairment provisions.
Costs include expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset.
The cost of selfconstructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour and any other costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for its intended use and the costs of dismantling and removing the items and restoring the site on which they are located.
Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that equipment.
Depreciation
Depreciation is provided to write off the cost less estimated residual value of the property plant and equipment by equal instalments over their estimated useful economic lives to the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss.
When parts of an item of property plant and equipment have different useful lives they are accounted for as separate items major components of property plant and equipment.
The depreciation rates used are as follows Freehold buildings 2%20% Plant and equipment 10%33% Leasehold property Up to the remaining life of the lease Assets under construction Nil Fixtures and fittings 10%33% Motor vehicles 25%33% Impairment reviews of fixed assets are undertaken if there are indications that the carrying values may not be recoverable.
Leased Assets Leases under the terms of which the Group assumes substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership are classified as finance leases.
Upon initial recognition the leased asset is measured at an amount equal to the lower of its fair value and the present value of the minimum lease payments.
Subsequent to initial recognition the asset is accounted for in accordance with the accounting policy applicable to that asset.
Assets acquired by finance lease and hire purchase are depreciated over the lease term or their useful lives.
Obligations under finance leases are included in liabilities net of the finance charge allocated to future periods.
The finance element of the rental payment is charged to the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as finance expense so as to produce a constant periodic rate of charge on the net obligations outstanding in each period.
Other leases are operating leases and the leased assets are not recognised on the Groups Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Operating Lease Payments Payments made under operating leases are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss on a straightline basis over the term of the lease.
Finance Lease Payments Minimum lease payments are apportioned between the finance charge and the reduction of the outstanding liability.
The finance charge is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Equity Accounted Investees Equity Accounted Investees Associates are those entities in which the Group has significant influence but not control over the financial and operating policies.
Significant influence is presumed to exist when the Group holds between 20 and 50 percent of the voting power of another entity.
Application of the Equity Method to Associates and Joint Ventures Equity Accounted Investees are accounted for using the equity method equity accounted investees and are initially recognised at cost.
The Groups investment includes goodwill identified on acquisition net of any accumulated impairment losses.
The consolidated Financial Statements include the Groups share of the total comprehensive income and equity movements of equity accounted investees from the date that significant influence commences until the date that significant influence ceases.
When the Groups share of losses exceeds its interest in an equity accounted investee the Groups carrying amount is reduced to nil and recognition of further losses is discontinued except to the extent that the Group has incurred legal or constructive obligations or made payments on behalf of an investee.
Intangible Assets and Goodwill Goodwill is stated at cost less any accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units and is not amortised but is tested annually for impairment.
Intangible assets are capitalised separately from goodwill as part of a business combination only if the fair value can be measured reliably on initial recognition and if the future economic benefits are expected to flow to the Group.
All intangible assets recognised are considered to have finite lives and are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful economic lives that range from 15 to 20 years.
Goodwill arises when the fair value of the consideration for the business exceeds the fair value of the net assets acquired.
Where the excess is negative negative goodwill the amount is taken to retained earnings.
Goodwill is capitalised and subject to impairment reviews both annually and where there are indications that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
45 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Significant Accounting Policies continued
The carrying amounts of the Groups intangible assets and goodwill are reviewed at each period end date to determine whether there is an indication of impairment.
Intangible assets and goodwill are considered to be impaired if objective evidence indicates that one or more events have had a negative effect on the estimated future cash flows of that asset.
If any such indication exists the assets recoverable amount is estimated.
For goodwill and intangible assets that have an indefinite useful life the recoverable amount is estimated at each period end date.
An impairment loss would be recognised whenever the carrying amount of an intangible asset goodwill or its cash generating unit exceeds its recoverable amount.
Impairment losses are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss.
Calculation of Recoverable Amount The recoverable amount is the greater of the assets fair value less costs to sell and its value in use.
In assessing an assets value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset.
Inventories
Inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is determined on the firstin firstout basis and includes all direct costs incurred and attributable production overheads.
Net realisable value is based upon estimated selling price allowing for all further costs of completion and disposal.
Specific provisions are made against old and obsolete stock taking the value to zero or an estimated reduced value based on the most likely route for disposal of each particular item of stock.
Employee Benefits Defined Benefit Plans Memory Lane Cakes Ltd operates a defined benefit pension scheme and the pension costs are charged to the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive Income in accordance with IAS 19 revised with current and past service cost being recognised as an administrative expense interest on assets and liabilities is shown as finance income or a finance cost in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss.
The remeasurements are recognised in full in Other Comprehensive Income.
Defined Contribution Plans The costs of contributing to defined contribution and personal pension schemes are charged to the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as an administrative expense in the period to which they relate.
Share Based Payment Transactions The value as at the grant date of options granted to employees is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The fair value of the options granted is measured using an option valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
Revenue
Revenue represents the amounts derived from the sale of bakery products.
Revenue is the invoiced value of consideration received or receivable excluding value added tax trade discounts transactions with or between subsidiaries and less the cost of price promotions and sales related rebates known as overriders.
Revenue is recognised upon despatch of goods.
The nature and timing of promotions and overriders is typically known accruals are established at the time of sale based on information available and managements expectations of the amounts necessary to meet the claims of customers.
Segmental Reporting An operating segment is a component of the Group that engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses including revenues and expenses that relate to transactions with any of the Groups other components.
All segments operating results are reviewed regularly by the Groups Board of Directors.
The Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker is considered to be the Board.
Licence Fees Payments made for licence fee charges are recognised under cost of sales in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss in the period to which they relate.
Any charges relating to future years are deferred and recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss under cost of sales over the life of the contract.
Finance Income and Cost Finance costs comprise loan interest payable interest payable and finance charges on finance leases recognised using the effective interest method unwinding of the discount on provisions and deferred consideration interest on the net defined benefit pension plan position and adverse changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps.
Finance income comprises interest receivable on funds invested and favourable changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps.
Interest income is recognised in Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as it accrues using the effective interest method.
46 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Significant Accounting Policies continued
Tax on the profit or loss for the year comprises current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in equity in which case it is recognised in equity.
Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the year using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the period end date and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
The following temporary differences are not provided for The initial recognition of goodwill The initial recognition of assets or liabilities that affect neither accounting nor taxable profit other than in a business combination and The differences relating to investments in subsidiaries to the extent that they will probably not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The amount of deferred tax provided is based on the expected manner of realisation or settlement of the carrying amount of assets and liabilities using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the period end date.
A deferred tax asset is recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary difference can be utilised.
Research and Development Expenditure The expenditure on research activities undertaken with the prospect of gaining new scientific or technical knowledge and understanding is recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as incurred.
Revenue and Segment Information Operating segments are identified on the basis of internal reporting and decision making.
The Groups Chief Operating Decision Maker is considered to be the Board as it is primarily responsible for the allocation of resources to segments and the assessment of performance by segment.
The Board uses adjusted operating profit reviewed on a regular basis as the key measure of the segments performance.
Operating profit in this instance is defined as profit before the following Net financing expense Significant nonrecurring items Pension charges or credits in relation to the net pension position Revaluation of interest rate swaps and forward foreign currency contracts The UK bakery segment manufactures and sells bakery products to the UKs multiple grocers and foodservice sectors.
This segment primarily comprises the operations of Memory Lane Cakes Ltd Lightbody Group Ltd Campbells Cake Company Ltd Johnstones Food Service Ltd Fletchers Bakeries Ltd and Nicholas and Harris Ltd.
These subsidiaries are aggregated into a single segment as they share similar economic characteristics.
The characteristics considered are The nature of the products  products are similar in nature and are classed as manufactured bakery products The production process  the production processes have the same or similar characteristics The economic characteristics  the average gross margins are expected to be similar Costs of Group operations plus a 10% premium have been allocated across the segments on the basis of their operating profit.
The premium has been charged to reflect the synergies achieved from obtaining resources centrally giving benefits across the operating segments.
A purchasing premium of 2% is charged from Group operations and is calculated on materials and packaging spend at segmental level.
This charge is based on the rationale that Group operations through its Group buyers optimises the Groups procurement spend through leveraging its purchasing power.
This has resulted in a loss from continuing operations of 0.2m 2016 0.3m loss being presented within the Group Operations segment.
The Groups finance income and expenses cannot be meaningfully allocated to the individual operating segments.
47 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Revenue and Segment Information continued 52 week period ended 1 July 2017 UK bakery
Group operations T otal Group External revenue continuing 281580 32716  314296 Adjusted operating profit 15369 2219 153 17435 Fair value foreign exchange contracts 71 Defined benefit pension scheme 200 Significant nonrecurring items Results from operating activities Finance income 555 Finance cost Net finance cost Share of losses of equity accounted investees after tax Profit before taxation T axation Profit for the financial year At 1 July 2017 Segment assets 188628 6543 712 195883 Unallocated assets Consolidated total assets Segment liabilities 62483 5041 6564 74088 Unallocated liabilities Consolidated total liabilities Other segment information Capital expenditure 12430 112  12542 Depreciation included in segment profit 6906 42  6948 Amortisation 537   537 Impairment of assets 4000   4000 Intersegmental salepurchases 8710 8710 Analysis of unallocated assets and liabilities
Liabilities
Investments 297 Loans and borrowings 20386 Financial instruments 560 Financial instruments 234 Cash and cash equivalents 3024 Cash and cash equivalents T axation balances 41 T axation balances 95 Unallocated assets 3922 Unallocated liabilities 20715 With regard to revenue five customers with sales of 64m 39m 31m 22m and 22m account for 57% of revenue which is attributable to the UK bakery and Overseas segments above.
Impairment relates to the assets held in Grain DOr which fall under the UK bakery segment.
48 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Revenue and Segment Information continued 53 week period ended 2 July 2016 UK bakery
Group operations T otal Group External revenue continuing 291196 28484  319680 Adjusted operating profit 15887 1511 300 17098 Fair value foreign exchange contracts 134 Defined benefit pension scheme 117 Significant nonrecurring items Results from operating activities Finance income 221 Finance cost Net finance cost Share of losses of equity accounted investees after tax Profit before taxation T axation Profit for the financial year At 2 July 2016 Segment assets 187827 6337 292 194456 Unallocated assets Consolidated total assets Segment liabilities 61557 5355 7052 73964 Unallocated liabilities Consolidated total liabilities Other segment information Capital expenditure 12115 26  12141 Depreciation included in segment profit 7063 27  7090 Amortisation 539   539 Impairment of goodwill 4290   4290 Intersegmental salepurchases 8488 8488 Analysis of unallocated assets and liabilities
Liabilities
Investments 253 Loans and borrowings 22570 Financial instruments  Financial instruments 157 Cash and cash equivalents 3024 Cash and cash equivalents T axation balances 28 T axation balances Unallocated assets 3305 Unallocated liabilities 22727 With regard to revenue five customers with sales of 66m 39m 29m 24m and 23m account for 57% of revenue which is attributable to the UK bakery and Overseas segments above.
Impairment loss relates to the Anthony Alan Foods Ltd acquisition in 2007 which falls under the UK bakery segment.
49 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Revenue and Segment Information continued An analysis by geographical segment is shown below Geographical split of revenue by destination
United Kingdom 276177 286562 Europe 38119 33118 Rest of World T otal continuing 314296 319680 Capital expenditure on segment assets is detailed in Note 2.
Geographical split by country of origin United Kingdom
T otal Continuing revenue 281580 32716 314296 Operating profit 15216 2219 17435 T otal assets 193262 6543 199805 T otal liabilities 89762 5041 94803 Net assets 103500 1502 105002 United Kingdom
T otal Continuing revenue 291196 28484 319680 Operating profit 15587 1511 17098 T otal assets 191424 6337 197761 T otal liabilities 91336 5355 96691 Net assets 100088 982 101070 The net assets shown under Europe comprises Lightbody Stretz Ltd being the 50% owned Parent Company of Lightbody Europe SAS the French based selling and distribution business.
50 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Expenses and Auditors Remuneration Included in profit are the following Amortisation of intangibles 537 539 Depreciation of owned tangible assets 6715 6770 Depreciation on assets under finance leases and hire purchase contracts 233 320 Impairment of assets and goodwill Note 4 4000 4290 Loss on foreign exchange 1360 326 Hire of plant and machinery  operating leases 1006 810 Hire of other assets  operating leases 1833 1877 Movement on fair value of foreign exchange contracts 71 134 Research and development 2328 2287 Share option charges 1240 739 Amortisation of intangibles for the year was 537000 2016 539000 relating to the Fletchers acquisition in October 2014.
Auditors remuneration Audit of these Financial Statements 50 47 Amounts receivable by the auditor and its associates in respect of Audit of the Financial Statements of subsidiaries of the Company 123 122 T axation compliance services 35 22 Other tax advisory 7 Other services 100 104 The auditors remuneration is in respect of KPMG LLP.
Fees for other services relates to pension advisory services and services relating to information technology.
Significant Nonrecurring Items The Group presents certain items as significant and nonrecurring.
These relate to items which in managements judgement need to be disclosed by virtue of their size or incidence in order to obtain a more meaningful understanding of the financial information.
The Grain DOr business has been historically loss making and despite the implementation of a range of initiatives to improve the business including strict cost control and new working practices the site remained loss making in the year to 1 July 2017.
The Company now proposes to close the site.
A formal consultation with representatives of the workforce commenced on 1 September 2017 .
The consultation is expected to conclude mid October 2017.
Until this consultation period concludes uncertainty remains over the use of the assets.
In light of this a decision has been taken to impair the assets used in the business by 4.0 million in the year to 1 July 2017.
A charge of 4.3 million in the previous year relates to impairment of goodwill acquired in 2007.
This is included in administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss and Other Comprehensive Income.
51 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Staff Numbers and Costs The average number of persons employed by the Group including Directors and excluding agency staff during the year analysed by category was as follows Number of Employees 2017 2016 Production 2617 2621 Selling and distribution 243 229 Administration technical new product development 302 200 3162 3050 The aggregate payroll costs of these persons were as follows Wages and salaries 72127 71131 Share option charges 1240 739 Social security costs 6427 6478 Charge in respect of defined contribution pension plans 1257 1187 81051 79535 52 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Remuneration of Directors Fees 300 257 Executive salaries 626 607 Bonuses and benefits 583 544 1509 1408 The aggregate of emoluments and amounts receivable under longterm incentive schemes of the highest paid Director was 693000 2016 687 000 there were no Company pension contributions made to a defined contribution scheme during the current or prior year.
Bonuses include cash bonus of 241000 2016 245000 and shares issued with a total cost of 91000 2016 88000.
There were no share options exercised in the period by the highest paid Director.
There were no retirement benefits accruing to Directors during the current or previous year.
The emoluments paid to Directors were as follows
Salary
Benefits
Annual bonus Year ended 1 July 2017 Y ear ended 2 July 2016 P Baker 75    75 75 E J Beale 23    23 45 S A Boyd  paid  253 1telS A Boyd  shares    64 64 56 J G Duffy  paid  349 1telJ G Duffy  shares    91 91 88 R P E Duignan 60    60 50 M J Millard 53    53 17 P J Monk 36    36 70 Z Morgan 53    53 509 1408 Shares comprise 71639 shares issued to J G Duffy and 50421 shares issued to S A Boyd.
During the year awards over 889996 shares under the longterm incentive plan LTIP were granted to Directors in the form of nil cost options 2016 1200146.
The vesting of the awards is conditional upon performance conditions over a three year period commencing 3 July 2016 and are subject to a further two year holding period.
Directors rights to subscribe for shares in the Company are listed below Number of options at 1 July 2017 Number of options at 2 July 2016
Earliest exercise date
S A Boyd 721217 721217 Nil 01072019 26062025 S A Boyd 505051 505051 Nil 01072020 04122025 S A Boyd 374532  Nil 30062021 29092026 J G Duffy 1137898 1137898 Nil 01072019 26062025 J G Duffy 695095 695095 Nil 01072020 04122025 J G Duffy 515464  Nil 30062021 29092026 3949257 3059261 The midmarket price of the ordinary shares on 1 July 2017 was 116p 2016 111.0p and the range during the 52 week period to 1 July 2017 was 103p to 137p 2016 80p to 124p.
53 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Finance Income and Cost Recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss Finance income Change in fair value of interest rate swaps 555 219 Bank interest receivable  2 T otal finance income 555 221 Finance cost Interest on net pension position 204 148 Bank interest payable 752 787 Interest on interest rate swap agreements 125 273 T otal finance cost 1081 1208
Recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss Current tax Current year 3270 2745 Adjustments for prior years 196 82 T otal current tax 3074 2827 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 222 928 Retirement benefit deferred tax charge 1 6 Adjustments for prior years 106 463 T otal deferred tax 115 459 T otal tax expense 2959 3286 Reconciliation of Effective Tax Rate The weighted average hybrid rate of UK and French tax is 22.2% 2016 21.8%.
The tax assessed for the period is lower 2016 lower than the hybrid rate of UK and French tax.
The UK corporation tax rate for the period is 20% reducing to 19% from 1 April 2017 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Profit before taxation before losses from equity accounted investees 13038 11804 T ax using the UK corporation tax rate of 19.76% 2016 20.00% 2577 2361 Overseas profits charged at different taxation rate 344 207 Nondeductible expenses 160 99 T emporary differences  7 Restatement of opening net deferred tax due to rate change and differences in rates 68 275 RandD uplift current year 100 140 Adjustments to tax charge in respect of prior periods 90 381 T ax expense excluding prior year disallowable impairment 2959 2428 T ax rate for the period excluding prior year disallowable impairment 21.4% 20.6% Disallowable intangible impairment  858 T otal tax expense 2959 3286 54 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Taxation continued The UK corporation tax rate reductions from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017 and 18% from 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015.
An additional reduction to 17% from 1 April 2020 was substantively enacted on 6 September 2016.
The deferred tax assets and liabilities at 1 July 2017 have been calculated based on these rates.
The adjustment of 90000 for prior year includes ineligible capital spends offset partially by additional tax relief on qualifying RandD expenditure for prior periods.
The Company has an unrecognised deferred tax asset of 162605 2016 172170 relating to capital losses carried forward.
This asset has not been recognised in the Financial Statements as it is not expected that suitable gains will arise in the future in order to utilise the underlying capital losses.
Earnings Per Ordinary Share Basic earnings per share for the period is calculated on the basis of profit for the year after tax divided by the weighted average number of shares in issue being 126979000 2016 126938000.
Basic diluted earnings per share is calculated by adjusting the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue to assume conversion of all potential dilutive ordinary shares.
At 1 July 2017 the diluted weighted average number of shares in issue was 130992000 2016 129206000.
An adjusted earnings per share and an adjusted diluted earnings per share have also been calculated for a 52 week period as in the opinion of the Board this will allow shareholders to gain a clearer understanding of the trading performance of the Group and year on year comparisons.
These adjusted earnings per share exclude Reorganisation and other significant nonrecurring items IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement fair value adjustment relating to the Groups interest rate swaps and foreign exchange contracts IAS 19 revised Accounting for retirement benefits relating to net income The taxation effect at the appropriate rate on adjustments Amortisation of intangible assets 52 weeks to 1 Jul 2017 53 weeks to 2 Jul 2016 52 weeks to 2 Jul 2016
Profit attributable to equity holders of Company basic 9048 7791 7528 Significant nonrecurring and other items as per Strategic Report 2901 4250 4250 Intangible amortisation net of deferred tax 446 442 442 Numerator for adjusted earnings per share calculation adjusted basic 12395 12483 12220
Diluted
Basic
Diluted
Basic
Diluted
Shares
Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the period 126979 126979 126938 126938 126938 126938 Dilutive effect of share options  4013  2268  2268 126979 130992 126938 129206 126938 129206
Pence
Diluted
Pence
Basic
Pence
Diluted
Pence
Basic
Pence
Diluted
Pence
Earnings per share pence per share Basic and diluted 7.1 6.9 6.1 6.0 5.9 5.8 Adjusted basic and adjusted diluted 9.8 9.5 9.8 9.7 9.6 9.5 Significant nonrecurring and other items are tabled in the Strategic Report on page 17 and comprise significant non recurring items 3320000.
Defined benefit pension scheme 3000 and fair value of interest rate swaps and foreign exchange contracts 422000.
55 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Intangible assets comprise customer relationships brands and goodwill.
Goodwill
Business systems Brands and licences
T otal Cost at 27 June 2015 71704  3683 5909 81296 Adjustment in respect of prior year acquisition 1754    1754 Additions  600   600 Cost at 2 July 2016 73458 600 3683 5909 83650 T ransfer from tangible assets  548   548 Additions  2695   2695 Cost at 1 July 2017 73458 3843 3683 5909 86893 Amortisation at 27 June 2015   929 296 1225 Charge for the year 2 July 2016 4290  144 395 4829 Amortisationimpairment at 2 July 2016 4290  1073 691 6054 Charge for the year 1 July 2017   143 394 537 Amortisationimpairment at 1 July 2017 4290  1216 1085 6591 Net book value at 27 June 2015 71704  2754 5613 80071 Net book value at 2 July 2016 69168 600 2610 5218 77596 Net book value at 1 July 2017 69168 3843 2467 4824 80302 The brand and customer relationships recognised were purchased as part of the acquisition of Fletchers Group of Bakeries in October 2014.
They are considered to have finite useful lives and are amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives of twenty years for brands and fifteen years for customer relationships.
The intangibles were valued using an income approach using MultiPeriod excess earnings Method for customer relationships and Relief from Royalty Method for brand valuation.
The amortisation of intangibles has been charged to administrative expenses in the Income Statement.
There is no amortisation on business systems during the year as the systems are yet to be brought into use.
Goodwill has arisen on acquisitions and reflects the future economic benefits arising from assets that are not capable of being identified individually and recognised as separate assets.
The goodwill reflects the anticipated profitability and synergistic benefits arising from the enlarged Group structure.
The goodwill is the balance of the total consideration less fair value of assets acquired and identified.
The carrying value of the goodwill is reviewed annually for impairment.
The carrying value of all goodwill has been assessed during the year.
A noncash impairment of goodwill arising from an acquisition in 2007 was made during the previous year.
The Group tests goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if there are indications that the goodwill may be impaired.
The recoverable amounts of the cash generating units are determined from value in use calculations.
The key assumptions for the value in use calculations are the discount rate used for future cash flows and the anticipated future changes in revenue direct costs and indirect costs.
The assumptions used reflect the past experience of management and future expectations.
The Group prepares cash flow forecasts covering a five year period based on the detailed financial forecasts approved by management for the next three years with estimated growth and inflation of 3% 2016 3% and 3% 2016 3% respectively thereafter.
The cashflows beyond this forecast are extrapolated to perpetuity using a nil growth rate on a prudent basis to reflect the uncertainties of forecasting further than five years.
Changes in revenue and direct costs are based on past experience and expectations of future changes in the market.
The revenue growth rate combines volume mix and price of products.
An inflation factor has been applied to costs of sales variable costs and indirect costs and takes into consideration the general rate of inflation movements in commodities improvement in efficiencies from capital investment and operations and purchasing initiatives.
A pretax discount rate of 10% 2016 10% has been used in these calculations.
The Group has considered the economic environment and higher level of return expected by equity holders due to the perceived risk in equity markets when selecting the discount rate.
The discount rate used for each cash generating unit has been kept constant as the market risk is deemed not to be materially different between the different segments of the bakery sector nor over time.
56 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Intangibles continued A noncash impairment of the goodwill arising from the acquisition of Anthony Alan Foods Ltd in 2007 was made during the previous year.
The impairment reflects the challenging market and changing dynamics of the healthier grocery market.
The related goodwill has been fully impaired and reflected in both the Lightbody of Hamilton and Memory Lane Cakes cash generating units accordingly.
The impairment is shown as a significant nonrecurring item within administrative expenses.
Sensitivity analyses have been carried out by the Directors on the carrying value of all remaining goodwill using discount rates ranging between 3.5% and 15.0% which would not result in an impairment of any cash generating units.
Management believe any increase in discount rates above 15% to be remote.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated to cash generating units or groups of cash generating units as follows Nicholas and Harris 2980 2980 Lightbody of Hamilton 45698 45698 Memory Lane Cakes Fletchers Bakery 20118 20118 Johnstones Food Service 372 372 69168 69168 57 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Property Plant and Equipment Land and buildings Plant and equipment Fixtures and fittings Assets under construction T otal
Balance at 28 June 2015 15260 73143 2853 1028 92284 Exchange adjustments   39  39 Additions 76 7162 756 3601 11595 T ransfers  1028  1028 Disposals  265 49  314 Balance at 2 July 2016 15336 81068 3599 3601 103604 Balance at 2 July 2016 15336 81068 3599 3601 103604 Exchange adjustments   7  7 T ransfers to intangible assets    548 548 Additions 17 6837 611 2382 9847 T ransfers 29 798 570 1339 Disposals  4364 43  4407 Balance at 1 July 2017 15324 84339 4744 4096 108503 Depreciation and impairment Balance at 28 June 2015 4742 39557 1947  46246 Exchange adjustments   27  27 Depreciation charge for the financial period 422 6289 379  7090 Disposals  211 49  260 Balance at 2 July 2016 5164 45635 2304  53103 Balance at 2 July 2016 5164 45635 2304  53103 Impairment  4000   4000 Depreciation charge for the financial period 390 6057 501  6948 T ransfers 28 223 251 Disposals  4360 45  4405 Balance at 1 July 2017 5526 51109 3011  59646 Net book value At 27 June 2015 10518 33586 906 1028 46038 At 2 July 2016 10172 35433 1295 3601 50501 At 1 July 2017 9798 33230 1733 4096 48857 Leased Plant and Equipment The net book value of assets held under finance lease or hire purchase contracts included above is as follows Plant and equipment 302 1232
HSBC Bank Plc HSBC Asset Finance UK Ltd HSBC Equipment Finance UK Ltd and HSBC Corporate Trustee Company UK Limited have debentures incorporating fixed and floating charges over the undertaking and all property and assets including goodwill book debts uncalled capital buildings fixtures fixed plant and machinery.
Hire purchase obligations are secured on the underlying assets.
The lease obligations are secured on leased equipment see Note 17.
58 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other Financial Assets and Liabilities
Investments in equity accounted investees At the beginning of the financial year 211 225 Additions 80 Share of losses 22 14 At the end of the financial year 269 211 Other financial assets 28 28 Current assets  derivatives Fair value of interest rate swaps 415 Fair value of foreign exchange contracts 145 T otal of derivatives with positive fair values 560 Current liabilities  derivatives Fair value of interest rate swaps  140 Fair value of foreign exchange contracts 234 17 T otal of derivatives with negative fair values 234 157 Investment in Associates During the year the Group purchased 6.12% of the ordinary share capital of Dr Zaks Ltd for a consideration of 80000 taking the Groups investment to 31.12%.
The cost of investment is deemed to be the fair value.
The Groups share of profit or loss of equity accounted Associates after tax is presented in a single line in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss.
This is a loss of 22000 for the current year 2016 14000 loss.
Interest Rate Swaps at Fair Value The Group has a forward dated interest rate swap arrangement to hedge its risks associated with interest rate fluctuations 20.0 million for five years from 3 July 2017 fixed at 0.455% Two swaps matured during the year 3.0 million for four years from 22 May 2013 fixed at 1.7% matured 22 May 2017 6.0 million for three years from 2 June 2014 fixed at 1.9% matured 2 June 2017 There was no coverage in place at the year end 2016 coverage of 9.0 million equivalent to 46% of total net bank debt at a weighted average rate of 1.8%.
A credit of 555000 2016 credit 219000 is shown in finance income for the periods reflecting changes in the fair values of interest rate swaps.
Forward Foreign Exchange Contracts at Fair Value The Group has entered into a number of forward foreign exchange contracts to minimise the impact of fluctuations in exchange rates.
A charge of 71000 2016 charge 134000 is shown in administrative expenses for the periods reflecting changes in their fair value.
59 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Pension Schemes A number of companies within the Group operate defined contribution pension schemes with one company also operating a defined benefit scheme.
Defined Contribution Scheme The Group made contributions in respect of its defined contribution pension arrangements of 1257000 2016 1187000.
Defined Benefit Scheme The Groups defined benefit scheme is the Memory Lane Cakes Pension Scheme which is a separately administered plan.
At the financial year end the scheme had no active members accruing benefits 2016 nil 196 deferred pensioner members 2016 206 and 217 pensioner members 2016 215.
The scheme was closed to future accrual on 31 May 2010.
The assets of the scheme are held separately from those of the Company.
The amounts in the Financial Statements for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 relating to defined benefit pension are based on a full actuarial valuation dated 31 December 2015 which was updated at the end of the schemes financial year 2016.
A 200000 contribution was paid during the financial year by Memory Lane Cakes Limited 2016 117000.
The Groups contribution has been agreed based on the outcome of the full actuarial valuation dated 31 December 2015.
The valuation of the scheme on an equitybond basis and projected unit method showed that there was a deficit at 31 December 2015 of 2505000 equivalent to an 11% deficit of liabilities over assets.
The valuation was conducted by a qualified independent actuary.
This deficit is payable at a rate of 200000 per annum until September 2020 and 100000 thereafter until September 2023.
The next full valuation is due by 31 December 2018 which will challenge the appropriateness of this recovery plan taking into consideration the deficit recovery contributions and actual returns realised on the pension scheme assets.
The present value of the Companys committed deficit reduction contributions does not give rise to a net pension asset or additional balance sheet liability in accordance with IFRIC 14.
Approximately 90% of the assets are held in two diversified growth funds which target 6 month LIBOR 5% and CPI 5% respectively.
The schemes assets are expected to provide real returns over the longterm.
The expected return on cash balances held is based on the current Bank of England base rate rather than longterm deposit rates as cash is held to cover shortterm requirements.
The full actuarial valuation differs from the financial year end valuation deficit of 10498000 2016 6463000.
No allowance is made in the financial year end valuation for any outperformance expected from the schemes actual asset holding over and above high quality corporate bonds.
Fair value of plan assets 19985 19287 Present value of defined benefit obligations 30483 25750 Deficit recognised 10498 6463 The fair value of plan assets and the return on those assets were as follows Equitiestarget return fund 17872 17291 Property 1989 1868 Cash 124 128 Fair value of plan assets 19985 19287 Actual return on plan assets 1319 661 None of the fair values of the assets shown above include any of the Companys own financial instruments or any property occupied by or any other assets used by the Company.
60 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Pension Schemes continued Movements in present value of defined benefit obligation At beginning of financial year 25750 24424 Interest on plan obligations 811 938 Benefits paid 821 756 Remeasurement  experience gain on liabilities  236 Remeasurement  loss from changes to financial assumptions 4743 1786 Remeasurement  gain from changes to demographic assumptions  406 At end of financial year 30483 25750 Movements in fair value of plan assets At beginning of financial year 19287 20587 Interest on plan assets 607 790 Return on plan assets less interest 712 1451 Benefits paid 821 756 Contributions by employer 200 117 At end of financial year 19985 19287 Remeasurement gains and losses arise due to changes in the key assumptions such as inflation mortality rates demographic rates and discount rates as well as experience gains and losses.
Expense Recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss Interest on plan assetsfinance income 607 790 Interest on plan obligationsfinance expense 811 938 T otal expenseincome Remeasurement Gains and Losses Recognised directly in Equity in the Statement of Comprehensive Income and Expense since 1 July 2006 the transition date to Adopted IFRS Cumulative amount at beginning of financial year 8600 6005 Recognised in the financial year  return on plan assets less interest 712 1451 Recognised in the financial year  experience lossesgains on liabilities  236 Recognised in the financial year  loss from changes to financial assumptions 4743 1786 Recognised in the financial year  gainslosses from changes to demographic assumptions  406 Cumulative amount at end of financial year 12631 8600 Principal Longterm Actuarial Assumptions at the Year End % % CPI price inflation assumption 2.4 2.0 Increases to pensions in payment 2.4 2.0 Discount rate for liabilities 2.7 3.2 Rate of return for plan assets 2.7 3.2 The differential between the assumed rate of inflation and the discount rate for liabilities is 0.3% 2016 1.2%.
Salary inflation assumptions are as determined by the Board with regard to price inflation.
The salary inflation from 31 May 2010 when the scheme closed to future accrual was assumed to be in line with inflation.
61 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Pension Schemes continued The financial assumptions are based on market conditions as at the review date of 1 July 2017 with discount rates based on the yields on longdated high quality corporate bonds.
The discount rate is lower than the discount rate used last year reflecting the change in bond yields over this period.
The rate of return for plan assets is the longterm rate that reflects the yield on high quality corporate bonds as required under changes to IAS 19.
The rate of return is effectively based on the discount rate with no allowance made for any outperformance expected from the schemes actual asset holding.
The actual return on the schemes assets net of expenses over the year to the review date was around 6.9% 2016 3.3% the negative return that occurred in the previous year was impacted by the uncertainty and volatility around the time of the EU referendum vote.
Changing the year end 2017 assumptions to those of 2016 year end listed on the previous page the deficit would have been 5755000 compared to the reported deficit of 10498000.
2017 2016 Preretirement mortality assumption S2NA year of birth tables with CMI 2015 projections and 1.25% pa longterm rate of improvement S2NA year of birth tables with CMI 2015 projections and 1.25% pa longterm rate of improvement Postretirement mortality assumption S2NA year of birth tables with CMI 2015 projections and 1.25% pa longterm rate of improvement S2NA year of birth tables with CMI 2015 projections and 1.25% pa longterm rate of improvement Under the mortality tables adopted the assumed future life expectancy at age 65 is as follows 2017 2016 Male currently at age 45 24.2 24.1 Female currently at age 45 26.5 26.4 Male currently at age 65 22.5 22.4 Female currently at age 65 24.6 24.5 Sensitivity Analysis The calculation of the defined benefit obligation is sensitive to the assumptions set out above.
The following table summarises changes in these assumptions and their approximate decreaseincrease in liabilities.
Discount rate plus 0.5% 2.7 million Discount rate minus 0.5% 3.1 million Inflation plus 0.5% 2.9 million Inflation minus 0.5% 2.9 million Life expectancy plus 1.0 years 0.7 million Life expectancy minus 1.0 years 0.7 million The above sensitivities are approximate and only show the likely effect of an assumption being adjusted whilst all other assumptions remain the same.
The weighted average duration of the defined benefit obligation is around 19 years.
Risk Mitigation Strategies Whilst the scheme does not explicitly hold risk mitigation strategies such as swaps annuities or liability driven investments the investment strategy is dominated by diversified growth funds which are intended to reduce the investment risk through diversification.
Effect of the Scheme on the Companys Future Cashflows The Company is required to agree a Schedule of contributions with the Trustees of the scheme following a valuation which must be carried out at least once every three years.
The next valuation of the scheme is due as at 31 December 2018.
In the event that the valuation reveals a larger deficit than expected the Company may be required to increase contributions above those set out in the existing Schedule of Contributions.
Conversely if the position is better than expected contributions may be reduced.
The total cash cost to the Company for the current financial year is 481000 this includes deficit recovery contributions pension protection fund levy fees and cost of advisors.
The Company expects to pay deficit recovery contributions of 200000 in the year to 30 June 2018.
The projected net interest charge to the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss for the year to 30 June 2018 is 281000.
This projection assumes cashflows to and from the scheme are broadly unchanged from the current year figures and that there will be no events that would give rise to a settlementcurtailmentpast service cost.
62 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Pension Schemes continued Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Fair value of plan assets 19985 19287 20587 19741 18728 Present value of the defined benefit obligation 30483 25750 24424 23371 21571 Deficit 10498 6463 3837 3630 2843 Experience adjustments on plan assets 712 1451 656 927 332 as a percentage of plan assets 3.6% 7.5% 3.2% 4.7% 1.8% Experience adjustments on plan liabilities  236   339 as a percentage of plan liabilities 0.0% 0.9% 0.0% 0.0% 1.6% T otal remeasurement lossesgains 4031 2595 153 726 543 as a percentage of plan liabilities 13.2% 10.0% 0.6% 3.1% 2.5%
Raw materials and consumables 5378 7018 Finished goods 7306 5559 12684 12577 Inventories Recognised as an Expense Opening inventories 12577 11268 Purchases 130302 135441 Increasedecrease in stock provisions 5 199 Closing inventories 12684 12577 Expensed during the period 130200 133933 Trade and Other Receivables T rade receivables due from third parties 45163 44900 Other debtors 2610 3532 Prepayments and accrued income 2245 1900 50018 50332 Specific provisions are made against doubtful debts taking the value of trade receivables to an estimated value based on the most likely outcome.
Cash received under the invoice discounting facility amounting to 11646000 2016 10824000 is shown within current liabilities and is secured on the trade receivables above.
All the risks and rewards of the trade debtors lie with the Group.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Including Bank Overdrafts Cash at bank and on hand 11305 10511 Bank overdraft 8281 7487 3024 3024 63 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Other Interestbearing Loans and Borrowings This Note provides information about the contractual terms and repayment terms of the Groups interestbearing loans and borrowings which are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest rate method.
2017 Margin Frequency of repayments Year of maturity
Drawn
Current
Noncurrent
Invoice discounting 1.50%base On demand Revolving 22000 11646 11646 T erm loan 2.00%LIBOR Quarterly 2019 13400 6337 2568 3769 Revolving credit 2.00%LIBOR Varies 2019 8000 Mortgage 1.75%LIBOR Quarterly 2022 3470 2457 369 2088 Finance lease liabilities 1.76%base Monthly Various 2000 57 57 Overdraft 2.00%base On demand  2000 50870 20497 14640 5857 Unamortised transaction costs 20386 14586 5800 Secured bank loans and mortgages over one year 5857 Unamortised transaction costs Repayments are as follows Between one and two years 2894 Between two and five years 2292 Between five and ten years 2016 Margin Frequency of repayments Year of maturity
Drawn
Current
Noncurrent
Invoice discounting 1.50%base On demand Revolving 22000 10824 10824 T erm loan 2.00%LIBOR Quarterly 2019 13400 8905 2568 6337 Revolving credit 2.00%LIBOR Varies 2019 8000 Mortgage 1.75%LIBOR Quarterly 2022 3470 2826 369 2457 Finance lease liabilities 1.76%base Monthly Various 2Overdraft 2.00%base On demand  2000 50870 22745 13894 8851 Unamortised transaction costs 22569 13829 8740 Secured bank loans and mortgages over one year 8851 Unamortised transaction costs Repayments are as follows Between one and two years 2940 Between two and five years 4817 Between five and ten years Revolving maturity above relates to the payment terms on the invoice discounting which is up to 90 days from the date of invoice.
The invoice discounting facility renewal date is October 2019.
64 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Other Interestbearing Loans and Borrowings continued Finance lease liabilities are payable as follows 2017 2016 Minimum lease payments
Principal
Minimum lease payments
Principal
Less than one year Between one and five years All of the above loans are denoted in pounds Sterling with various interest rates and maturity dates.
The main purpose of the above facilities is to finance the Groups operations.
For more information about the Groups exposure to interest rate risk see Note 21.
As part of the bank borrowing facility the Group needs to meet certain covenants every six months.
There were no breaches of covenants during the year.
The covenant tests required are Net bank debt  EBITDA Interest cover debt service cover and capital expenditure.
The bank facilities excluding overdraft available for drawdown are 48.9 million 2016 48.9 million.
At the period end date the facility utilised was 20.5 million 2016 22.7 million giving 28.4 million 2016 26.2 million headroom.
Analysis of Net Debt
At year ended 2 July 2016 Cash flow At year ended 1 July 2017 Cash at bank 3024  3024 Debt due within one year 2937  2937 Debt due after one year 8794 2937 5857 Invoice discounting due within one year 10824 822 11646 Hire purchase obligations due within one year 133 76 57 Hire purchase obligations due after one year 57 57 T otal net bank debt 19721 2248 17473 Debt 17 22569 2183 20386 Cash at bank 3024  3024 Unamortised transaction costs 176 65 111 T otal net bank debt 19721 2248 17473 Cash at bank 3024  3024 T otal debt payable excluding cash 22745 2248 20497 Trade and Other Payables
T rade creditors 36663 38049 Other creditors including taxes and social security 2002 1947 Accruals and deferred income 21796 24361 60461 64357 65 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities Recognised Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities Deferred tax assets and liabilities are attributable to the following Assets Liabilities Intangibles   1239 1409 Property plant and equipment 1331   138 Foreign exchange contracts 40 3 25 Shortterm temporary differences 73 37 Interest rate swaps  25 71 Pension scheme charges 1785 1163 Employee share scheme charges 460 202 Losses acquired 374 2062 T ax assetsliabilities 4063 3492 1335 1547 Net tax assetsliabilities 2728 1945 Shortterm temporary differences relate to general provisions which will be allowed when utilised.
The deferred tax asset recognised for losses relate to acquired businesses based on current and forecast levels of profitability the losses are expected to be utilised within 3 years.
Movement in Deferred Tax during the Year 2 July
Recognised in equity 1 July Intangibles 1409 170  1239 Property plant and equipment 138 1469  1331 Foreign exchange contracts 3 12  15 Shortterm temporary differences 37 36  73 Interest rate swaps 25 96  71 Pension scheme 1163 1 621 1785 Employee share scheme Losses acquired 2062 1688  374 1945 115 668 2728 27 June
Recognised in equity Recognition of deferred tax on intangible assets 2 July Intangibles  345  1754 1409 Property plant and equipment 41 97   138 Foreign exchange contracts 23 26   3 Shortterm temporary differences 39 76   37 Interest rate swaps 72 47   25 Pension scheme 767 6 390  1163 Employee share scheme 758 19 575  202 Losses acquired 2849 787   2062 4343 459 185 1754 1945 The deferred tax liability in respect of intangible assets will unwind in line with the amortisation of the intangible assets.
66 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial Risk Management
The main purpose of the Groups financial instruments is to finance the Groups operations.
The financial instruments comprise of bank term loans invoice discounting facility hire purchase finance leases interest rate swaps foreign currency forwards cash and liquid resources and various items arising directly from its operations such as trade receivables and trade payables the main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are interest rate risk and liquidity risk.
The Groups policies on the management of liquidity credit interest rate and foreign currency risks are set out below and the main risks are also referred to in the Strategic Report on pages 14 to 15.
All financial assets and liabilities are held at amortised cost apart from forward exchange contracts and interest rate swaps which are held at fair value with changes going through the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss.
The Group has not disclosed the fair values for financial instruments such as shortterm trade receivables and payables because their carrying amounts are a reasonable approximation of fair values.
The fair values of forward exchange contracts and interest rate swaps are determined using a market comparison valuation technique.
The fair values are based on broker quotes.
Similar contracts are traded in an active market and the quotes reflect the actual transactions in similar instruments.
The fair values relating to these instruments represent level 2 in the fair value hierarchy which relates to the extent the fair value can be determined by reference to comparable market values.
The classifications range from level 1 where instruments are quoted on an active market through to level 3 where the assumptions used to arrive at fair value do not have comparable market data.
The Groups policy is to ensure that it has sufficient facilities to cover its future funding requirements.
Shortterm flexibility is available through the existing bank facilities and the netting off of surplus funds.
The carrying amounts are the amounts due if settled at the period end date.
The contractual undiscounted cash flows include estimated interest payments over the life of these facilities.
The estimated interest payments are based on interest rates prevailing at the 1 July 2017.
Contractual cashflows including estimated interest At year ended 1 July 2017 Carrying amount T otal 1 year or less 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years 5 years and over Nonderivative financial liabilities Secured bank loans 8683 9162 3110 3042 2390 620 Finance lease liabilities 57 58 58 Invoice discounting 11646 11646 11646 T rade creditors 36663 36663 36663 57049 57529 51477 3042 2390 620 Contractual cashflows including estimated interest At year ended 2 July 2016 Carrying amount T otal 1 year or less 1 to 2 years 2 to 5 years 5 years and over Nonderivative financial liabilities Secured bank loans 11555 12401 3202 3128 5063 1008 Finance lease liabilities 190 194 136 58 Invoice discounting 10824 10824 10824 T rade creditors 38049 38049 38049 Derivative financial liabilities Interest rate swaps liabilities 140 108 108 60758 61576 52319 3186 5063 1008 The carrying amount relating to interest rate swaps is the fair value.
The information relating to the interest rate swaps shown in the tables above indicate the cash flows associated with these instruments.
This also reflects the expected effect on the future profit.
These amounts will change as interest rates change.
Shortterm flexibility is available through existing bank facilities and the netting off of surplus funds.
67 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Financial Risk Management continued
Credit risk is the risk of financial loss to the Group if a customer or counterparty to a financial instrument fails to meet its contractual obligations and arises principally from the Groups receivables from customers.
These trading exposures are monitored and managed at operating level and are also monitored at Group level.
Whilst there is a concentration of credit risk arising from the profile of five customers accounting for 57% of total revenue the Group deems this to be low risk due to the nature of these customers.
The carrying amount of the financial assets represents the maximum credit exposure.
Therefore the maximum exposure to credit risk for the trade receivables at the period end date was 45.2 million 2016 44.9 million and the ageing of trade receivables at the period end date was Not past due 41553 42709 Past due 030 days 3236 1779 Past due 31120 days 317 391 Past due more than 120 days 57 21 45163 44900 The above numbers are net of impairment provisions.
Group policy is to provide in full against all receivable balances whose full recovery is significantly in doubt.
The provision is netted off the gross receivable.
The Groups strategy is to focus on supplying UK multiple grocers and foodservice distributors the nature of these customers is such that there is a relatively low risk of them failing to meet their contractual obligations.
There is no impairment necessary to the value of trade receivables at the period end date over and above the specific credit note provision and bad debt provision held at the year end.
The balance of 0.4 million past due by more than 30 days is equivalent to less than 1 day sales 2016 0.4 million equivalent to less than 1 day.
The Groups interest rate risk exposure is primarily to changes in variable interest rates.
The Group has entered into three interest rate swap arrangements in order to hedge its risks associated with any fluctuations.
Details of swaps are given in Note 12.
The profile of the Groups loans and overdraft at the period end date were split as follows Variable rate liabilities 20497 22745 There is no swap coverage at 1 July 2017.
The Group has entered into a forward dated swap for 20000000 2016 9000000 to limit the risk associated with the variable rate liabilities the interest rate for the forward dated swap is 0.455% 2016 1.8% weighted average interest rate.
Sensitivity
A 1% increase in the base rate or LIBOR would have the following impact on interest charges and associated net assets for the Group this sensitivity relates to interestbearing bank borrowings and interest rate swaps only and excludes possible changes in pension financing costs.
Profit decrease 197 345 Decrease in net assets 197 345 A 1% decrease in the base rate or LIBOR would have an equal and opposite impact to those listed above.
The above movement is not equal to 1% of interestbearing loans because of interest rate swap cover that is in place.
Any rises in commodity prices can adversely impact the core profitability of the business.
The Group will aim to pass on its increased costs to its customers as far as is reasonable in the circumstances whilst maintaining its tight control over overhead costs to mitigate the impact on consumers.
The Group maintains a high expertise in its buying team and will consider longterm contracts where appropriate to reduce uncertainty in commodity prices.
Further information on input prices and risks is contained in the Strategic Report.
The Group currently supplies UK manufactured products to Lightbody Stretz Ltd its 50% owned selling and distribution business trading primarily in Europe.
The Group also purchases some raw materials in foreign currency.
The consequence of this is that the Group is exposed to movement in foreign currency rates.
Forward foreign exchanges contracts are used to manage the net foreign exchange exposure.
68 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial Risk Management continued
The Groups objective is to maximise the return on net invested capital while maintaining its ongoing ability to operate and guaranteeing adequate returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders within a sustainable financial structure.
An interim dividend for the six months to 31 December 2016 of 1.0p per share was paid on 21 April 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 31 March 2017.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 22 November 2017 the final dividend of 2.0 pence per share will be paid on 22 December 2017 to all shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017.
It is the Companys intention to pay dividends at an affordable rate so that the Company can continue to invest in the business in order to grow profits.
The Group manages its capital by monitoring its gearing ratio on a regular basis there are also covenant tests which are monitored regularly and presented to the Groups banks every six months.
There have been no breaches of covenant tests during the year and the gearing ratio stands at 0.2 2016 0.2.
The gearing ratio is calculated taking the total net debt including deferred consideration over net assets.
The Group considers its capital to include share capital share premium and capital redemption reserve.
The Group does not have any externally imposed capital requirements.
Capital and Reserves The reconciliation of movement in capital and reserves is shown as a primary statement Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity on page 40.
Equity comprises the following Share capital representing the nominal value of equity shares Share premium representing the excess of the fair value of consideration received for the equity shares net of expenses of the share issue over nominal value of the equity shares Capital redemption reserve representing the buyback and cancellation of shares at nominal value Employee share reserve representing ordinary shares held in an employee benefit trust EBT to satisfy awards made to employees Retained earnings representing retained profits Share Capital In issue at beginning of the financial year 130383 128037 Shares issued  2346 In issue at end of the financial year  fully paid 130383 130383 Allotted called up and fully paid Ordinary shares of 1p each 1304 1304 The holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
Shares are held in an Employee Benefit Trust which is intended to be used to satisfy awards made to employees 3057272 shares were held at the year end.
All shares are the same class with equal rights.
69 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share Capital continued Share Based Payments The Group operates both approved and unapproved share option schemes.
The fair value is calculated at the grant date and ultimately expensed in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss over the vesting period based on the best available estimate of the number of share options expected to vest with a corresponding credit to reserves.
Upon exercise of the share options the proceeds received net of attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital and where appropriate share premium.
There were a number of options granted during the course of the financial year to 1 July 2017 with further details given below.
Date of grant Number of options granted Number of options expected to vest
Fair value Amount expensed in year to 1 July 2017 Period of expense 29 September 2016 889996 889996 Nil 760 190 3 years 29 September 2016 544384 544384 Nil 524 131 3 years Charge relating to options granted in the current year 321 Charge relating to options granted in prior years 919 Charge included in Administrative expenses 1240 There were a number of options granted during the course of the financial year to 2 July 2016 with further details given below.
Date of grant Number of options granted Number of options expected to vest
Fair value
2 July 2016 Period of expense 4 December 2015 1200146 972118 Nil 947 195 3 years 4 December 2015 423980 343424 Nil 383 79 3 years Charge relating to options granted in the current year 274 Credit relating to options granted in prior years Credit included in Administrative expenses Details of share options outstanding at 1 July 2017 and movements during the year by exercise price is shown below
First exercise date
58.0p May 2017 May 2024 302758    302758 54.8p Jul 2017 Jul 2024 155172     155172 Nil Sep 2018 Dec 2025 423980   29899  394081 Nil Jul 2019 Jun 2025 1859115     1859115 Nil Jul 2020 Dec 2025 1200146     1200146 Nil Jun 2021 Sep 2026  889996    889996 Nil Sep 2019 Sep 2026  544384    544384 3941171 1434380  29899 302758 5042894 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 70 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share Capital continued A summary of share options outstanding and movements for the year to 2 July 2016 is shown below At 27 June 2015 Granted Forfeited Cancelled Exercised At 2 July 2016 Number of options 7638244 1624126 39240 5253659 28300 3941171 There were no options exercisable at the period end date 2016 nil.
There were 302758 options exercised during the year 2016 28300.
The average share price at dates of exercise was 114 pence per share.
The options outstanding at the year end have weighted average exercise price of 1.7p 2016 6.6p and a weighted average contractual life of 5.9 years 2016 5.9 years.
The Company uses a Monte Carlo model for the valuation of the award subject to relative performance to the TSR of AIM listed companies.
An external consultant assists with the valuation of the awards.
The key inputs into the Monte Carlo model are as follows 2017 2016 Expected life of option 3.0 years 3.0 years Volatility of share price 25% 29% Dividend yield 2.1% 1.9% Risk free discount rate 0.10% 0.80% Share price at grant date 126.5p 110.6p Exercise price Nil Nil Performance period 3 years 3 years Postvesting holding period 02 years 02 years Employee turnover Zero Zero
An interim dividend for the six months to 31 December 2016 of 1.0p per share was paid on 21 April 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 31 March 2017.
The amount paid was 1270233.
A final dividend of 2.0p per share has been proposed taking the total dividend for the year to 3.0p per share.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 22 November 2017 the final dividend will be paid on 22 December 2017 to shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017.
During the year a dividend of 705000 2016 336000 was paid to the holders of the noncontrolling interest in Lightbody Stretz Ltd.
Operating Leases The Group has annual commitments under noncancellable operating leases relating primarily to land and buildings fork lift trucks and office equipment.
Land and buildings have been considered separately for lease classification.
Land and buildings amounts relate to leasehold properties at the Nicholas and Harris site part of the Lightbody of Hamilton site Fletchers sites in London and Manchester and Johnstones site in East Kilbride.
During the year 2839000 was recognised as an expense in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss in respect of operating leases 2016 2687000.
Future minimum lease repayments under noncancellable operating leases at the end of the financial periods are as follows Land and Buildings Other On leases which expire in Less than one year 2372 2348 839 811 Between one and five years 7979 8299 1064 979 More than five years 7805 9452 29 33 18156 20099 1932 1823 Capital Commitments At the financial year ended 1 July 2017 the Group had capital expenditure commitments of 429000 2016 1232000.
71 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Related Parties Related Party Transactions and Directors Material Interests in Transactions A 50% owned subsidiary Lightbody Stretz Ltd paid Mr P Stretz the Managing Director of Lightbody Stretz Ltd 55000 2016 58000 in respect of rent for offices.
No balances were outstanding at either year end.
The Group paid 31000 2016 81000 for the supply of finished products from and received 52000 2016 83000 for the sale of finished products to Party Fizz a company 50% owned by Mr P Stretz.
The amount payable and receivable at the year end was nil 2016 24000 and 3000 2016 18000 respectively.
The Group sold finished product to Dr Zaks for a value of 196000 during the year 2016 269000 the amount receivable at the year end was 68000 2016 78000.
Transactions with the Memory Lane Pension Scheme are detailed in Note 13.
Mr E Beale is the Chief Executive of City Group Plc.
Directors fees of 22000 for Mr E Beale 2016 45000 have been paid to City Group.
Directors fees for Mr E Beale are ceded to his primary employer.
During the previous year City Group provided Company Secretarial and ancillary services to the Group up until 31 December 2015.
Fees for these services amounted to 19380 including VAT.
Mr P Baker is a Director of Crosta and Mollica Limited.
The Group sold finished product to Crosta and Mollica for a value of 284000 2016 nil the amount receivable at the year end was 36000 2016 nil.
Transactions with Key Management Personnel Directors of the Company and their immediate relatives control 3% 2016 3% of the voting shares of the Company.
The aggregate compensation of key management personnel Main Board Executive Directors Divisional MDs and Executive Committee is as follows Company contributions to money purchase pension schemes 62 61 Executive salaries and benefits 1663 1498 Executive bonuses 1683 1049 3408 2608 Share options held by Group Directors are set out in Note 6.
Details of share options outstanding at 1 July 2017 for other key management personnel by exercise price is shown in the table below.
Exercise price Number of options at 1 July 2017 Number of options at 2 July 2016
Exercise expiry date Nil 338951  30092019 29092026 Nil 279596 279596 30092018 04122025 54.75p 51724 51724 03072017 03072024 58.00p  206896 16052017 16052024 670271 538216 Post Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Events Since the period end date a proposal has been put forward to close our Grain DOr business.
Grain DOr is a provider of premium baked products for the UK pastry sector and based in London.
The Company entered into a formal consultation period on 1 September 2017 with circa 250 employees concerning the proposal.
The business has been historically loss making and despite the implementation of a range of initiatives to improve the business including strict cost control and new working practices the site remained loss making in the year to 1 July 2017.
Formal consultation is expected to conclude mid October 2017.
A formal employee group consultation has concluded at our small Campbells Cake Company factory in Twechar.
A rationalisation program had decreased the volumes considerably at the site and the overhead cost of running a small remote site was not sustainable in todays competitive market.
To retain the site to the required industry standards would take significant investment which the Group could not justify given the asset limitations and small scale site.
Following the formal consultation a decision has been taken to cease production with product manufacture being transferred within the Group and a small amount of rationalisation.
The closure will affect 22 employees and site is expected to close by end October 2017.
Ultimate Parent Company Finsbury Food Group Plc is the ultimate Parent Company.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 72 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company Balance Sheet at 1 July 2017 and 2 July 2016
Noncurrent assets Investments 37 100827 100676 Deferred taxation 3tel287 100903 Current assets Debtors 39 25173 27790 Other financial assets  fair value foreign exchange contracts 40 560 495 Cash and cash equivalents 6509 3621 32242 31906 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 41 9633 10098 Net current assets 22609 21808 T otal assets less current liabilities 123896 122711 Creditors amounts falling due after more than one year 41and43 5896 8772 Net assets 118000 113939 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 44 1304 1304 Share premium account 44 64956 64956 Capital redemption reserve 44 578 578 Employee share reserve 3585 3920 Profit and loss account 45 54747 51021 Shareholders funds 118000 113939 These Financial Statements were approved by the Board of Directors on 15 September 2017 and were signed on its behalf by Stephen Boyd
Registration number The Notes on pages 74 to 81 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
73 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company Statement of Changes in Equity for the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 and 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016
Share capital
Capital redemption reserve
Retained earnings T otal equity Balance at 28 June 2015 1280 64952 578  33566 100376 Loss for the financial year     658 658 T otal comprehensive loss for the period     658 658 T ransactions with owners recorded directly in equity Own shares acquired    3920  3920 Shares issued during the year 23 24 4   23 5 Impact of share based payments credit to subsidiaries     11 11 Impact of share based payments 23     306 306 Deferred tax on share options     575 575 Dividend received     21721 21721 Dividend paid 24     3305 3305 Balance at 2 July 2016 1304 64956 578 3920 51021 113939 Balance at 2 July 2016 1304 64956 578 3920 51021 113939 Loss for the financial year     157 157 T otal comprehensive loss for the period     157 157 T ransactions with owners recorded directly in equity Shares issued from EBT    335 158 177 Shares issued during the year 23 Impact of share based payments charge to subsidiaries     5 5 Impact of share based payments 23     1240 1240 Deferred tax on share options     47 47 Dividend received     6404 6404 Dividend paid 24     3645 3645 Balance at 1 July 2017 1304 64956 578 3585 54747 118000 The Notes on pages 74 to 81 form an integral part of these Financial Statements.
74 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting Policies The following accounting policies have been applied consistently in dealing with items which are considered material in relation to the Financial Statements.
Basis of Preparation The financial year was the 52 weeks ended 1 July 2017 prior financial year 53 weeks ended 2 July 2016.
These Financial Statements were prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101.
In preparing these Financial Statements the Company applies the recognition measurement and disclosure requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs but makes amendments where necessary in order to comply with Companies Act 2006 and has set out below where advantage of the FRS 101 disclosure exemptions has been taken.
The Company proposes to continue to adopt the reduced disclosure framework of FRS 101 in its next Financial Statements.
Under section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present its own Profit and Loss Account.
The profit or loss for the year is set out in the Statement of Changes in Equity.
As permitted by FRS 101 the Company has taken advantage of the disclosure exemptions available under the standard in relation to the following disclosures Presentation of a Cash Flow Statement and related notes Capital management Comparative period reconciliations for share capital and tangible fixed assets Impairment of assets Transactions with wholly owned subsidiaries The effects of new but not yet effective IFRSs Key management personnel As the consolidated Financial Statements of Finsbury Food Group Plc include the equivalent disclosures the Company has also taken the exemptions under FRS 101 available in respect of the following disclosures IFRS 2 Share Based Payments in respect of Group settled share based payments Certain disclosures required by IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement and the disclosures required by IFRS 7 Financial Instrument Disclosures Where required equivalent disclosures are given in the Group accounts of Finsbury Food Group Plc which are available within this Report.
The Financial Statements are prepared on the historical cost basis except where stated at their fair value.
The principal accounting policies of the Company are as follows
Investments are stated at cost less provision for any permanent impairment.
Any impairment is charged to the profit and loss as it arises.
Impairment
Foreign Currency Transactions in foreign currencies are translated to Sterling at the foreign exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the period end date are retranslated to Sterling at the foreign exchange rate ruling at that date.
Any exchange differences arising on the settlement of monetary items or on translating monetary items at rates different from those at which they were initially recorded are recognised in the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss in the period in which they arise.
The assets and liabilities of foreign operations including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on consolidation are translated to Sterling at foreign exchange rates ruling at the period end date.
The revenues and expenses of foreign operations are translated at an average rate for the year where this rate approximates to the foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates of the transactions.
This revaluation is recognised through Other Comprehensive Income.
Derivative Financial Instruments The Company has derivative financial instruments in respect of interest rate swaps and foreign exchange hedges.
The Company does not hold derivative financial instruments for trading purposes.
The existing interest rate swaps and foreign exchange hedges used by the Company while they function as hedges do not meet the criteria for hedge accounting set out by IAS 39 and have thus been treated as financial assets and liabilities which are carried at their fair value in the Company Balance Sheet.
Fair value is deemed to be market value which is provided by the counterparty at the year end date.
Changes in the market value of interest rate swaps have been recognised through the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss as finance income or cost.
Changes in the market value of foreign exchange hedges have been recognised through the Consolidated Statement of Profit and Loss within administrative costs.
Notes to the Companys Financial Statements forming part of the Financial Statements 75 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Companys Financial Statements Accounting Policies continued Nonderivative Financial Instruments Nonderivative financial instruments comprise investments in equity and debt securities trade and other receivables cash and cash equivalents loans and borrowings and trade and other payables.
Unless otherwise indicated the carrying amounts of the Groups financial assets and liabilities are a reasonable approximation of their fair values.
Trade and Other Payables The value of trade and other payables is the value that would be payable to settle the liability at the period end date.
Cash and Cash Equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash balances.
Bank overdrafts that are repayable on demand and which form an integral part of the Groups cash management are included as a component of cash and cash equivalents.
Interestbearing Borrowings Interestbearing borrowings are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Share Based Payment Transactions The value as at the grant date of options granted to employees is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The fair value of the options granted is measured using an option valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
Taxation
The credit for taxation is based on the loss for the year and takes into account taxation deferred because of temporary differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes.
Deferred tax is recognised without discounting in respect of all temporary differences between the treatment of certain items for taxation and accounting purposes which have arisen but not reversed by the balance sheet date.
Going Concern After making enquiries and on the basis of current financial projections and available funds and facilities the Directors are satisfied that the Company has adequate resources to continue in operation for the next 12 months and therefore consider it appropriate to prepare the Financial Statements on the going concern basis.
Shares held by Employee Share Trusts Shares held to satisfy options are accounted for in accordance with IAS 32 Financial Instruments.
All differences between the purchase price of the shares held to satisfy options granted and the proceeds received for the shares whether on exercise or lapse are charged to reserves.
Remuneration of Directors Details of Directors remuneration are set out in Note 6 of the Groups Financial Statements.
Staff Numbers and Costs The average number of persons employed by the Company including Directors during the year analysed by category was as follows Number of employees 2017 2016 Directors and administrative staff 39 37 The aggregate payroll costs of these persons were as follows Wages and salaries 4219 3330 Social security costs 382 463 Other pension costs 198 142 4799 3935 76 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share Based Payments Details of Directors share options are set out in Note 6 of the Groups Financial Statements and details of all share options issued are set out in Note 23 to the Group Financial Statements.
During the year 330301 2016 194404 of the total 544384 2016 423980 share options granted were issued to employees of the Company.
The remaining options were granted to employees of the subsidiary companies with corresponding charges to the relevant profit and loss accounts.
The total charge in the financial year to the Company for all share options relating to current and prior years was 1084000 2016 248000.
Credits relating to options exercised cancelled or lapsed after vesting have also been passed to the subsidiaries during the year.
The charge totalled 151000 2016 47000 and has resulted in an increase 2016 increase in the total cost of investments in the Company balance sheet.
Details of Directors share options are set out in Note 6 of the Groups Financial Statements.
Finance Income and Cost Recognised in the Company Statement of Profit and Loss Finance income Change in fair value of interest rate swaps 555 219 Intergroup recharge 157 124 Bank interest receivable 1 2 T otal finance income 713 345 Finance cost Bank interest payable 428 532 Interest on interest rate swap agreements 125 273 T otal finance cost 553 805 Net finance cost 160 460
On 16 December 2016 a final dividend of 1.87p per share was paid to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 18 November 2016 the amount paid was 2374822.
An interim dividend for the six months to 31 December 2016 of 1.0p per share was paid on 21 April 2017 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 31 March 2017.
The amount paid was 1270233.
A final dividend of 2.0p per share has been proposed taking the total dividend to 3.0p per share.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Companys AGM on 22 November 2017 the final dividend will be paid on 22 December 2017 to all shareholders on the register at 24 November 2017.
77 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Companys Financial Statements Investment in Subsidiaries and Equity Accounted Investees Set out below are all undertakings of the Company whose results are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements for the period ended 1 July 2017.
Subsidiary
DirectIndirect ownership Country of incorporation Class of shares held 2017 2016 Anthony Alan Foods Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Direct England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% California Cake Company Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% California Cake Company Holdings Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Direct Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Campbells Cake Company Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Campbells Cake Holdings Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Direct Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Dr Zaks Ltd Unit 3 Stirling Court Stirling Way Borehamwood England WD6 2BT Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 31% 25% Fennel Acquisition Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Direct England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Fletchers Bakeries Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Fletchers Bakeries Investment Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Goswell Enterprises Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Goswell Marketing Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Johnstones Food Service Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Lightbody Celebration Cakes Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Lightbody Group Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Direct Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Lightbody Holdings Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% Lightbody of Hamilton Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 100% 100% LightbodyStretz Ltd 73 Bothwell Rd Hamilton ML3 0DW Indirect Scotland Ordinary 1 50% 50% Lightbody Europe SAS 14 Alle Coysevox CS 56939 35069 Rennes Cedex France Indirect France Ordinary 1 50% 50% Memory Lane Cakes Ltd Maesycoed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Direct England and Wales Ordinary 1p 100% 100% Murray T raders Ltd 3 Inch Marnock St Leonards East Kilbride South Lanarkshire G74 2JQ Indirect Scotland Preference 1 10.5% 10.5% Nicholas and Harris Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Indirect England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% Storesurvey Ltd Maes Y Coed Rd Cardiff CF14 4XR Direct England and Wales Ordinary 1 100% 100% 78 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Fixed Asset Investments
At beginning of financial year 100676 Additions 151 At end of financial year 100827 Net book value At 1 July 2017 100827 At 2 July 2016 100676 The additions relate to share option charge of 151000 2016 47000 passed down to individual subsidiaries.
Deferred Tax Recognised deferred tax assets and liabilities Assets Liabilities Employee share scheme charges 460 202 Interest rate swaps  25 71 Foreign exchange contracts   25 89 T ax assetsliabilities 460 227 96 89 Net tax assets 364 138 The deferred tax asset at 1 July 2017 has been calculated based on the rate of 17% substantively enacted at the balance sheet date.
The impact through the profit and loss of reduction from 18% to 17% on recognised net deferred tax asset is 8000 charge.
Movement in Deferred Tax during the Year 2 July
Recognised in equity 1 July Employee share scheme Interest rate swaps 25 96  71 Foreign exchange contracts 89 64  25 Movement in Deferred Tax during the Prior Year 28 June
Recognised in equity 2 July Employee share scheme 758 19 575 202 Interest rate swaps 72 47  25 Foreign exchange contracts 11 100  89
Amounts owed by Group undertakings 24928 27700 Other taxation 57 15 Prepayments and accrued income 188 75 25173 27790 79 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Forward Foreign Exchange Contracts at Fair Value The Group has entered into a number of forward foreign exchange contracts to minimise the impact of fluctuations in exchange rates.
A charge of 350000 2016 credit 554000 is included in administrative expenses for the periods reflecting changes in their fair value.
Creditors Amounts Falling Due Within One Year Bank loan 2883 2872 T rade creditors 45 143 Amounts due to Group undertakings 52 33 Other financial liabilities  fair value interest rate swaps  140 Other financial liabilities  fair value foreign exchange contracts Corporation tax 134 Other taxes and social security 122 114 Accruals and deferred income 6397 6796 9633 10098 Other Financial Liabilities  Fair Value Interest Rate Swaps The Group has one forward dated interest rate swap for five years from 3 July 2017 with a coverage of 20 million fixed at a rate of 0.455%.
Two swaps expired during the year 3.0m for four years from 22 May 2013 fixed at 1.7% expired 22 May 2017 6.0m for three years from 2 June 2014 fixed at 1.9% expired 2 June 2017 There was no coverage at year end 2016 coverage of 9.0 million equivalent to 78% of total net bank debt with a weighted average rate of 1.8%.
A credit of 555000 2016 219000 is shown in finance income for the previous year reflecting changes in the fair values of interest rate swaps.
The fair values are liabilities as a result of the current low levels of base and LIBOR interest rates.
Creditors Amounts Falling Due After More Than One Year T otal bank loans and mortgages 5800 8683 Deferred tax liability 96 89 5896 8772 HSBC Bank Plc HSBC Asset Finance UK Ltd HSBC Equipment Finance UK Ltd and HSBC Corporate Trustee Company UK Limited have debentures incorporating fixed and floating charges over the undertaking and all property and assets including goodwill book debts uncalled capital buildings fixtures fixed plant and machinery.
Notes to the Companys Financial Statements 80 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Interestbearing Loans and Borrowings This note provides information about the contractual terms and repayment schedule of the Companys interestbearing loans and borrowings which are measured at amortised cost.
For more information about the Groups exposure to interest rate risk see Note 21.
2017 Currency Margin Above Frequency of repayments Year of maturity T otal
Noncurrent
T erm loan GBP 2.00% LIBOR Quarterly 2019 6337 2568 3769 Revolving credit GBP 2.00% LIBOR Varies 2019 Mortgage GBP 1.75% LIBOR Quarterly 2022 2457 369 2088 Unamortised transaction costs 8683 2883 5800 Repayments are as follows Between one and two years 2894 Between two and five years 2292 Between five and ten years 614 Between ten and fifteen years 2016 Currency Margin Above Frequency of repayments Year of maturity T otal
Noncurrent
T erm loan GBP 2.00% LIBOR Quarterly 2019 8905 2568 6337 Revolving credit GBP 2.00% LIBOR Varies 2019 Mortgage GBP 1.75% LIBOR Quarterly 2022 2826 369 2457 Unamortised transaction costs 11555 2872 8683 Repayments are as follows Between one and two years 2883 Between two and five years 5185 Between five and ten years 615 Between ten and fifteen years Called Up Share Capital Note 23 in the Group Financial Statements gives details of called up share capital.
Capital and Reserves The reconciliation of the movement in capital and reserves is shown as a primary statement in the Companys Financial Statements Company Statement of Changes in Equity on page 73 with definition details in Note 22 to the consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingent Liabilities The Company has guaranteed the overdrafts of its subsidiaries there was a net cash position at the year end of 3024000 2016 3024000.
Related Party Disclosures Note 27 in the Groups Financial Statements gives details of related party transactions.
Financial Risk Management
The Companys policies on the management of liquidity credit and interest rate risks are managed at a Group level and are set out in Note 21 in the Groups Financial Statements and also referred to in the Strategic Report.
81 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Presentation of Financial Statements Basis of Preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements The Group has adopted the following IFRSs in these Financial Statements Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation  Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38 effective date 1 January 2016 Equity Method in Separate Financial Statements  Amendments to IAS 27 effective date 1 January 2016 Annual Improvements to IFRSs  20122014 Cycle effective date 1 January 2016 The application of the above standards and interpretations has not had a material effect on the net assets results and disclosures of the Group.
The IASB and the IFRIC have also issued the following standards and interpretations with an effective date after the date of these Financial Statements.
New Standards and Interpretations Endorsed but not yet Effective IFRS 9 Financial Instruments  effective 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers  effective 1 January 2018 Work will begin in the new financial year to assess the impact of the new standards and interpretations on the Groups Financial Statements.
New Standards and Interpretations not yet Endorsed and not yet Effective IFRS 16 Leases  effective from 1 January 2019 IFRS 2 Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions  effective 1 January 2018 Annual Improvements to IFRSs  20142016 Cycle effective date 1 January 2018 IFRIC Interpretation 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration effective date 1 January 2018 Work will begin in the new financial year to assess the impact of the new standards and interpretations on the Groups Financial Statements.
Notes to the Companys Financial Statements 82 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Registered Office Maes Y Coed Road
CF14 4XR Tel Registrars Capita Registrars 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU Company Secretary ONE Advisory Limited 201 Temple Chambers 37 Temple Avenue
EC4Y 0DT tel
KPMG LLP Chartered Accountants 3 Assembly Square Britannia Quay Cardiff Bay CF10 4AX Nominated Adviser and Broker Cenkos Securities Plc 6.7.8 Tokenhouse Yard
EC2R 7AS
CMS Cameron McKenna LLP Cannon Place 78 Cannon Street
EC4N 6AF Remuneration Committee Adviser Deloitte LLP Four Brindleyplace
B1 2HZ Registered Number Advisers 83 Finsbury Food Group Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Designed and Produced by site Photography by David Hares and Mike Abrahams Products with a Mixed Sources label support the development of responsible forest management worldwide.
The wood comes from FSC certified well managed forests company controlled sources andor recycled material.
Company controlled sources are controlled in accordance with FSC standards to exclude illegally harvested timber forests where high conservation values are threatened genetically modified organisms violation of peoples civil and traditional rights and wood from forests harvested for the purpose of converting the land to plantations or other nonforest use.
