Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Investing for a sustainable future We are committed to serving life science researchers to achieve their mission faster.
We continue to identify the biological pathways of greatest interest to our consumers and continuously strive to provide products of the highest quality with increased specificity reproducibility and sensitivity.
At the same time through investment and acquisition we are expanding into new markets identifying new technologies and applications while moving into new geographic regions thereby driving sustainable growth.
Strategic report
To serve life scientists to achieve their mission faster
To be the most influential life sciences company for researchers worldwide Strategic report 1 Highlights of our year 2 About us 4 Chairmans introduction 6 Our business model
Chief Executive Officers review
10 Our markets 12 Our strategic priorities 14 Our KPIs 15 Our risks
Our financials Corporate governance Chairmans governance overview Directors and Company Secretary Corporate governance report 37 Audit and Risk Committee 40 Nomination Committee 41 Remuneration report 55 Directors report Financial statements 59 Independent auditors report 65 Consolidated income statement Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 66 Consolidated balance sheet 67 Consolidated statement of changes in equity Consolidated cash flow statement Notes to the financial statements 97 Company balance sheet 98 Company statement of changes in equity Notes to the Company financial statements 107 Technical glossary 108 Corporate directory 108 Shareholder information Financial highlights Total revenue increased 26.5% on a reported basis to 217.1m FY 2016 171.7m.
On a constant exchange rate
9.9% meeting our full year guidance Catalogue revenue increased by 27.4% on a reported basis to 202.5m FY 2016 159.0m and 10.8% on a CER basis
Reported gross margin of 70.1% following the reclassification of certain costs FY 2016 70.2%.
On a like for like basis FY 2016 gross margin was 69.2% EBITDA margin was 32.5% FY 2016 33.6%.
Adjusted EBITDA margin was 33.8% FY 2016 34.9% reflecting the continued investment in the business Profit before tax PBT on a reported basis was 51.9m FY 2016 45.4m and 64.6m FY 2016 53.8m on an adjusted basis Reported diluted earnings per share EPS increased by 11.9% to 20.74 pence FY 2016 18.53 pence.
Adjusted diluted EPS increased by 13.9% to 25.46 pence FY 2016 22.35 pence Closing cash and cash equivalents and term deposits were 84.8m 30 June 2016 70.7m Proposed full year dividend increase of 14% to 10.18 pence per share FY 2016 8.91 pence Operational highlights Continued to gain market share globally as a result of our direct customer focus and digital marketing leadership Led stakeholder discussions to raise industry quality standards through knockout validation expansion of recombinant antibody portfolio and other quality initiatives Expanded use of the FirePlex formerly Firefly platform within the kitsassays range by introducing 142 validated antibody pairs and validated a range of these pairs in multiplex immunoassays Further expanded our addressable market in custom products and licensing by providing Abcam Inside for multiple pharmaceutical and diagnostic development partners Accelerated AxioMx technology milestone payments in recognition of technical success demonstrated with the unique antibody development capabilities at AxioMx Launched several of the Oracle Cloud modules of our new ERP system and made good progress towards full implementation in FY 2018 Completed recruitment of the Executive Leadership Team with the appointment of a new CFO as well as new hires of Senior VP of Technology and Senior VP of Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain Commissioned construction of Abcams purposebuilt global HQ at the expanding Biomedical Campus in Cambridge UK with expected occupancy in FY 2019 Constant currency is calculated by applying prior periods actual exchange rates to this periods results.
Unaudited figures in our preclose updat e stated 10.2% revenue growth.
As a result of the completion of the yearend financial review and audit actual total revenue growth in the year is 9.9%.
This refe rs to goods in processing costs w hich are costs incurred in receiving resizing and storing broughtin product.
These costs are only incurred in relation to selling product and management has concluded that it is more appropriate to include the costs in gross margin as a cost of sales to give a more accurate representation of the true cost of product sales.
These costs had previously been shown as an operating expense.
Excluding acquisition and integration costs the change in fair value of contingent consideration the initial incremental costs associated with the systems and process improvements and RandD tax credits relating to prior years.
Excluding acquisition and integration costs the change in fair value of contingent consideration unwinding of discount factor on contingent consideration and fees amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets the initial incremental costs associated with the systems and process improvements and RandD tax credits relating to prior years.
Excluding acquisition and integration costs the initial incremental costs of systems and process improvements unwinding of discount factor on contingent consideration and fees the change in fair value of contingent consideration amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets RandD tax credits relating to prior years and the tax effect of adjusting items.
1 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Highlights of our year Products We manufacture our own products in our specialist facilities worldwide as well as sourcing from over 400 partners.
This way we are able to offer scientists the newest and best research tools available globally regardless of source.
Customers
Our
Our
People
Our team is our biggest asset.
We have over 1000 employees and we are proud to have over 140 inhouse PhDs.
Nurturing employee excellence is key to our success and we continue to invest in the learning and development of our staff.
Our main product types
The human body makes proteins known as antibodies when it becomes infected by a foreign body like bacteria.
Each antibody binds to a very specific part of the surface of the foreign body that we call the antigen different antibodies bind to different antigens.
We can artificially generate antibodies to target antigens on molecules we are interested in studying to understand where they are located within a cell or tissue sample.
Researchgrade antibodies Our main focus is providing antibodies intended for basic research that is those typically used in academic pharma and biotech laboratories to investigate fundamental scientific questions.
In vitro diagnostic IVD antibodies IVDs are tools typically used in a clinical setting such as a hospital or medical institute lab to help diagnose a particular disease or condition.
These antibodybased tools are used on patient samples such as blood urine or tissue and help clinicians to diagnose or assess the progression of a disease.
IVDs can also provide information on the type of treatment to use and on disease prognosis.
Kits
Kits contain everything a researcher needs to run an experiment the reagents and protocol are provided and the contents have been optimised for maximum performance.
A researcher provides the sample of interest and the kit delivers everything else.
These tools enable life scientists to analyse components of living cells at the molecular level which is essential in a wide range of fields including drug discovery diagnostics and basic research.
We are headquartered in Cambridge UK with eleven additional locations across Asia the UK and the US.
Abcam is a producer and marketer of high quality protein research tools.
Leadership
Good corporate governance is fundamental to the success of our business.
The Board and its Committees have a key role in our governance framework by providing external and independent support and challenge understanding the views of shareholders and stakeholders and ensuring that a culture of good governance is promoted across the business.
2 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report About us Our global presence
Cambridge
UK we employ over people across twelve locations servicing researchers in more than countries.
Locations globally Abcam employees worldwide PhDs within the Company Countries delivered to worldwide Product revenue Revenues have grown significantly since we set out our new growth strategy in 2014 Core primary antibodies RabMAb primary antibodies Nonprimary antibodies Custom products and licensing FY 2014
FY 2015
FY 2016
FY 2017
Read more on our markets page 10 Read more on our strategy page 12 3 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report I am pleased to report that Abcam has made good progress both financially and strategically over the course of the past twelve months.
We have continued to successfully implement our growth strategy and once again delivered doubledigit catalogue revenue growth performing at levels well above market growth rates.
At the same time we have significantly strengthened the organisations underlying capabilities to deliver further growth in the future.
We are a global leader in the sale of research antibodies and have a reputation for providing high quality products along with comprehensive supporting scientific data to researchers who strive to understand the molecular basis of biology and disease.
We continue to ensure we are at the forefront of scientific advances by investing in new technologies as well as in methods that ensure the quality of our products including knockout validation.
We are excited about the successes we have made and the further opportunities we see in custom products and licensing.
As result we are putting increasing resources behind this part of our business.
I am grateful for the hard work enthusiasm and dedication of all our employees.
My thanks to them and to our shareholders for their ongoing support.
Murray Hennessy
4 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Chairmans introduction Strengthened the foundations for growth us to continue to deliver solid growth over the longterm.
Our new enterprise resource planning ERP system is a significant investment and is providing a new platform for the way in which we do business.
We have gone live with a number of modules over the course of the year and are making progress towards its full implementation in FY 2018.
Another goal for us this year was to progress the development of our global facilities.
Investments have been made to initiate and complete manufacturing and distribution improvement related projects in China the US and the UK.
We have completed the hiring of our Executive Leadership Team and have reorganised the business to create separate Research and Development and Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain teams.
Our dual growth strategy combines organic inhouse development with track record of successfully completing partnerships and acquisitions.
We remain committed to this strategy and continue to proactively evaluate the landscape for opportunities which align with our business objectives and that will provide increased scale.
Our team I am grateful for the hard work enthusiasm and dedication of all our employees.
My thanks to them and to our shareholders for their ongoing support.
Board colleagues for their hard work guidance and oversight of the business through a successful period of growth and change.
Gavin
Wood joined the
CFOelect in July 2016 replacing Jeff Iliffe as CFO and Executive Director on 12 September 2016.
Additionally Jim Warwick retired from Abcam and stepped down from the Board on 31 December 2016 and Anthony Martin and Michael Ross did not seek reelection as NonExecutive Directors at the AGM in November 2016 leaving the Board on 31 October 2016.
Senior Vice President of Technology and a Senior Vice President of Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain.
Governance
We are committed to high standards of governance and continue to comply in all material respects with the UK Corporate Governance Code despite it not being a requirement for an AIMlisted company.
In addition we operate a robust framework of systems and controls to maintain high standards throughout the Company.
Dividend
The Board is proposing a final dividend of 7.355 pence per share FY 2016 6.556 pence per share.
Added to the 2017 interim dividend of 2.825 pence per share this brings the total dividend for the financial year ended 30 June 2017 to 10.18 pence per share FY 2016 8.91 pence per share representing an increase of 14.3% over the previous year.
Outlook
We believe we are well placed to continue to gain market share from our leadership position in research antibodies and to continue to make progress in related markets.
We remain confident that we have the right strategy and the right people to achieve our longterm goals and build significant value for all our stakeholders.
Murray Hennessy
8 September 2017 5 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Core purpose At Abcam we are focused on providing research antibodies and other research tools to serve life scientists and enable our consumers to achieve their mission faster.
These products allow research into the role of signalling and regulatory molecules and proteins in biological pathways ultimately leading to treatments for diseases such as cancer and immune deficiency disorders.
Our catalogue includes approximately 112000 diverse products and including our revenues from custom products and licensing more than 40% of our total revenue is now derived from our inhouse manufactured products and innovation.
Creating value From Abcams inception we have increased the value of our products by adding performance data that is readily accessible to our consumers.
We are now expanding how we add value by increasing the feedback mechanisms for consumers acting on these insights and providing products for difficult targets.
Broadening our offering We constantly review opportunities to expand our offering to consumers by broadening our product range improving speed to market and accessing underpenetrated consumer groups in the markets we serve.
One area that has become increasingly attractive to us is broadening Abcams offerings as a development and supply partner in the diagnostics market.
Although nascent we have seen some exceptional success partnering with major diagnostic companies.
Our business model is designed to deliver sustainable longterm value for all our stakeholders.
Our business model is designed to deliver sustainable longterm value for all our stakeholders.
Consumers
Our comprehensive consumer insights personalised support data and continually growing range of resources are helping to accelerate scientific discovery.
Investors
Operating transparently and responsibly we regularly engage with our investors.
We manage our business to sustain attractive economics.
Employees
Essential to our success is listening to and recognising our employees achievements.
Our people remain highly motivated by the opportunities we provide to gain additional skills and experience and to help advance their careers at Abcam.
Suppliers and distributors We work closely with our suppliers and distributors we are transparent about how we work in terms of ethics quality the environment and general business principles and we have the same expectations of them.
Local communities to share best practice and knowledge in our sector.
We support young people with employment opportunities internships and work experience where possible.
Pathway
AAAI
Binder
Peptides
Proteins
Cellular assays
Direct conjugates
Singleplex assays Learning from consumer interaction and improving offering as a result Gain insights into how researchers work and what they need Prioritise highvalue pathways and targets and tailor and extend product portfolio Quickly offer what consumers need through digital and offline channels Strategic report Our business model 6 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A year of progress We have led Abcam further toward achieving our goal of becoming the most influential life sciences company for researchers worldwide.
We remain the market leader in the primary antibody market and have grown above market in all our product categories and territories despite a highly competitive landscape.
This outcome reflects our clear growth strategy strong product line and dedication from our team.
Our strategy leads to longterm sustainable growth FY 2017 was another year of good progress as we continue to build on the growth strategy that we announced in 2014.
Our customer feedback has never been stronger and we continue to make market share gains worldwide.
To prepare for further growth we have made substantial investments in our systems and processes our facilities and our people and we continue to work hard to ensure these investments support our longterm growth aspirations.
Underpinning our transformation is the solid financial foundation we have established.
Overall
2023 in terms of the life science research influence and commercial scale of the Group.
It has been a year of progress for Abcam as we have once again delivered on our financial goals.
We have delivered 10% constant currency revenue growth meeting our full year guidance while continuing to invest in the longterm future of the Company.
Alan Hirzel
Chief Executive Officer
7 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Strategic report Chief Executive Officers review Our strategy leads to longterm sustainable growth continued rates.
In year with political uncertainty in large markets such as the US and Europe our business has remained focused on serving customers well.
Our history and strengths in digital marketing continue to support our business well and we are making increasing use of data to enhance our product selection website and marketing in order to attract new customers and satisfy more needs of our existing customers.
Our research useonly product catalogue revenues at reported values grew to 202.5m FY 2016 159.0m a 27.4% increase over the previous year.
By product type we continue to grow primary antibody revenue ahead of the global market growth rate.
Our
Constant currency revenues from RabMAb products are in line with our full year expectations growing by over 25% and now represent 41.5m of our total 159.8m primary research antibody revenue.
With over 11000 RabMAb primary antibodies in our catalogue 10000 of which are recombinant these and other recombinant antibodies are expected to continue to play an important part in our future growth.
Product quality is a priority for our customers and therefore major focus of our work and investment at
We are investing to increase the standards and breadth of product validation including over products that now benefit from market leading knockout validation.
Our investments in the latest antibody production technology mean that our 10000 recombinant antibodies ensure the highest standard of repeatability for researchers and drug development teams.
We continue to work closely with our suppliers to ensure that they meet our high standards.
Nonprimary antibody revenues on a constant currency basis grew 16% aggregated across several product categories.
Kits and assays are the largest subcategory within this part of our product portfolio representing approximately 60% of the revenue.
Following the midyear revision to lower growth targets for this portfolio the products performed within our expectations and all product categories within this group grew at doubledigit levels versus the prior year.
Kits and assays remain a very important growth opportunity for Abcam.
These products contain all the reagents researchers need to run an experiment and save researchers considerable time.
For example our SimpleStep ELISA kit reduces the time it takes to run the simple ELISA experiment from approximately four hours to just ninety minutes with the added benefit that the kit minimises potential variability between experiments.
We are investing and innovating to move our market leading antibodies into these products as rapidly as possible.
In the last year we have created new assay products from integrating antibody and assay technologies from our recently acquired companies.
These combinations resulted in the introduction of approximately 500 new products including matched antibody pairs singleplex immunoassays and multiplex immunoassays using the FirePlex particle platform.
Reported revenue
Increase
FY 2017 FY 2016 Geographic split The Americas 86.5 68.9 25.5% 7.9% EMEA 57.1 47.7 19.7% 7.2% Japan 17.3 12.3 40.4% 11.6% China 26.5 18.8 40.9% 27.8% Rest of Asia Pacific 15.1 11.3 33.6% 13.8% Catalogue revenue 202.5 159.0 27.4% 10.8% Other revenue 14.6 12.7 15.1% 0.4% Total reported revenue 217.1 171.7 26.5% 9.9% Product split Core primary antibodies 118.3 98.1 20.7% 4.9%
Nonprimary antibody products 42.7 32.1 33.0% 15.6% Catalogue revenue 202.5 159.0 27.4% 10.8% Includes royalty income custom products and licensing revenue.
Beyond the research use product market that we serve through our catalogue we are working to grow our custom products and services by working with leading diagnostic and pharmaceutical companies worldwide.
Forecasts estimate that the end market value of antibody and immunoassay use in diagnostics and therapeutics is expected to grow to circa 80bn by 2022.
We believe Abcam can address up to 5bn of that total through in vitro diagnostic IVD products other antibodies and immunoassays and biological therapeutics.
We have an emerging reputation for successfully partnering with pharmaceutical diagnostic and instrument companies.
These businesses work with immunoassays that they then take to market.
Abcam benefits from the relationships through opportunities to license and from downstream milestones and potential royalties as well as from the opportunity to sell the researchgrade version of the antibody or immunoassay into our core research markets via our website.
This is a model we are replicating across many commercial agreements around the world to establish future growth for our business.
8 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Chief Executive Officers review continued Underlying markets growing We observed singledigit underlying market growth for our products in all regions and customer segments with one exception
China continues to invest public funds to support life science strategy such that we are seeing 1215% annual revenue growth for the markets our products serve.
In our largest market the US it has been a year of uncertainty around the funding environment following the presidential election.
This resulted in an eventual increase in National Institute of Health NIH funding for 2017 coupled with a buoyant biopharma cycle.
In Europe there has been increased funding but Brexit has caused some disruption to the UK market as researchers move to replace EU research funding with domestic sources.
Elsewhere in the world the markets continued to grow but growth remained relatively low compared to the major three of the
China and
Our five strategic priorities Grow our core reagents business faster than the market.
Establish new growth platforms.
Scale organisation capabilities.
Sustain attractive economics.
Selectively pursue partnerships and acquisitions.
Read more about our achievements against these priorities in the Strategic Priorities section.
The Company introduced these strategic priorities in 2014 and the broad headlines remain the same and they continue to serve us well.
As the
KPIs continue to be updated to reflect the needs of the Company and the dynamic markets in which we operate.
Our KPI performance was within full year guidance for all measures Strategic KPIs FY 2017 FY 2017 target
Growth in constant currency revenue from nonprimary antibody products 16% 1520% Brand Net Promoter Score NPS 24% 2430% Market position 1 in primary antibodies 1 1 Abcam has consistently delivered against these strategic priorities and achieved growth rates ahead of the underlying market rate.
As the Company and the market direction are evolving we are refining our multiyear goals and KPIs.
For FY 2018 strategic priorities are as follows Sustain antibody and digital marketing leadership.
Expand in related growth markets.
Invest in operating capabilities to double our scale from 2016 to 2023.
Sustain attractive economics.
Supplement organic growth through acquisitions and partnerships.
As we indicated at the half year we have now revised our KPIs moving into 2018 to better reflect the overall direction of the business and our updated goals.
Updated strategic KPIs FY 2018 target Recombinant antibody revenue growth 2025% Immunoassay revenue growth 2025% Customer engagement transactional NPS 5565% Delivering results from our investments Business systems growth.
We are investing in building enhanced capabilities processes and systems centred around the Oracle Cloud ERP system.
We are putting significant emphasis on organisational preparation training and transformation to support the improvements that the deliver.
We are resolutely focused on delivering a high quality solution that is scalable and will deliver future efficiency improvements.
During the year we have chosen to adopt additional functionality including a Warehouse Management
HR and certain customer service modules and are making good progress towards full implementation in FY 2018.
UK facilities We currently operate from three separate sites in Cambridge which are not only at the end of their leases but also at the end of their operational lives.
We have started construction of our new
Cambridge
Biomedical
Campus in early following completion of the build and fitout.
Leadership Team
Executive
Leadership Team and are confident that we have the right team and expertise in place to lead Abcam in our next stage of development.
Outlook
There is significant momentum across the business as we continue to grow our revenues ahead of the market in every region we serve.
The investments we are making are enabling position for a successful future.
Based on our clearly defined strategy together with our history of results we expect our total revenue growth for FY 2018 to be similar to FY 2017s total growth rate.
Alan Hirzel
Chief Executive Officer
8 September 2017 9 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report The global life science research tools market is estimated to be 2.7bn of which the primary antibody research sector is estimated at 906m.
Academic funding is variable across countries but good increases have been seen this year in many regions with and US funding increasing by 6% compared with 2016.
The pharma and biotechnology industries continue to be steady end market supported by continuing medicines and in vitro diagnostics IVDs.
In particular IVD market forecasts estimate the market to grow to 80bn by 2022 and we are looking to further develop our custom and licensing capabilities to address this market.
Key markets and trends Key growth drivers Increased funding for life science research particularly to drive healthcare research into chronic diseases associated with an ageing population and the ongoing threat from communicable diseases.
Improved economic activity in certain regions particularly in the Middle East and Asia.
Technological and scientific advances such as development of advanced antibody manufacturing technologies and the emergence of revolutionary genome editing technologies such as CRISPR that allow us to speed up antibody production and improve validation.
Demand for more accurate and reliable antibodies and research tools by the research community to address the reproducibility crisis facing scientific research.
Substantial funding for collaborations between private and public organisations which improves funding in certain research areas e.
NIHs BRAIN Initiative Cancer Moonshot and the Precision Medicine Initiatives in the US and China.
The Americas US academic funding has seen a 2bn increase in NIH funding this year with the 21st Century Cures Act providing additional funding on top of the NIH budget.
Cancer and Alzheimers disease are receiving the biggest increases in funding with a cancerfocused precision medicine initiative being launched this year that may translate to increased opportunities in the IVD space.
There is uncertainty regarding the science budget beyond September with the threat that the Trump administration will try to cut budgets by 20% however Abcams business model means that it is well placed to mitigate any budget cuts.
Historically NIH funding changes have had limited impact on Abcams growth rate.
Read more on our KPIs page 14 10 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our markets Government investment into research remains flat for the fiscal year starting April 2017.
Japans declining population meaning fewer researchers alongside the lack of increased budget for science and technology has meant that Japans global share of scientific publications is decreasing.
However research grants are increasing at the top academic institutions with the top five national universities receiving almost half of the JPY100bn approximately 900m  funding.
Japan
Academic research in China continues to be well funded and a substantial precision medicine initiative is beginning in
9.2bn primarily for cancer research potentially presenting opportunities in the space.
Chinas pharmaceutical industry is also growing strongly having increased 10.4% from 2015 to 2016.
China
The Asia Pacific region has seen strong economic growth overall and many countries in the region have increased investment in scientific funding.
In South Korea scientific research funding remains very high and we are benefiting from strong investment by conglomerates private institutes and academia.
Singapore has increased spending in RandD in recent years to advance academic research into a commercial setting and we are growing well in this country as a result of our customer acquisition strategy.
Asia Pacific EU academic research funding increased strongly this year.
The total European Research Council ERC budget increased to 1.8bn an 8% increase from with approximately available for new life science projects in 2017.
Currently
Germany
UK and
EU funding winning 17% 16% and 13% of EU life science grants respectively.
With the continuation of the Horizon 2020 programme funding in the European Union is set to continue to grow until 2020.
The impending exit of the UK from the EU has created uncertainty around science funding in the UK which has the potential to slow demand.
However the
Brexit will lead to a material adverse impact on results.
EMEA
11 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Our strategic priorities What we promised for FY 2017 What we achieved Our new strategic priorities Grow our core reagents business faster than the market Our aim is to generate above market revenue growth from our existing consumer base as well as by attracting new consumers Continue to drive market share gain for primary antibodies including rabbit monoclonal antibodies Retain existing consumers and attract new ones by continuing to improve our digital and offline experiences Continue focus on high quality products which are specific selective and reproducible in the context for which our consumers use them launches.
Further process improvements have shortened lead times and further improved the success rates of launches Increased the number of RabMAb antibodies in our catalogue to over 11000 Continued to grow our digital footprint to retain current customers and attract new ones.
Our integrated marketing approach is driving better conversion across multiple channels Continued to work closely with suppliers to add validation data to ensure consistent quality supply as well as delivering improvements in quality by continuing to invest in technologies including knockout validation of an increasing proportion of our broad recombinant antibody range Sustain antibody and digital marketing leadership Continue high value focus to gain share Continue validation initiative and raising quality standards Implement next phase of digital marketing vision Establish new growth platforms Our aim is to deliver enhanced value by the addition of attractive new product ranges or services in either the same or adjacent segments and by extending our geographic penetration Continue to strengthen our position in China Continue to grow our kits and assays business further leveraging our RabMAb and FirePlex technologies Continue to increase share of unpenetrated segments Grow custom products and licensing Increased our geographic reach across China Introduced antibody pairs and RabMAb antibodies in SimpleStep ELISA kits used the
Significantly expanded electronic catalogue connections to largevolume customers Further expanded our addressable market in custom products and licensing by providing Abcam Inside for multiple pharmaceutical and diagnostic development partners Expand in related growth markets Grow kits and assays in line with multiyear aspiration Expand the number of Abcam Inside projects and framework agreements Our strategy is designed to increase growth and improve our longterm financial performance in support of our ambition to become the most recommended brand by life science researchers.
12 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our strategic priorities Our strategic priorities What we promised for FY 2017 What we achieved Our new strategic priorities Scale organisation capabilities Our aim is to attract and retain the best people empower them to succeed and build the capabilities necessary to deliver our strategy Finalise Executive Leadership Team hires and integrate and align teams Implement the Oracle Cloud modules successfully and in accordance with the implementation plan Progress activities to consolidate our Cambridge UK facilities Hiring of Executive Leadership Team completed with the appointment of new CFO as well as new hires of Senior Vice President of Technology and Senior Vice President of Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain Reorganised the business to create Research and Development and Global Manufacturing and Supply Chain teams Launched several of the Oracle modules and made good progress towards full ERP implementation Commenced construction of new HQ on the Cambridge Biomedical Campus and on track for build completion at the end of 2018 Invest in operating capabilities to double our scale Further improve organisational engagement Successfully implement Oracle Cloud and complete alignment of organisation Complete implementation of Supply Chain and Manufacturing function Sustain attractive economics Our aim is to ensure operational efficiency and cost effectiveness to deliver sustainable profitable growth Optimise and further improve custom service role and economics Consolidate procurement and identify cost savings Scaleup of AxioMx production Repositioned our RandD and manufacturing resources to align with our multiyear strategy and strengthened focus and accountability on manufacturing new product development and longterm RandD Global procurement function and processes developed and strengthened including the publication of our Supplier Code of Conduct AxioMx fitout completed on time and to budget doubling capacity for in vitro recombinant binder discovery and validation.
Successfully completed a number of milestones relating to AxioMxs intellectual property and technology development and added new products to the catalogue Sustain attractive economics Deliver major capital projects with planned costs and time Realise productivity gains Move to direct distribution in at least one additional market Selectively pursue partnerships and acquisitions Our aim is to supplement the other components of our strategy by making acquisitions of and working with partners that add to our competitive advantage in the life science market Continue to actively seek out and evaluate new partnerships acquisitions collaborations and investment opportunities that support our strategy and leverage our competitive advantage
Supplement organic growth through acquisitions and partnerships Continue to strengthen relationships for future deals 13 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report We measure our performance against a number of KPI targets.
Success against these KPIs forms a component of the Executive Directors and senior managements incentives.
Ongoing targets Maintain 1 position in primary research antibodies.
Gain share in at least two other product categories.
How we performed Market research has confirmed that we remain the 1 company for research antibodies and that we continue to gain market share across other categories.
Our 2018 KPIs As indicated at the half year we have revised our KPIs moving into 2018 to better reflect the overall direction of the business and our updated strategic priorities.
Revised KPIs for FY 2018 are listed below Recombinant antibody revenue growth 20%25% Immunoassay revenue growth 20%25% Customer engagement transactional NPS 55%65% Market position 1in primary research antibodies Strategic alignment Strategic alignment How we performed At a constant exchange rate CER growth rate of 25.2% our RabMAb revenues despite increasing the target in March 2017 have again outperformed our high expectations in the year.
RabMAb primary antibodies CER revenue growth 25% 25% FY 2017 18%22 % revised in March 2017 to 23%27%.
FY 2017 target 29.5% FY 2016 24.2% FY 2015 17.1% FY 2014 How we performed We revised the guidance of our nonprimary antibody revenues in March 2017 due to large volume orders in the previous period not repeating.
Led by our kits and assays business nonprimary antibody CER revenue growth was 16%.
Strategic alignment Nonprimary antibody products CER revenue growth 16% 16% FY 2017 20%25 % revised in March 2017 to 15%20%.
24%30 %.
FY 2017 target 30.3% FY 2016 28.2% FY 2015 34.3% FY 2014 Strategic alignment Brand Net promoter score NPS 24% How we performed We conducted several formal consumer surveys during the year to determine the likelihood of consumers recommending Abcams products and services to a colleague.
The balance of promoters and detractors is then computed into an NPS using standard industry methods.
24% FY 2017 26% FY 2016 24% FY 2015 18% FY 2014 FY 2017 target Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our KPIs Abcams risk management strategy is to identify assess and effectively mitigate any existing or emerging significant risks that it faces in accordance with the Groups risk appetite.
It is recognised however that no risk management strategy can provide absolute assurance against loss.
Risk management framework Our risk management framework provides the structure within which principal risks affecting our business are managed and sets tone culture and appetite for risk.
The Board is accountable for carrying out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those threatening its business model future performance solvency and liquidity.
The Board in conjunction with the Audit and Risk Committee performed the latest full assessment in June 2017 reviewing the progress of agreed risk mitigation strategies and any changes to the materiality of key risks to ensure that the overall risk profile of the Group is appropriate to its strategy and risk appetite.
The principal risks form the backbone of the risk register that is maintained by the Group Executive Leadership Team.
The Audit and Risk Committee reviews and approves the adequacy and effectiveness of risk management and internal controls including the risk register and reviews changes in risks and mitigations regularly with formal review by the full Board twice a year.
Management is responsible for the initial identification and evaluation of risks and the implementation of policies and procedures intended to reduce risk.
It implements mitigating actions in relation to significant risks embeds risk management in the internal controls system and cultivates the tone of an open and receptive approach to addressing business risk across the
Risk policies are regularly reviewed with regard to current market conditions and the Groups activities.
A number of compliance initiatives have been rolled out over the course of the year including our new employee code of conduct called How we do things at Abcam.
Subsidiary companies and Group functions supported by the internal audit function are responsible for identifying assessing and managing risks within their office or function.
The Group financial management team has added responsibilities to challenge and review the risks identified review changes in the business that may give rise to new risks or risk areas and to ensure that significant risks are escalated to the risk register.
As a result of the above the Board believes it has taken all reasonable steps to satisfy itself that the risk management process is effective and fit for purpose.
Risk appetite Risk appetite describes the types and amount of risk that the Board is willing to take or accept to achieve our strategic and operational objectives and serves as boundary to our strategy.
Our culture is based on the entrepreneurial and collaborative spirit that has supported the rapid growth of the business to date.
The Board aims to enable the scalability of the business by reinforcing appropriate controls without hindering its ability to continue to grow and take advantage of opportunities.
In doing so it is committed to maintaining high ethical standards and complying with the applicable laws and regulations of the countries in which it operates.
Furthermore the Group has no appetite for significant reputational risk or for not providing appropriate facilities and tools for our staff to operate effectively.
During the year the mitigating actions.
The updated risk appetite statements have been embedded in the risk register and the risk policy.
Principal risks A summary of the principal risks their linkage to our strategy and an explanation of how the Group mitigates each risk is set out in the table on pages 16 to 19.
Whilst the Group is exposed to some risks wider than those listed the most material for the Group.
In reaching this conclusion the Board discussed the UK Corporate Governance Code 2016 Code requirements to give due regard to risks to the Groups strategy.
Although Brexit and the result of the last American presidential election have introduced more uncertainty into these business environments the macroeconomic risks were considered to be covered within the breadth of the existing principal risks.
At this point apart from the effect of the devaluation of Sterling there are no immediate material effects of Brexit on Abcams risk profile.
There may be other risks and uncertainties which are unknown to the future.
These risks may cause the Groups results to vary materially from historical and expected results.
Further additional information on the Groups financial risk management strategy can be found in note 24 to the financial statements.
15 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Our risks Inadequate integration or leverage of acquired businesses Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Misjudging key elements of an acquisition or failing to integrate it in an efficient and timely manner would disrupt existing operations Detailed integration plan and dedicated integration teams in place prior to acquisition Regular communication on progress highlighting variations and remedial action taken Our ERP system is expected to enhance our ability to integrate acquisitions No new acquisitions in the year Attained technical milestones envisaged in AxioMx acquisition Increased competition specifically pinpointed to disruptive developments Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
The market remains fragmented and competitive.
Focus is mainly on new technologies channels and workarounds with opportunities dependent on rapidly evolving technological developments and consumer needs.
To maintain our position as the market leader in primary antibodies and to gain share in the other markets in which we operate it is essential to stay at the forefront of industry developments Maintain market knowledge and monitor competitor developments and technologies
Well established and progressive product content datasheets supply channels and logistic network Maintain investment in RandD and consumer insight programmes Appropriate intellectual property registrations and enforcement Continuous improvement in product quality to better meet customer needs Hiring and developing the right talented people Continuous commitment to product differentiation through innovation and product quality improvements AxioMx gives potential for rapid in vitro antibody development across a wider set of targets Further development of FirePlex technology Specialist reviews of technology developments in the market continue Longerterm viability statement The Code requires the Board to assess the future prospects of the by going concern provisions and to issue a viability statement.
Last year the Board selected a fiveyear assessment period for the viability statement as this aligns with our innovation pipeline and strategic planning window and more than covers the period with large cash outflows on live major capital projects.
On review the Board determined that this is still the most appropriate time period given our business model and strategy.
The process adopted to assess viability this year followed that undertaken in 2016 and involved collaborative input from a range of business functions to model a series of theoretical stress test scenarios linked to the Groups principal risks.
These scenarios included both significant adverse financial outcomes and operational failures.
Consideration was given to the impact of mitigations as well as their interdependencies.
The Audit and Risk Committee reviewed the process before the viability evaluation was provided to the Board to assist in its assessment.
The Directors have assessed the Groups prospects and resilience with reference to its current financial position and prospects its recent and historical financial performance and forecasts the Boards risk appetite and the principal risks and mitigating factors.
The Group is operationally and financially strong and has a track record of consistently generating profits and cash and this is expected to continue.
Based on this assessment the Directors confirm that they have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the next five years.
16 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our risks continued Table of principal risks The direction of change during the year is illustrated by the arrow in the Change column.
Please note that this refers to the overall change in the risk to the Group following mitigating actions.
Increased risk No change to risk Decreased risk Identification valuation and pursuit of acquisitions and investments Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Abcam fails to acquire businesses which could bring added value to Abcam Abcam attempts to acquire too many businesses in a period leading to inadequate diligence integration planning dilution of the Abcam brand andor distraction of management from more valuable initiatives Abcam does not identify risks in the acquired business that would have prevented acquisition The valuation of the acquired business is not justified through failure to hit technical targets commercial underperformance andor the absorption of resource which impacts on performance elsewhere in the Group External communications maintained with advisors and ownersmanagement of businesses to ensure Abcam achieves sufficient visibility of businessespotential transactions across the market Potential targets prioritised to ensure sufficient time and care spent on diligence Rigorous due diligence process conducted using internal and external experts to ensure Abcam fully evaluates the costs and benefits expected to accrue before any business purchase Business case for acquisition articulated clearly and key assumptions financial technical and operational identified and stresstested to ensure sufficient contingency in the acquisition process Specialist reviews of technology and business developments in the market continue Reputational risk Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Consumer trust is adversely affected reducing demand for Abcams products Increased cost of finance Impact on staff retention Potential difficulties in dealing with new and existing suppliers Adherence to ethical policy with regular supplier visits and trainingsignoff of all staff for adherence to antibribery policy Continued drive for improved product quality e.
Consumer Net Promoter Score regularly measured and Life Sciences Survey monitored Feedback from other consumer interactions including surveys is monitored and appropriately reported internally and addressed Consumer complaints and Abcams responses are monitored at a senior level to ensure appropriate action taken External communications are reviewed at an appropriately senior level Codes of conduct in place for employees suppliers and distributors Continuation of the initiative to use the quality of products in the catalogue as a differentiator Formalised quality management system covering process documentation competency and training New code of conduct for employees incorporating all relevant anticorruption legislation issued and training provided globally in local languages New codes of conduct for suppliers and distributors More rigorous ongoing due diligence process for key suppliers Online training on bribery and corruption developed and delivered plus refreshed communication routes for whistleblowing.
Additional inperson briefings in Asian facilities Cyber security risks including loss of data and website inaccessibility Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Abcam has exploited the use of online and eCommerce systems and relies on its website to attract customers and make sales Continued extensive investment in IT systems and training Monitor evolving threats and anticipate risks.
Regular security reviews including penetration testing by external experts Physical and software safeguards in place IT disaster recovery processes Cyber security insurance policy More instances of high profile global cyber attacks Website security penetration tested by a third party Cyber security audit by a third party Regular public website failover drills Additional improved security measures identified and implementation started Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Table of principal risks continued Loss of output at any Group manufacturing or logistics facility Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Loss of manufacturing or logistics output at any important facility risks disruption to sales operations Strategic location of the six manufacturing facilities across the world Business continuity planning and disaster recovery plans Saleable stocks of finished products held in logistics hubs globally.
Backup hybridomas are stored in more than one location Business interruption insurance Circa 61% of catalogue revenues come from OEM suppliers Strict quarantine procedures for cell lines with tested procedures for responding to mycoplasma infection Cryogenic storage and fridges are covered by alarms Infrastructure improvements in Branford and Hangzhou to enhance security of supply Further progress in the initiative to better align inventory holdings to sales patterns Business growth is constrained by not having appropriate people resources and infrastructure in place Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Abcam has enjoyed rapid growth increasing the size of our operation and the number of people we employ.
Our operational and IT infrastructure needs to be robust efficient and scalable for the Group to continue to manage its growth the contribution made by Abcams highly skilled and dedicated staff has been and will continue to be essential to Abcams future success Extensive investment in IT to maximise scalability security and usability Global content delivery partner used to increase reliability and access speed for static website content Dynamic website content served from an external fully supported data centre Investment in global premises to ensure they are fit to support current operations and mediumterm growth plans Open employee communication including employee NPS monitoring and improvement Operation of share ownership schemes Provision of significant opportunities for learning and development First modules of investment programme on business process transformation and ERP system implemented Facility investments in Branford Management and leadership training programme delivered globally to all senior management teams and being rolled out to middle management Signed agreement for the construction of our new global headquarters on the Cambridge Biomedical Campus and building works underway ERP projectIT infrastructure Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
ERP project costs more than planned The project timetable slips and there is a knockon effect in resourcing elsewhere in the business Savings do not materialise Staff morale falls Consumer service levels fall Unable to complete MandA The ERP project is closely aligned with the strategic objectives and appropriate resource is in place for business as usual and to handle training Appropriate resource is committed to advisors and backfilling inhouse staff who will work on the project Oracle Cloud means limited customisation but a greater need for business transformation Global systems integrator working in partnership with Abcam and Oracle to ensure a quality golive Appropriatebest practice project management and governance structures in place Regular monitoring of progress and remedial action Design complete first modules implemented.
Remaining modules have been unit tested and systems integration testing commenced Detailed plans are in place for systems integration testing and user acceptance testing with changed approach to testing and training due to a greater understanding of the complexity of integrations the functionality provided by the ERP system and the impact on our global business procedures and workforce Audit of ERP project governance processes by an external advisor Significant investment in external expertise in project management and key deliverables such as testing integration and business transformation Backfilledcontractor staff to support testing and golive Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our risks continued Significant exchange rate movements Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
The Group reports its results and pays dividends in Sterling.
Operating and manufacturing companies trade in local currency.
Our main exposures are against the US Dollar Euro Japanese Yen and Chinese Renminbi Clear communications strategy for results to ensure Groups currency exposures and hedging policies are understood Forward cover where appropriate and in line with the Group hedging policy Where possible created natural hedges matching sales and costs in the same currency More volatility in FX markets as a result of global macroeconomic and political factors including Brexit and the US presidential election Continued use of US Dollar Euro Japanese Yen and Chinese Renminbi forward contracts Availability of research funding Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
Any substantial reduction in funding as a response to a fiscal contraction in one of our significant territories could have an adverse effect on the demand for our products.
Brexit has introduced some uncertainty into European markets and the US future research funding position has become less predictable since the US election result Mitigated to an extent given that Abcam trades globally and such issues are likely to be country specific Our products are used as research consumables which are more resilient to budget cuts than large capital investment projects Further expansion into high growth markets and high margin products Continue geographic penetration to diversify revenues from any single government funding source Diversification of geographic reach in particular through expanded penetration in China
RabMAb products Broadening of our customer base to include different customer segments with different funding sources Increased uncertainty in the funding environment in the UK and the US following Brexit and US election Noncompliance with laws and regulations Principal risk and why it is relevant Key mitigation Activity during the year Change
We are unable to manufacture products or to ship them May lead to the closure of a location Inability to report externally reputational impact and late filing penalties Compliance with legislation and codes of best practice Regular external health and safety audits checks and reporting Subscription to available database and use of health and safety and importexport experts to ensure we are up to date Ongoing training Legal department monitors changes to laws and regulations Legal department monitors changes to laws and regulations and oversees actions to ensure compliance Various tax audits completed with no significant findings Transfer pricing structures reviewed and fully implemented across the Group Permanent establishment review by external advisor Code of conduct and antibribery training for all staff 19 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Our communities our goal of helping advance life science research.
We aim to help communities through programmes that inspire the next generation of scientists and by supporting life science research through corporate giving and fundraising activities.
Partnering with In2Science to encourage the next generation of scientists In2Science is a charitable organisation that encourages students from low socioeconomic and underrepresented backgrounds to pursue scientific careers.
The twoweek programme provides placements at leading research organisations for students to work on cuttingedge scientific research 78% of students that go through the programme progress onto science degrees and STEM careers.
Abcam is proud to be partnering with In2Science and this year launched an image competition for the students during their research placements.
The entries were outstanding and demonstrated high engagement of the students with their projects.
In 2017 In2Science will be expanding from London to include programmes in Harlow and Cambridge and Abcam will be working closely with the charity to launch a new bespoke mentoring programme.
Charitable donations
In2Science and Breast Cancer Now.
We have also supported charities through fundraising activities and volunteering.
In the UK a team of employees ran the Cambridge half marathon in aid of Breast Cancer Now raising over 8000 and our US offices are actively involved in volunteering and this year have volunteered with Habitat for Humanity to help build a home for families in South Boston and organised a holiday toy drive to provide gifts for families in need.
Our people Attracting and retaining the best talent is crucial to the success of our business.
During the year we invested in new global careers website which won the best website at the
Recruitment
Awards in November 2016.
We have started to roll out a new global onboarding process where senior leaders welcome all new employees and spend time explaining our unique culture and what we expect of people.
To improve how we communicate we launched a new intranet where we regularly share stories and updates on business performance employee events and achievements.
We have started to publish detailed infographics celebrating key achievements and results over the course of the year.
Every quarter we hold our Global Conversation  a meeting where we present business updates and recognise employee and team achievements.
These are broadcast live and employees both present at the meeting and watching in other global locations can ask questions.
Employees across the globe can watch live plus they are recorded and posted on our intranet for anyone not able to join live.
They are also translated for employees where English is not their first language.
We provide employees with an anonymous question service Ask Alan  allowing anyone to send a question on any topic to the CEO.
With the launch of our code of conduct this year we introduced global hotline for raising concerns and questions.
We have continued to listen to our people through our annual allemployee survey which this year had response rate of nearly 90% and saw a rise on employee Net Promoter Score of over points.
We have expanded our staff forums adding permanent ones in the US as well as the UK.
These give us additional opportunities to listen to our people.
Underpinning our ambition to become the most influential life science company for researchers worldwide is Abcams reputation for ethical business practices and behaving in a socially and environmentally responsible way.
Our sustainability activities are around three key areas our communities our people health safety and the environment In2Science and Abcam image competition winner  IIhaam Ibrahim.
20 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Sustainability Meet our first Trailblazers This year saw the launch of Trailblazers  our new apprenticeship scheme that gives people the opportunity to become qualified within working environment while helping us to grow talent within the business.
We will be hosting apprentices in
HR customer experience the lab and logistics.
We have already welcomed our first two apprentices based in the lab.
Enabling our employees to serve customers faster We have been reviewing and improving our global systems and processes to ensure they fit our future needs as we continue to grow at pace.
By implementing a new ERP system we hope to build the foundations of a smarter faster and more scalable organisation.
This longterm project is in its implementation phase this year we have released the
HR function to support the global business more effectively.
We have also released modules that integrate our sales service and marketing functions allowing us to understand and meet customer needs better and streamlining our processes globally.
Health safety and the environment ensure we follow legal requirements and best practice standards.
Following sustainable practices is important to Abcams success and we continue to look for ways to improve our environmental impact and operational efficiency.
Gold award for sustainable travel
Cambridge UK.
This award reflects initiatives introduced in the past year such as branded cycle wear a new Lifeshare website and cycle to work schemes and also how engaged and committed our employees are to sustainable travel.
Investing in our locations are pleasant and safe.
We have made good progress with our global offices this year.
Construction of our new Cambridge HQ has begun.
The new
Cambridgebased operations and employees under one roof in a new stateoftheart facility.
The new and will improve efficiency across all business functions.
We have also refurbished or expanded many of our existing facilities we have completed refurbishment of the AxioMx site in Branford and the Boston office and expanded our Shanghai and Eugene offices.
We provide employees with a positive and healthy work environment where they are listened to and recognised for their contributions.
In the UK all permanent employees have the opportunity to share in the success of Abcam via the award of free shares and can participate in our Share Incentive Plan SIP.
As of
38% of
Share
Incentive Plan.
How we do things at Abcam Trust is a fundamental element of our business.
We want to be valued for the high quality research tools we provide and trusted for the way in which we work.
Underpinning our ambition is Abcams reputation for ethical business practices and high standards of integrity.
We have launched our code of conduct called
Abcam.
This defines who we are as company how we make decisions what standards we expect and how we behave amongst ourselves and with others.
All of our people have been trained on this.
We have also launched codes of conduct for our suppliers and distributors which clearly state our expectation that our suppliers and distributors demonstrate a culture that reinforces ethical and lawful behaviours.
I have always been passionate and enthusiastic about science and cannot wait to develop my understanding and knowledge.
I look forward to contributing to Abcam and am very grateful to be given this amazing opportunity.
Jade Smith Apprentice Laboratory Technician Innovation and Manufacturing  Purification 21 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report 22 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Total reported revenues for the year increased by 26.5% to 217.1m.
Sterling was considerably weaker against the basket of foreign currencies in which the the entire year following the UK Brexit vote.
Adjusting for this weakening in Sterling CER revenue growth was 9.9% FY 2016 15.9%.
Catalogue revenue growth is up 27.4% on 2016 financial year 10.8% at CER with RabMAb sales growing 43.9% 25.2% at CER.
Catalogue revenue represented 93.3% of total revenues.
Custom products and licensing contributed 6.7% to total revenues.
This has been an area of increased focus for the years.
Summary
Reported revenue for the year increased by 26.5% to 217.1m FY 2016 171.7m At constant exchange rates CER catalogue product revenues grew by 10.8% and total revenues by 9.9% The reported profit before tax for the year increased by 14.3% to 51.9m FY 2016 45.4m.
Adjusted profit before tax increased by 20.1% to 64.6m FY 2016 53.8m Strong operating cash generation with net cash inflow from operating activities of 66.4m FY 2016 47.3m and closing cash and cash equivalents of 84.8m FY 2016 68.9m 18.5m continued investment in infrastructure systems and processes including our
Cloud
ERP project to support future scalability of the business Gavin Wood Chief Financial Officer Strategic report Our financials The Directors use a number of alternative performance measures including adjusted profit measures that are considered key to understanding the performance.
The measures and their use are defined and reconciled in the Alternative Performance Measures section.
23 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Gross margins Reported gross margin was in line with the prior year at 70.1% FY 2016 70.2%.
However this reported number was after the reclassification of goodsin processing costs from administration and management expenses in the year.
Restating FY 2016 gross margin on a like for like basis results in a gross margin of 69.2% for the prior year an expansion of 90 basis points in FY 2017.
The expansion in gross margin comes from both product mix and productivity improvements across our manufacturing sites.
Administration and management expenses We have continued to invest in Abcams capabilities people processes and systems to support and drive our medium and longterm growth and this has increased our cost base.
Administration and management expenses were also impacted by the effect of our forward currency contracts because hedging the positive effect of currency rates on revenue results in an offsetting charge to administrative costs.
Administration and management expenses increased by 17.0m 28% to 78.4m.
Included in the increase are 11.4m owing to the relative weakness of Sterling consisting of 3.5m in relation to costs denominated in the currency of the
Sterling results in higher charges to expenses and of net currency losses from forward selling currency contracts together with transaction and translational currency impacts 3.0m additional performancerelated remuneration charges driven by the strong Group results in the year 1.4m spend to further strengthen commercial and support teams as part of building business scalability with key people being recruited for IVD an area of future strategic importance and marketing teams supporting the RabMAb and core primaries product categories and 2.0m cost increase in global operations and logistics related to the increase in revenue volumes and organisation structure improvements including securing key senior roles to build inhouse expertise in global operational processes and increased premises space to accommodate expansion of operations and the costs associated with closing small reagent manufacturing facility in
Groups manufacturing footprint.
We have realised oneoff benefits within administrative and management expenses during the year comprising of a release of bad debt provision of following an update to the of AxioMx in November 2015.
Research and development expenditure Research and development RandD expenditure relates to the development of new products as well as costs incurred in identifying and implementing production process improvements.
These costs do not meet the requirements to be capitalised as an intangible asset and are therefore expensed through the income statement.
Whilst total RandD expenditure increased by 5.8m to 18.6m FY 2016 12.8m there were certain oneoff costs within this total.
These include the effect of exchange rate movements that contributed 1.1m of the increase the amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets which increased by due to the full year impact of the assets acquired as part of the AxioMx Inc acquisition in FY16 and the FirePlex platform previously held as in progress and therefore not amortised and a oneoff 1.3m prior year RandD tax credit in FY 2016.
Following these adjustments the underlying increase in
AxioMx costs compared with only eight months in depreciation charges from capitalised development costs.
The Group remains focused on improving the quality of its product catalogue and invested 0.9m during the year sustaining a similar level of investment as in the prior year.
Investing in infrastructure systems and processes We are investing in our IT systems infrastructure capabilities and business processes and have selected Oracle Cloud as our core ERP system.
We had targeted a full implementation of the ERP system in late 2017.
We now expect the remaining modules to be implemented in FY 2018.
As a result of the incremental functionality and the extended project timelines we have chosen to invest in we expect the total cost of the project to be in the region of 44m to 46m split between capital expenditure of 29m to 31m and operating expenses of 15m.
In
FY with the rampup of work performed on the
Cloud
ERP project we incurred capital expenditure of FY 2016 5.5m and incremental operating costs of 4.4m FY 2016 4.0m as well as depreciation of 0.6m on the modules fully implemented and deployed in the year.
We are planning to relocate from our current premises in Cambridge to new purposebuilt
Cambridge
Biomedical
Campus in early 2019.
We entered into an agreement for a 20year lease in FY 2017 for the building.
As previously announced the total build cost will be in the region of 46.3m with Abcam contributing approximately 16m.
Additionally professional fees laboratory and office design costs and office fitout costs will be in the region of 8m.
During the year we have spent approximately 1.1m of capital expenditure on our new global HQ and also transferred 6.1m to an escrow account to partly fund our element of the build costs.
We have also expanded our Branford Connecticut site during the year to enhance the manufacturing capacity of our AxioMx business and as noted above we have made significant investment in the headcount of our support operational and commercial functions.
Earnings and tax Reported profit before tax for the year was 51.9m FY 2016 45.4m.
This was after finance costs of 3.4m FY 2016 1.1m in relation to the unwind of the discount on contingent consideration and fees associated with the early settlement during the year of the remaining contingent consideration liability from the AxioMx acquisition.
After taking into account the acquisitionrelated income and costs incremental costs associated with the ERP improvements and the tax losses relating to the Epitomics acquisition claimed in the year the reported effective tax rate would be 18.3% FY 2016 17.6%.
Adjusted profit before tax for the year was on which the effective tax rate was 19.5% which includes a oneoff 1.9% rate reduction from 1.3m of prior year and one off tax charge adjustments FY 2016 53.8m and 16.0% respectively which included a oneoff 5.2% rate reduction from 2.8m of prior year tax charge adjustments.
Group profits arise in the
US and other overseas territories and as a consequence the effective tax rate is a blend of the varying tax rates in different jurisdictions.
24 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our financials continued Earnings and tax continued Basic earnings per share EPS were 20.90 pence FY 2016 18.61 pence on a profit after tax of 42.4m FY 2016 37.4m with adjusted EPS of 25.66 pence FY 2016 22.45 pence on an adjusted profit after tax of
The adjusting items are disclosed in the Alternative Performance Measures section.
Balance sheet Goodwill and other intangibles Goodwill at 30 June 2017 was 115.5m FY 2016 112.5m.
The increase of 3.0m is related to exchange rate movements due to the location of businesses acquired being predominantly based in the United States.
The Directors have performed the required impairment test and no impairment was necessary.
For more details please see note 12.
Other intangible assets at 30 June 2017 were 73.6m FY 2016 70.2m.
The increase primarily reflects capitalisation of software costs as part of the
ERP improvement project and exchange rate movements arising on assets where the functional currency of the entity to which the asset belongs is not Sterling.
The amortisation charge on acquisitionrelated intangible assets was movements as the functional currency of these assets is US Dollars.
The amortisation charge on the other intangible assets was FY 2016 3.8m including 0.6m of accelerated amortisation of existing software which was replaced by the
FY 2016 1.3m which is included within the incremental costs of the ERP improvements.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment additions of 10.2m FY 2016 8.0m have been made in the year.
This reflects continued investment in support of our growth strategy with spent on improvements to research and manufacturing sites including an investment of 2.4m in significant expansion of our Branford Connecticut site and 3.6m on continued development of the Groups product catalogue.
The capital expenditure figure above includes a 1.1m contribution to the initial ground preparation and fitout work for our
FY 2016 0.6m.
Noncurrent liabilities Consideration payable on the acquisition of AxioMx included an element of performancebased payments a contingent liability of 10.9m reflecting the expected future payment was included in noncurrent liabilities at 30 June 2016.
During the year an early settlement of certain milestones was negotiated and performance against the other outstanding milestones was met.
Consequently there is no further liability associated with this acquisition.
See note on page 91 for further details.
Cash flow Strong cash generation from the business continued in the year resulting in cash inflow from operations of
FY including favourable working capital movements of reconciliation of the adjusted measure is included in the Alternative Performance Measures section.
Cash outflow on investment activities of
FY outflow of for the initial acquisition consideration and additional spend compared with FY 2016 of 5.7m for the stepup in capital activity for the ERP improvements and on the new HQ building.
In relation to the new terms.
This is excluded from cash and is disclosed within other receivables on the balance sheet.
The cash and cash equivalents position was including term deposits giving a net increase of 14.1m.
The term deposits have matured during the year and there was no bank debt at 30 June 2017.
Looking forward and people at Abcam.
These investments and our financial strength will enable us to continue to deliver against our commitments to grow revenue sustainably and continue to fulfil our mission to help life science researchers discover more.
Gavin Wood Chief Financial Officer 8 September 2017 25 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Alternative performance measures The Groups performance is assessed using a number of financial measures which are not defined under IFRS the financial reporting framework applied by the Group.
These measures are therefore considered alternative performance measures APMs.
Management uses the adjusted or alternative measures as part of their internal financial performance monitoring and when assessing the future impact of operating decisions.
The measures allow more effective yearonyear comparison and identification of core business trends by removing the impact of items occurring either outside the normal course of operations or as a result of intermittent activities such as a corporate acquisition.
The principles to identify adjusting items have been applied on a basis consistent with previous years.
The measures used in the financial review are defined in the table below and reconciliations to the nearest related IFRS measure are included subsequently on pages 26 and 27.
Nature of measure Related IFRS measure Related IFRS source Definition Userelevance
Operating Profit Operating profit Consolidated income statement Based on the related IFRS measure but excluding adjusting items Acquisitionrelated income arising on the settlement of contingent consideration of the AxioMx acquisition in FY 2016 net of related discount unwind and related acquisition costs Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets across the Group Incremental costs associated with the implementation of a new global ERP system and associated processes Allows management to assess the performance of the business after removing the distortion of largeunusual items or transactions that are not reflective of the routine business operations Adjusted profit before tax Profit before tax Consolidated income statement
Basic EPS Consolidated income statement EBITDA Operating profit Consolidated income statement Consolidated earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation Provides management with an approximation of cash generation from operational activities Adjusted EBITDA Operating profit Consolidated income statement Consolidated earnings before interest tax depreciation amortisation and adjusting income items noted above Provides management with an approximation of cash generation from operational activities after removing the distortion of largeunusual items or transactions that are not reflective of the routine business operations
CER is achieved by applying the prior years actual exchange rates to the current years results Allows management to identify the relative yearonyear performance of the business by removing the impact of currency movements which are outside of managements control Free cash flow FCF Cash flow from operating activities Cash flow statement Free cash flow is the cash generated from operating activities less non acquisitionrelated capital expenditure Provides management with an indication of the amount of cash available for discretionary investing or financing after removing the distortion of largeunusual expenditures that are not reflective of the routine business operations 26 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Our financials continued Alternative performance measures continued The tables below show a reconciliation between the alternative measures and the related IFRS measures for financial performance and cash flows for the last two years.
Reconciliation of adjusted incomeexpense measures 30 June 2017
Acquisition related costsincome
RandD tax credit relating to prior year
IFRS measure Revenue 217098    217098 Cost of sales 64998    64998 Gross profit 152100    152100 Administration and management expenses 73440 523 4436  78399 Research and development expenses 14182 4383   18565 Operating profit 64478 4906 4436  55136 Operating profit margin % 29.7% 2.3% 2.0%  25.4% Finance incomeexpense 137 3399   3262 Profit before tax 64615 8305 4436  51874 Taxation 12620 2227 876  9517 Profit after tax 51995 6078 3560  42357 Earnings per share pence 1 Operating profit margin is operating profit divided by revenue.
30 June 2016
Acquisition related costsincome
RandD tax credit relating to prior years
FRS income statement Revenue 171673    171673 Cost of sales 51142    51142 Gross profit 120531    120531 Administration and management expenses 55231 2206 3955  61392 Research and development expenses 11662 2467  1308 12821 Operating profit 53638 4673 3955 1308 46318 Operating profit margin % 31.2% 2.7% 2.3% 0.8% 27.0% Finance incomeexpense 144 1050   906 Profit before tax 53782 5723 3955 1308 45412 Taxation 8630 994 791 1138 7983 Profit after tax 45152 4729 3164 170 37429 Earnings per share pence Diluted 22.35 2.34 1.56 0.08 18.53 27 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Strategic report Reconciliation of alternative profit measures 30 June 2017 30 June 2017 % 30 June 2016 30 June 2016 % Operating profit 55136 25.4 46318 27.0 Depreciation and amortisation 15326 11355 EBITDA 70462 32.5 57673 33.6
ERP improvements 3873 2645 Integration costs 21 480 RandD tax credit relating to prior years  1308 Adjusted EBITDA 73331 33.8 59956 34.9 Reconciliation of alternative cash measures 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Net cash inflow from operating activities 66384 47314
Purchase of property plant and equipment 10224 7974 Purchase of intangible assets 8947 7608 Transfer of cash into escrow for future capital expenditure 6075 Free cash flow FCF 41138 31732 Corporate governance 29 Chairmans governance overview Directors and Company Secretary Corporate governance report 37 Audit and Risk Committee 40 Nomination Committee 41 Remuneration report 55 Directors report I am pleased to present the Corporate Governance Report for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Good corporate governance is fundamental to the success of our business.
The Board and its Committees have a key role in our governance framework by providing external and independent support and challenge understanding the views of shareholders and stakeholders and ensuring that a culture of good governance is promoted across the business.
Our continuing aim is to promote and maintain an environment of openness transparency accountability and responsibility.
This section of the Annual Report describes our corporate governance structures and processes and how they have been applied throughout the year ended 30 June 2017.
The UK Corporate Governance Code Code Although as an AIMlisted company we are not required to comply with the Code which sets out the principles of good practice in relation to corporate governance to be followed by Main Marketlisted companies the Board continues to believe that it is appropriate for Abcam to comply with the Code insofar as is practicable given the Companys size and the nature of its operations.
I am happy to report that we have complied with the principles and provisions of the 2016 edition of the Code in all material respects during the 201617 financial year.
My role as Chairman My role is to ensure that the Board of Abcam operates effectively in delivering the longterm success of the Company.
In fulfilling this role I seek to ensure that Board proceedings are conducted in such a way as to allow all Directors to have the opportunity to express their views openly and that in particular the NonExecutive Directors are able to provide constructive support and challenge to the Executive Leadership Team.
Culture and business ethics Underpinning Abcams ambition to be valued for the high quality research tools we provide and to be trusted for the way in which we work is our reputation for ethical business practices and high standards of integrity.
This has been a particular area of focus for Abcam this year.
The Board has reviewed and approved a new code of conduct for staff How we do things at Abcam which has been produced in four languages and distributed to all employees across the business.
We have launched compulsory online antibribery training for all employees in three languages updated our gifts and hospitality policy and enhanced our whistleblowing arrangements.
We have also launched codes of conduct for our suppliers and distributors which clearly state our expectation that our suppliers and distributors demonstrate a culture that reinforces ethical and lawful behaviours.
Capital investment projects The Board and the Audit and Risk Committee have received regular progress updates on the implementation of our new enterprise resource planning ERP system during the year with a particular focus on risks related to the quality cost and timing of delivery of the project.
We are very pleased with the manner in which the project has been managed and the operational and strategic benefits that the system will deliver as it is embedded throughout the business over the coming months.
The Board has also considered and discussed the project to design and build our new headquarters in Cambridge again with a particular focus on the identification and mitigation of risks associated with the investment.
Succession planning and Board changes The composition of the Board changed significantly during the year as described in last years Nomination Committee Report.
We appointed Gavin Wood to the Board to replace Jeff Iliffe as CFO and three other Directors Jim Warwick Michael Ross and Anthony Martin stepped down.
The Nomination Committee has kept the composition of the Board and the Committees under review and it is our intention to appoint an additional NonExecutive Director during 2018.
However we are satisfied that the current composition of the Board reflects an appropriate balance of skills experience knowledge and diversity and remain confident that the Board and its Committees have operated effectively during the year.
Succession planning and talent management have also remained firmly on the agenda of the Board and the Nomination Committee over the last year and are detailed in the Nomination Committee Report on page 40.
Board and Committee evaluation We regard regular Board and Committee evaluation as a valuable tool in maintaining and improving Board effectiveness.
Following last years performance evaluation it was decided to reduce the number of Board and Committee meetings in order to improve efficiency.
This has proved to be a successful decision allowing more focused and constructive debate at Board and Committee meetings.
This year I again conducted a thorough evaluation process which was discussed in detail by the Board.
Overall we are satisfied that the Board is both efficient and effective with a good mix of skills and experience.
There is always room for improvement and we have identified some areas around Board process to develop in the coming year.
More detail about the Board evaluation and on some of the major matters considered by the Board and its Committees during the year can be found on pages 34 to 54.
The year ahead Over the coming year and in addition to our normal duties the Board will focus on the continued implementation of the ERP system and progress on the development of our new headquarters in
We will also monitor with interest the ongoing corporate governance debate in the UK and in particular any changes that may be recommended by the Financial Reporting Council FRC to the Code.
We believe that our governance framework is robust and effective but recognise that we will need to consider any changes that it may be appropriate for us to address following any revisions to the Code.
Moreover we will continue to monitor assess and seek ways to underpin and improve our governance further.
Murray Hennessy
8 September 2017 Chairmans governance overview Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance 29 30 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Directors and Company Secretary Abcams Board of Directors has a diverse breadth and depth of skills and experience and is therefore able to support and guide the Group as it pursues its strategy of investing for growth.
Appointment November 2011.
Background After an early career as a management consultant in the London Tokyo and Boston offices of Bain and Company Murray held a number of senior positions in the restaurant industry with PepsiCo and Yum Brands and also led an internet startup.
Between 2001 and 2004 Murray was the Commercial Director of John Lewis Department Stores where he pioneered the stores online presencesite Following this Murray became Chief Executive of Avis Europe plc the car rental company until 2008. train ticket retailer until June 2014.
Current external appointments Murray is Chairman of TGIF UK Thank God Its Friday UK NonExecutive Director for SEDCO Holding Company Saudi Arabia Chairman of Receipt Bank Chairman of Talon Outdoor and a NonExecutive Director of Great Wolf Lodges.
Skills and experience Murray has an impressive track record of working internationally in customerfacing industries as well as significant experience of online businesses.
His experience across various consumerfacing sectors where technology plays a key role is valuable to Abcams digital and customerfacing strategy and his background in management consulting and executive leadership positions supports Abcams strategy development.
Murray Hennessy MBA
N R Appointment March 2014.
Background Having started her career in corporate and investment banking Louise moved into management consultancy and became a Board Director of the Hilton Group.
Since then she has served on a succession of multinational listed company boards for more than 20 years as a NonExecutive Director a Senior Independent Director a Remuneration Committee Chairman and a company Chairman at companies including the retailers Marks and Spencer plc GUS plc and Somerfield plc.
Current external appointments Louise is currently a NonExecutive Director of the FTSE 100 property group Intu Properties plc a Senior Advisor to Bain and Company and a NonExecutive Director of Arthur J.
Gallagher Insurance Brokers Limited.
Skills and experience Louises highly recognised career in business with her extensive board and corporate governance experience brings Abcam the knowledge and proficiency required to support its strategic growth plans and whilst doing this ensures that the Abcam Board is led by a robust governance framework.
Alan Hirzel MS MBA
Chief Executive Officer
Appointment September 2015.
Background Mara was the President and Chief Executive Officer of Ventana Medical Systems the Tissue Diagnostics Division of the Roche Group.
While at Ventana she led the company to increased market leadership worldwide and primacy in companion diagnostics.
Previously Mara spent twelve years at Genzyme Corporation now part of Sanofi where she was the President of Genzyme Genetics and Genzyme Pharmaceuticals.
She was also the founder and Chief Executive Officer of OnQity a circulating tumour cells company.
Mara is cofounder of the International School of Biomedical Diagnostics at Arizona State University and Dublin City University the only institution dedicated to the study of diagnostics as an independent discipline.
She is a Fellow of the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering.
Current external appointments Mara is the Chief Executive Officer of Health Catalysts Executive Chairman of GenePeeks Inc.
Director of Allscripts Healthcare Solutions Inc.
Castle Biosciences Blue Cross Blue Shield Arizona OraSure Technologies 3Scan and CA Therapeutics and is on the nonfiduciary advisory boards of ProMIS Neurosciences Inc.
Slone Partners and Greybird Ventures.
Skills and experience Mara has considerable international experience in the biotechnology and diagnostics industries with public and private companies.
Maras specific focus areas are in her operational expertise including acquisition integration global manufacturing quality systems and strategic marketing.
Her knowledge of the diagnostics industry is helpful in establishing Abcams business in this sector.
Appointment January 2014.
Background Alan joined Abcam as Chief Marketing Officer in 2013 to implement the growth strategy he defined with the Board and the CEO.
In 2014 he became CEO and succeeded Abcam founder Jonathan Milner.
Prior to joining Abcam Alan spent 14 years with Bain and Company helping companies grow organically and through acquisition.
Earlier in his career he led product innovation efforts for several brands at Kraft Foods.
He was trained as a life science researcher with BS and MS degrees from Cornell University.
He also has a passion for social enterprise and was involved in establishing two social venture philanthropy organisations in the UK and later acted as a Trustee for the National Citizens Service Trust.
Current external appointments Alan has no external appointments.
Skills and experience Alan brings the Abcam Board an impressive combination of a strong scientific background global business and leadership experience as well as strong consumer knowledge.
Alan has a keen focus on the consumer helping Abcams strategic vision to be a successful global business by placing the customer at the heart of the business.
Mara Aspinall MBA NonExecutive Director N R Louise Patten MA Oxon NonExecutive and Senior Independent Director N A R Gavin Wood BA Hons ACA Chief Financial Officer Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Appointment December 2014.
Background A chemist by training Sue began her career at Ford Motor Co. company Amerada Hess.
She subsequently held senior executive roles at Marks and Spencer plc across finance and latterly as Head of Corporate Development and Group Treasurer and Managing Director Finance at Standard Life where she led the process to float the company in 2006.
She then joined Lloyds Banking Group LBG where she was Finance Director of respectively Cheltenham and Gloucester LBGs Retail Bank and LBG Group Finance and latterly Group Audit Director.
Previously Sue was a NonExecutive Director of St.
Jamess Place representing LBG a member of the audit and remuneration committees of the British Bankers Association Chair of Trustees for KCP Youth and during a tenyear association with Mencap chaired both the finance and audit committees.
Current external appointments Sue is an independent NonExecutive Director of Bank of Ireland UK Chair of the Audit and Assurance Council a member of the Codes and Standards Committee of the Financial Reporting Council a NonExecutive Director of Schroder and Co.
Limited a member of the Audit and Risk Committee of Schroder Wealth Management Division and a NonExecutive Director of Barclays Pension Funds Trustees Limited.
Skills and experience Sue has over 30 years of financial and commercial experience.
Along with her corporate board experience and scientific background Sue brings a wealth of finance and commercial skills that strengthens the Abcam Board in its current growth strategy and is the ideal person to chair the Audit and Risk Committee.
Jonathan Milner PhD Deputy Chairman Appointment April 1998.
Background Having worked in the life sciences industry for over ten years as an academic researcher Jonathan identified the market opportunity for supplying high quality antibodies to support protein interaction studies and in 1998 founded Abcam with Dr David Cleevely and Professor Tony Kouzarides.
Current external appointments Jonathan is a NonExecutive Director of Horizon Discovery Group plc The Evolution Education Trust Repositive Ltd Syndicate Room Group Ltd and HealX.
He is also Chairman of Axol Bioscience Ltd PhoreMost Ltd Definigen Limited and CamAllergy Ltd.
Jonathan holds an Executive Director position at Meltwind Limited being a designated member of Meltwind Advisory LLP and is a member of the advisory panel of Cambridge Innovation Capital plc.
Skills and experience Jonathan is an experienced entrepreneur and investor and is passionate about supporting UK life science and hightech startups.
He has provided considerable investment and support to over 40 companies and has assisted three AIM IPOs.
Appointment September 2016.
Background Gavin is a Chartered Accountant who started his career in practice in London before moving to Grant Thorntons Thames Valley office.
After five years in practice Gavin moved to Unipart Group of Companies where he had a number of roles of increasing responsibility including global ERP implementations and business unit controller.
Gavin then moved into the life sciences sector and spent nearly a decade at Nasdaqquoted Affymetrix Inc.
President and Chief Financial Officer leading the global finance and information technology functions.
Current external appointments Gavin has no external appointments.
Skills and experience Gavin has over 20 years experience as an accounting professional with broad and international exposure in a number of sectors and roles including corporate statutory and operational accounting project management and investor relations.
Appointment July 2015.
Background Before joining Abcam Suzanne was Executive Director Legal at Actavis plc where she was responsible for the leadership of the legal function internationally excluding Americas.
Previous positions include Legal Director at Genzyme Therapeutics Ltd General Counsel and Company Secretary at Phoqus Pharmaceuticals plc and Group Legal Counsel and Company Secretary at LGC Ltd together with positions at SmithKline Beecham and Aventis.
Current external appointment School Governor of Maidstone Grammar School for Girls.
Skills and experience Suzanne is a qualified solicitor with over 20 years global legal business and leadership experience within the life sciences industry.
Her experience in legal and company secretarial roles brings Abcam additional knowledge and skills in corporate governance.
Suzanne Smith LLB MBA Chief Legal Officer and Company Secretary Sue Harris BSc ACMA NonExecutive Director N A R Key to Committees N Nomination A Audit and Risk R Remuneration Committee Chair The terms of reference of the Committees are available on the Companys investor relations website at site Executive Directors Responsible for the implementation of the Boards strategy daytoday management of the business and all matters which have not been reserved for the Board.
32 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Corporate governance report The role of the Board and its Committees
Responsible for the longterm success of the Group.
It sets strategy and oversees implementation ensuring only acceptable risks are taken.
It provides leadership and direction and is also responsible for corporate governance and the overall financial performance of the Group.
Meet our Board of Directors on pages 30 and 31.
Executive Leadership Team ELT A team that operates under the direction and authority of the CEO and CFO and comprises the direct reports of the
It assists the Executive Directors in implementing strategy and policies and managing the operational and financial performance of the Group.
Audit and Risk
Reviews and is responsible for the oversight of the Groups financial and reporting processes the integrity of the financial statements the external and internal audit processes and the systems of internal control and risk management.
More details on pages 37 to 39.
Remuneration
Committee
Reviews and recommends to the Board the executive Remuneration Policy and determines the remuneration packages of the Executive Directors and the Company
Has oversight of the remuneration packages of the Executive Leadership Team.
More details on pages 41 to 54.
Nomination
Committee
Reviews and recommends to the Board the structure size and composition of the Board and its
It also has oversight responsibility for succession planning of the Board and senior management.
More details on page 40.
Disclosure
Committee
Oversees the identification and control of inside information by the Company to meet its disclosure obligations under the Market Abuse Regulation the AIM Rules and the Financial Conduct Authoritys FCA Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules DTR.
Global Leadership Team GLT The GLT comprises the ELT and other senior global leaders who meet as required in person and by telephone conference to support the delivery of Abcams strategic activities and the annual planning process.
This enables the CEO and the ELT to hear from different areas of the business whilst providing the opportunity to communicate with and engage the GLT members on global initiatives.
Matters reserved for the Board and delegated authorities To retain control of key decisions the Board has identified certain reserved matters that only it can approve with other matters responsibilities and authorities delegated to its Committees as above.
The schedule of matters reserved for the Board and the terms of reference for each of its Committees can be found on the Companys investor relations website at site Any matters outside of these fall within the CEOs responsibility and authority.
Accordingly he reports on the activities of the ELT through monthly reports to the Board.
Board composition and roles The Board comprises the Chairman two Executive Directors and four NonExecutive Directors NEDs one of whom is the Deputy Chairman.
The Board reflects a good balance of skills and experience from financial operational sectorspecific and general business backgrounds as described in the Directors biographies set out on pages 30 and 31.
The key responsibilities of the members of the Board are as set out in the table below Board composition and roles Chairman Murray Hennessy Responsible for leading and managing the Board as well as its effectiveness and governance.
Ensures Board members are aware of and understand the views of major shareholders and other key stakeholders.
Helps the CEO and the ELT set the tone from the top in terms of the purpose goal vision and values for the whole organisation.
CEO Alan Hirzel Responsible for the daytoday management of the business developing the Groups strategic direction for consideration and approval by the Board and implementing the agreed strategy.
CFO Gavin Wood Supports the CEO in developing and implementing strategy.
Responsible for the financial and operational performance of the Group.
Deputy Chairman Jonathan Milner Responsible for bringing expert knowledge in the everevolving field of protein research and its related science and technology.
Provides entrepreneurial support to the Board to develop strategy to further exploit opportunities to enable Abcam to support scientists worldwide.
Provides a technical sounding board for the Chairman and the CEO.
Represents Abcam at external events and forums worldwide and is an ambassador for Abcam in the scientific community.
Senior
Independent
Director SID Louise Patten Acts as a sounding board for the Chairman and as a trusted intermediary for other Directors.
Available to discuss any concerns with shareholders that cannot be resolved through the normal channels of communication with the Chairman or the Executive Directors.
Independent NEDs Sue Harris Mara Aspinall Assist in the development of strategy and monitor its delivery within the Companys established risk appetite.
Responsible for bringing sound judgement and objectivity to the Boards deliberations and decisionmaking process and constructively challenging and supporting the Executive Directors.
They also review the performance of the Executive Directors.
Board and Committee meetingsattendance during the year
Scheduled
Board meetings
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nomination
Committee
Current Directors Murray Hennessy Alan Hirzel 88 na na na Gavin Wood appointed to the Board on 12 September 2016 66 na na na Sue Harris 88 55 66 33 Jonathan Milner 88 na na na Mara Aspinall Louise Patten 88 55 66 33 Past Directors Jeff Iliffe left the Board on 12 September 2016 22 na na na Anthony Martin left the Board on 31 October 2016 23 22 33 na Michael Ross left the Board on 31 October 2016 33 na na 01 Jim Warwick left the Board on 31 December 2016 44 na na na Appointed a member of the Remuneration Committee on 8 December 2016.
Appointed a member of the Audit and Risk Committee on 1 November 2016 however it was decided on 8 December 2016 that he should cease to be a member of that Committee.
2 Appointed a member of the Remuneration and Nomination Committees on 8 December 2016.
33 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Board activity The Board agenda focuses on the themes of driving our strategy monitoring risk and execution against the strategy via regular business financial and departmental updates together with corporate governance and regulatory matters.
A summary of the activity of the Board during the year is set out in the chart below.
All employees
Women 234
Leadership Team Men 6 Women 3
Men 4 Women 3 57% 43% 48% 52% 67% 33% The percentage of women on the Board is currently 43% putting us ahead of recommended targets for FTSE 350 companies.
We also have a good representation of women in senior management and continue to seek to increase the pipeline of women into both the Board and senior management.
As at 30 June 2017 comprising Abcam plc only and excluding subsidiaries outside of the UK.
Strategy
Reviewed the implementation progress against the multiyear strategic initiatives established in 201314 and the longterm strategy as part of the offsite strategy day and decided the approach to diagnostics custom products and licensing.
Reviewed progress of the design and development of new Abcam headquarters at the Cambridge Biomedical Campus.
Received various departmental presentations from members of the ELT to monitor progress against strategic goals.
Financial performance Considered the financial performance of the business and key performance targets.
Approved the budget and fiveyear plan.
Monitored the performance against budget through regular presentations from the CFO.
Reviewed the halfyear and annual results and presentations to analysts and approved the Annual Report.
Approved the interim and final dividend recommendations.
Governance stakeholders and shareholders Reviewed the outcome of the Board evaluation and effectiveness.
Reviewed the Companys compliance with the Code and key developments in corporate governance.
Received key legal and regulatory updates on topics such as gender pay gap and payment practices reporting.
Reviewed feedback from institutional shareholders and analysts following the annual and interim results.
Approved the Companys Modern Slavery Act Statement.
Reviewed the terms of reference of the Board Committees.
Reviewed Company policies including approval of How we do things at Abcam the Gifts and Hospitality Policy and the new Supplier Code of Conduct.
Leadership and people Discussed the composition of the Board and its Committees.
Discussed the results of the employee engagement survey and the actions arising from it.
Discussed the development of the people strategy which included the implementation of a clear reward strategy a focus on development and ensuring good team leaders.
Internal control and risk management Reviewed the approach to risk management and carried out a robust assessment of the Companys principal risks.
Approved the Companys risk appetite being the level of risk that the Company is willing to take in pursuit of its objectives.
Monitored the implementation of the enterprise resource planning system which will improve and streamline the flow of information between all business functions and improve internal controls.
Reviewed the Companys hedging arrangements and strategy including approving the Companys hedging policy.
The Board
Financial performance
Internal control and risk management
Gender diversity 34 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Corporate governance report continued Board meetings The Board meets on six occasions in person during the year on a bimonthly basis with two further scheduled telephone conferences.
In addition ad hoc meetings may be called to discuss urgent matters arising during the course of the year or to approve the annual and interim accounts and dividends.
A separate oneday strategy session is also held once a year to discuss the longerterm aspirations and objectives of the Company.
The culture of our Board meetings is to encourage rigorous debate.
The NEDs constructively challenge the performance of management in meeting agreed goals and objectives and help develop proposals on strategy priorities and indeed on occasion tactics.
More informal and extended discussions on strategy routinely take place before after and in between bimonthly Board meetings.
The Chairman also holds meetings with the NonExecutive Directors without the Executive Directors present and the NonExecutive Directors led by the Senior Independent Director meet without the Chairman present at least annually to appraise the Chairmans performance.
The Directors have access to the advice of the Company Secretary who is a qualified solicitor and acts as secretary to the Board and its Committees.
Effectiveness
Information and support The Chairman the Executive Directors and the Company Secretary are responsible for making sure the Board members are updated with information concerning the state of the business and its performance and information necessary for them to effectively discharge their duties and responsibilities in a timely manner.
The agenda for the following Board meeting is discussed at the end of each Board meeting so that NonExecutive Directors have the opportunity to influence agendas for Board discussions ensuring the amount of time spent reviewing strategic and operational issues as well as governance is appropriately balanced.
In the event that Directors are unable to attend a meeting or a conference call they are encouraged to relay their comments and if necessary to follow up with the Chairman or the CEO after the meeting.
Board development Regular training is provided to the Board and in particular focus is given to explaining the complex and evolving science behind Abcams business together with updates on corporate governance including training on the Market Abuse Regulation the Modern Slavery Act 2015 and anticorruption legislation.
On appointment to the Board new Directors receive a comprehensive and tailored induction programme the aim of which is to introduce them to key management and personnel across the business and to enhance their knowledge and understanding of the Companys business strategy and governance structure as well as their own duties and responsibilities.
This includes time with each of the Executive Directors and the Company Secretary and with a wide range of senior management from across the business.
Director independence The Board considers all NonExecutive Directors to be independent within the meaning of the Code with the exception of Jonathan Milner who is a founder of Abcam and was an Executive Director of the Company until September 2014.
In accordance with an established procedure all Directors are required to notify the Board of any conflicts of interest and a register of such interests is maintained by the Company Secretary and formally reviewed at Board meetings.
Any planned changes to their interests including directorships outside the Group are notified to the Board.
There were no relationships declared in the year which were considered to conflict with Abcams business and therefore there was nothing that was deemed to impact on the independence of the Directors.
While the obligation to notify the Company is immediate the Conflicts of Interest Register is maintained by the Company Secretary and is formally reviewed at each Board meeting.
In determining the independence of the NonExecutive Directors the Board also considers the beneficial interests of such Directors in the share capital of the Company.
Those interests are set out on page 49 and do not other than in respect of Jonathan Milner who is not considered independent in the opinion of the Board detract from their independent status.
Board evaluation The Board undertakes a regular evaluation of its own performance which is led by the Chairman.
One of the key findings of the 2016 evaluation was that the number of Board and Committee meetings should be reduced to improve efficiency and the calendar of meetings was therefore amended to address this concern principally reducing the number of formal Board meetings per year from eleven to six.
The 2017 Board evaluation was again conducted by the Chairman by way of questionnaires and face to face meetings with each Director.
The outcome of the evaluation process was presented to the Board in June.
As well as confirming the improved efficiency of the Board and Committees as a result of the reduction in meeting frequency the key findings of the evaluation process were the composition of the Board is strong with a good mix of skills and experience but the Board agrees it is right to appoint a further NonExecutive Director Board dynamics are good with all Directors able to share their views and challenge and the balance of discussion between strategic operational and governance matters is appropriate.
In addition some areas of focusimprovement were identified for the 201718 financial year including enhancing some of the nonfinancial reporting to the Board and developing the process by which the impact of key decisions are reviewed.
35 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Accountability
Risk management
The Board has overall responsibility for ensuring that the Group maintains a sound system of risk management and internal control in accordance with the Code.
The system of risk management and internal control is kept under review by the Audit and Risk Committee which reports to the Board on its findings.
The Board considers and determines the principal risks faced by the Company which are set out on pages 16 to 19 and also conducts an annual review of the effectiveness of the risk management and internal control systems.
Financial reporting The Board is responsible for reviewing and approving the Annual Report and Accounts and the interim financial information and for ensuring that these reports present a balanced assessment of the Groups position.
Drafts of these reports are provided to the Board in a timely manner and Directors feedback is discussed and incorporated where appropriate prior to publication.
In addition the Board ensures that controls over the financial reporting process and preparation of the consolidated accounts include extensive reviews by qualified and experienced individuals to ensure that all elements of the financial statements and appropriate disclosures are considered and accurately stated.
Whistleblowing procedures The Group operates a whistleblowing policy which allows all employees to raise concerns to senior management in strict confidence about any unethical business practices fraud misconduct or wrongdoing.
During the year the Company has also implemented a new online whistleblowing portal and hotline Speak Up through which employees are encouraged to raise questions and concerns anonymously if preferred.
Speak Up is managed by a third party and not staffed by Abcam employees.
Any concerns raised in accordance with the whistleblowing policy are reviewed by the Audit and Risk Committee.
Disclosure Committee The Disclosure Committee was established by the Board in July 2016 to assist the Company in complying with its obligations relating to the disclosure and control of inside information under the Market Abuse Regulation and the AIM Rules.
Its responsibilities include identifying inside information ensuring the appropriate disclosure of inside information and maintenance of insider lists and that effective internal controls are in place to keep any inside information confidential.
The Disclosure Committee meets as and when is necessary in order to discharge its obligations.
Relations with shareholders The Board is committed to maintaining an open and constructive dialogue with shareholders to ensure there is a common understanding of the strategic objectives governance and performance of the Company.
The main points of contact for major shareholders are the CEO the CFO the SID the Chairman and the Head of Investor
Following the announcement of the interim results there was an extensive roadshow over three weeks with most of the top shareholders of the Company with the CEO and the CFO present.
Any feedback gained from the roadshow is reported back to the Board to enable the Board to understand the views of major shareholders.
Where appropriate the Company consults with shareholders on significant issues.
During 2017 the major shareholders were offered the opportunity to meet the Chairman andor the SID to discuss Abcams strategy and governance arrangements.
In addition our financial public relations advisors and corporate brokers gather investor and analyst feedback following meetings and roadshows which is relayed to and reviewed by the Board.
Annual General Meeting AGM The Chairman actively encourages the participation of all Directors at the AGM which is the principal forum for dialogue with shareholders.
A presentation is also given at the AGM outlining recent developments in the business and a question and answer session follows to enable shareholders to ask about specific areas or the business in general.
All Committee chairmen attend the AGM to answer any questions that shareholders may have on specific matters within the relevant Committees remit.
36 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Corporate governance report continued Sue Harris Audit and Risk Committee Chairman Committee members Sue Harris Chairman Louise Patten As Chairman of the Audit and Risk Committee I am pleased to present the Committees report for the year ended 30 June 2017.
This report details the work of the Committee over the past year fulfilling our responsibilities to provide effective governance over the Groups financial affairs to ensure that shareholders interests are properly protected in relation to internal controls and financial reporting.
In meeting these responsibilities we continue to consider the provisions of the Code and the FRC Guidance on Audit Committees.
Effective Committee governance Louise Patten and I are both independent NonExecutive Directors with a combination of accounting financial risk commercial and strategic experience in listed companies and with Abcam since 2014.
The Committee acts independently of management to ensure that the interests of shareholders are appropriately protected in relation to financial reporting internal control and risk management.
The Board has determined that I meet the Code requirements for the Committee to have one member with recent and relevant financial experience as I am a qualified accountant with over 30 years financial risk and commercial experience in listed companies.
Shortly prior to the 2016 Annual General Meeting Anthony Martin stepped down from the Board and ceased to be a member of the
Murray Hennessy was appointed as an additional member of the Committee and attended the November meeting such appointment being permitted under the Code.
Subsequently as part of a general review of Board Committees as the size of the main Board was reduced it was decided that the Committee should be reduced to two members.
Murray Hennessy therefore stepped down from the Committee following the November 2016 meeting.
Committee meetings are also attended by invitation by the Chief Financial Officer the Chief Legal Officer and Company Secretary acting as secretary to the Committee and where appropriate other members of management internal audit and the Board.
Representatives of the Groups external auditor also attend by invitation and meet with the Committee at least twice a year without Executive Directors or Company management being present.
Key responsibilities of the Committee The Committees principal duties are to monitor the integrity of the Groups financial reporting including the review of significant financial reporting judgements and advise the Board on whether taken as a whole the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable advise the Board on principal risks their mitigation and risk appetite and review the robustness of our risk management system and internal controls oversee assurance work including the work of the Groups internal auditor oversee the Groups external audit process monitor the auditors independence objectivity effectiveness and performance and approve any engagement of the external auditor outside of the Groups audit and review and monitor the whistleblowing policy and activity.
Committee activities The key areas of Committee activity during the year included Financial reporting considering and deciding if the accounting policies are appropriate and reviewing the key judgements and estimates that underpin financial reporting as set out in note 4 to the financial statements on pages 76 and 77.
Other matters considered included reviewing the Groups accounting for the completion of milestones and settlement of the contingent consideration related to the acquisition of AxioMx the provision for bad and doubtful debts the presentation of goodsin processing costs taxation tax losses transfer pricing primarily related to China and RandD claims and the tax provision and the impairment review of goodwill and intangibles reviewing the Annual Report and Accounts interim management statements associated analyst presentations and press releases and challenging where appropriate to ensure clarity and completeness of disclosures including considering alternative performance measures to inform shareholders and other stakeholders and advising the Board that taken as a whole the Annual Report and Accounts is fair balanced and understandable reviewing the basis for the going concern statement in light of financial plans and reasonably likely scenarios and recommending to the Board that the Company is a going concern and reviewing the longerterm viability statement LTVS considering the appropriateness of the fiveyear time period on which the LTVS is based linkage to strategy principal risks the assumptions underlying stresstesting and the scenario analysis.
Risk management and internal control reviewing principal risks and risk appetite to ensure effective and continual improvement in risk management including reviewing and challenging the assessment of businesswide risks and actions to mitigate 37 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Audit and Risk Committee Committee activities continued Risk management and internal control continued reviewing the effectiveness and integrity of the internal financial controls framework that underpins financial reporting.
The
Committee has considered reports on internal control reviews in the period.
These reviews did not highlight any significant control failings though they did identify some areas where existing controls could be strengthened monitoring progress on the implementation and project governance of the new ERP system including receiving the internal auditors report on programme assurance reviewing Group insurance cover reviewing hedging strategy and policy application in light of changing global market conditions and monitoring and reviewing internal audit approving the appointment of KPMG LLP KPMG as internal auditor reviewing and approving the internal audit plan for 201617 ensuring alignment with key risks and challenging key audit outcomes and recommendations.
Tax overseeing the Groups tax affairs and reviewing Group tax strategy for recommendation to the Board and reviewing the preparation for compliance with Senior Accounting Officer SAO legislation.
The parent company has implemented enhancements to the internal control framework in anticipation of the requirement to comply with SAO legislation that is expected to apply from the financial year 201819.
External audit approving the annual audit plan and risk identification and approving the level of fees paid to the auditor for audit services reviewing the findings of the auditor and managements response ensuring robust challenge reviewing the independence objectivity performance and effectiveness of the auditor and reviewing and updating the policy on the use of the auditor for nonaudit work and approving any such work undertaken.
Compliance reviewing and considering the operation of the Groups compliance initiatives including the launch of the employee code of conduct called How we do things at Abcam a global whistleblowing hotline and portal and compulsory online training in antibribery.
External audit
The Committee undertakes an annual assessment of the effectiveness of the external auditor incorporating the views of both financial and commercial management in addition to the NonExecutive Directors to facilitate continued improvement in the external audit process.
The assessment which is informed by the FRCs Audit Quality Practice Aid for Audit Committees considers delivery of a thorough robust and efficient global audit in compliance with the agreed plan and timescales provision of accurate robust and perceptive advice on key accounting and audit judgements technical issues and best practice a high level of professionalism and technical expertise consistently demonstrated by all audit staff and maintenance of continuity within the core audit team and strict adherence to independence policies and other regulatory requirements.
The Committee concluded that the above factors had been met and that it continued to be satisfied with PwCs performance and effectiveness.
Independence and objectivity of external auditor Both the Board and the external auditor have safeguards in place to protect the independence and objectivity of the external auditor which were reviewed by the Committee during the year and remain satisfactory.
During the year the Committee reviewed and revised the policy for the use of the external auditor for nonaudit work to ensure that objectivity and independence are not compromised and that it is in line with the new EU audit regime introduced in 2016.
Under the revised policy all nonaudit services to be contracted with the auditor require approval by the Committee.
The external auditor will not be engaged to provide nonaudit services that would be prohibited taking account of recent EU legislation applicable to Main Market companies.
Details of fees paid to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP PwC during the year are outlined in note 7 on page 79 of the financial statements.
Nonaudit fees were paid to PwC during the year mainly in respect of its review of the Companys interim results.
As it is usual practice for these nonaudit services to be provided by the auditor the Committee does not consider that auditor independence has been impacted.
The ratio of nonaudit fees to audit fees is 1387.
Appointment and tendering PwC has served as Abcams external auditor since September 2013 when a full tender process was carried out.
The current audit partner Simon Ormiston has served since the firms appointment and is due for rotation after completion of the audit for the year ending 30 June 2018.
Following the review of PwCs continued objectivity independence and performance in respect of the 201617 financial year and with PwC having confirmed its willingness to continue in office as external auditor the Committee recommended to the Board that PwC be reappointed as external auditor for the 201718 financial year subject to approval at the AGM.
There were no contractual obligations that inhibited or influenced the Committees recommendation.
Internal audit As reported last year following a tender process KPMG was appointed to provide internal audit services to the Group.
KPMG presented its internal audit plan for 201617 to the Committee in November and its work during the year has focused on project assurance for the implementation of the new ERP system cyber security a business health check in China and US and UK payroll.
KPMG has provided updates on progress against the internal audit plan at each of the subsequent Committee meetings including reports on each completed audit.
The Committee will monitor the effectiveness of the internal audit function including managements response to internal audit findings and is pleased that the new internal audit programme has been well received across the Group.
38 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Audit and Risk Committee continued Review of financial statements and audit findings The Committee considered the following significant financial issues in relation to the Companys financial statements and disclosures with input from management and the external auditor Issue Committees review and conclusions
The Committee reviewed the assessment of the viability of the Group.
This assessment was based upon the Groups mediumterm financial and operating plans and risk assessment and included appropriate scenario analysis.
The Committee continued to be satisfied that a period of five years was suitable and that the viability statement be provided.
Strategic IT investment The strategic ERP investment project is a complex global implementation with multiple phases and implementation will extend into the next financial year.
The Committee has maintained its review of programme progress with particular consideration of financial accounting and controls processes.
In line with last year the Committee has provided oversight of the accounting for both capital and revenue expenditure.
There has been additional oversight of this important programme at Board level with a focus on its broader reach across the Group.
Inventory and property plant and equipment valuation for inhouse manufactured items Inventory manufactured in house and capitalisation within property plant and equipment of the costs of new hybridoma and assay development include an element of overhead allocation.
The Committee discussed the calculation methodologies with management and also reviewed the report from the auditor on the results of its testing.
Inventory provisioning The calculation of the inventory provision includes a degree of judgement of the likelihood that individual products will be sold at some point in the future at a value equivalent to or greater than cost.
During the year the Company amended the estimated product sales life for all product categories except biochemicals and reviewed the growth rates of product sales taking account of all the historical data available to the Company.
The impact on the provision was not significant.
The Committees review included an assessment of the reasonableness of future sales forecasts which are based on actual sales patterns in previous years and the shelf life of those products.
The Committee has had a busy and productive year as newer control processes such as internal audit have bedded in and finance capability further develops to meet the needs of the Group as it continues to grow.
I look forward to another successful year in 201718.
Sue Harris Audit and Risk Committee Chairman 8 September 2017 39 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Murray Hennessy Nomination Committee Chairman Committee members Murray Hennessy Chairman Mara Aspinall Sue Harris Louise Patten Key responsibilities of the Committee The Committee is responsible for reviewing Board composition and balance considering the skills and capabilities required for each new Board appointment leading the process for Board appointments making recommendations to the Board in relation to new appointments and reviewing succession planning.
Board diversity and appointments procedure Abcam recognises and embraces the benefits of having a diverse Board and sees diversity at Board level as an essential element in maintaining a competitive advantage.
Board composition is central to the effective leadership of the Group and therefore prior to commencing any search for prospective Board members the Committee draws up a specification reflecting on the Boards current balance of skills and experiences and those that would be conducive to the delivery of the Companys strategy.
Selection for Board appointments is made on merit against this specification.
Board changes in the year The size of the Board has reduced during the year as a result of the retirement of Jim Warwick as COO and Michael Ross and Anthony Martin stepping down from the Board at our 2016 AGM.
The Committee keeps the composition of the Board under review and while it is satisfied that the balance of skills experience and knowledge on the Board is appropriate the Committee has recommended that an additional independent NonExecutive Director be appointed in 2018.
Gender diversity Following the Board changes during the year female representation on the Board now stands at 43% up from 30% at the end of the previous financial year.
This puts Abcam ahead of recommended targets for FTSE 350 companies in terms of female Board representation.
The Company continues to see the development of female executive talent as an important area.
More details on gender diversity in the Company are set out on page 34.
Activity in the year A key focus for the Committee during the year has been on the successful integration of new additions to the ELT.
This has included a newly introduced mentoring programme whereby each ELT member has been assigned a NonExecutive Director mentor.
They meet on a regular basis and the ELT member can use the time with the NonExecutive Director to support their career development journey learning from their experience.
The Committee has also supported the introduction of a coaching scheme to further the development of the leadership skills of the ELT.
Succession planning has been an important area of focus with the Committee regularly discussing succession and receiving and discussing a detailed paper on succession planning across the business.
A number of key priority areas have been identified in particular the development of a robust pipeline of potential ELT successors and the deliberate effort to ensure that the development needs of potential successors are met.
Priorities for 201718 The Committee will continue to focus on succession planning particularly for ELT positions as well as monitoring the success of the mentoring and coaching schemes.
The Committee will also focus on developing its plans for the orderly and progressive refreshing of the Board over time.
Murray Hennessy Nomination Committee Chairman 8 September 2017 40 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Nomination Committee Louise Patten Remuneration Committee Chairman Committee members Louise Patten Chairman Mara Aspinall appointed 8 December 2016 Sue Harris Murray Hennessy appointed 8 December 2016 On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present you with the Committees report for the year ended 30 June 2017.
This year Abcam has continued its trend of significant growth with an increase in total revenue of 26.5% to 217.1m FY 2016 171.7m and a 13.2% increase in reported profit whilst making substantial investment in the business including a global Enterprise Resource Planning ERP system as a platform to support continued growth demands.
Over the last three financial years we have seen the successful execution of our strategy which has created significant value for shareholders.
Abcams total shareholder return has been 169.9% over this period with a compound annual growth rate of 39.1% and an increase in Abcams market capitalisation from around 800m to over 2bn.
Abcam has significantly outperformed the FTSE 250 index which had compound annual growth of 9.8% over the same period.
Although Abcam is not required by the AIM Rules to provide all the information detailed in this report the Committee have chosen to do so to provide greater transparency to shareholders in accordance with best practice.
Within this context I would like to provide you with an overview of the Committees major decisions during 201617.
Remuneration Policy The Committee undertook a strategic review of the approach to remuneration in 2015 and the resulting Remuneration Policy was put to an advisory vote at the 2015 AGM and approved by 91.5% of shareholders.
We are not proposing to make any changes to our Remuneration Policy this year.
We engaged with shareholders prior to the publication of this Remuneration report.
Over the coming year we will seek their feedback as we carry out a review of our Remuneration Policy which will be put to them for an advisory vote at the 2018 AGM.
Executive Director changes As detailed in last years Annual Report 201617 saw changes to the Executive Directors following the departure of the CFO Jeff Iliffe on 12 September 2016 the appointment of Gavin Wood as CFOelect on 18 July 2016 and his subsequent appointment as an Executive Director on 12 September 2016.
The COO Jim Warwick retired on 31 December 2016.
Details of the departure arrangements for Jeff Iliffe and Jim Warwick can be found on page 47.
Base salary for Executive Directors and the Company Chairmans remuneration The Remuneration Committees policy is to offer remuneration which is competitive with comparable publicly listed companies and to provide incentives which fairly and responsibly reward individuals for their contribution to the longterm success of the Group.
Both Alan Hirzel and Gavin Wood received increases to their base salaries of 2.5% effective 1 July 2017 in line with the average increase awarded to Abcams UK employees.
No increase will be made to the Chairmans remuneration in 201718.
201617 remuneration outturns for Executive Directors Annual Bonus Plan ABP  the annual bonus outturns in 201617 were 100% and 59.1% of the maximum award for financial and strategic measures respectively reflecting a strong performance against stretching targets during the year.
In combination with a good performance against personal objectives for both our Executive Directors as detailed on page 44 this means our Annual Bonus Plan will pay 78% of the maximum for both the CEO and CFO of which 30% is deferred into shares in line with our policy.
Further details regarding achievement against each performance target are set out on page 44.
41 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance
Remuneration report
Part 1  Remuneration Committee Chairmans statement 201617 remuneration outturns for Executive Directors continued Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP  awards granted on 4 November 2014 at a maximum of 50% of salary had an Earnings Per Share EPS performance condition measured over the three financial years ended 30 June 2017.
Over the performance period Abcams rapid growth has placed demands on our existing systems and processes and the Board formally approved a significant investment in our ERP platform in February 2016.
As the scale and complexity of this transformational programme had not been established when the LTIP target was set the Committee has determined as permitted under the Remuneration Policy that it should be excluded from the calculation of EPS growth for the purposes of the LTIP awards.
This resulted in an adjusted annualised compound EPS growth over the threeyear performance period ended 30 June 2017 of 9.7% against a minimum target of 8% and a maximum target of 12%.
Awards will therefore vest at 71.6% of the maximum award.
Further detail regarding the EPS calculation and achievement against the performance target is set out on page 45.
Overview of outturns and performance These results reflect the successful execution of our strategy.
Abcam has achieved strong financial growth while also investing significantly in the people systems and infrastructure required to support our continued expansion.
The Committee has continued to place emphasis on ensuring that the remuneration outcomes are aligned with our longterm strategy and performance.
Louise Patten Remuneration Committee Chairman 8 September 2017 Part 2  Directors Remuneration Policy The Directors Remuneration Policy approved in an advisory vote by shareholders at the 2015 AGM is available on the Companys investor relations website at site 42 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 1  Remuneration Committee Chairmans statement continued AUDITED INFORMATION a 201617 single figure for total remuneration for Executive Directors The aggregate remuneration provided to Directors who have served as Executive Directors in the year ended 30 June 2017 is set out below together with comparatives for the prior year.
Single figure for total remuneration Alan Hirzel Jeff Iliffe Jim Warwick Gavin Wood Salary 480 320 5tel240 Taxable benefits Annual bonus Longterm incentives
Total remuneration 137tel388 429 574 The figures in the table above for Jeff Iliffe and Jim Warwick represent their remuneration received up to their respective departure dates.
The figures in the table above for Gavin Wood represent the remuneration he received from the date he was appointed as an Executive Director.
The figures for the 201617 longterm incentives represent the value of the 2014 LTIP at the average market value in the final quarter of the financial year being 9.29 plus the value of SIP free and matching shares awarded in the year at their market values at the date of grant being 8.41.
Pensionrelated and other benefits include cash payments in lieu of pension contributions where pension contributions can no longer be made in a taxefficient way.
Jim Warwick waived his entitlement to 14000 201516 30000 of these payments in lieu of retirement benefits.
The Company made donations to charities of its choice amounting to the total amounts waived.
The figures in the total remuneration table above are derived from the following Salary The amount of base salary received in the year including pay in respect of holiday accrued but untaken by Jeff Iliffe and Jim Warwick on the date of their respective departures.
Taxable benefits The taxable value of benefits received in the year.
Annual bonus The value of the annual bonus earned in respect of the year under the ABP.
70% of the annual bonus will be paid in cash and 30% deferred into Abcam plc shares which will vest on the second anniversary of the dealing day immediately following the period of ten dealing days beginning on the day on which the Company announces its preliminary results for the financial year subject to continuous employment.
Longterm incentives The value of performancerelated incentives whose performance targets relate to a period ending in the relevant financial year and the value of free and matching shares granted in the year under the HMRCapproved Share Incentive Plan SIP.
Both are based on the fair value of the shares at the date of grant.
The values shown in the 201516 column relate to the LTIP award made in 2013 based on compound EPS performance which did not vest.
The values shown in the 201617 column relate to the LTIP award made in 2014 based on compound EPS performance which will vest at 71.6%.
Pensionrelated and other benefits The value of the employer contribution to the defined contribution pension plan or the value of a salary or benefit supplement paid in lieu of a contribution to this pension plan.
Details of individual elements of remuneration Base salary Alan Hirzel received an increase in base salary to 480000 with effect from 1 July 2016.
Gavin Wood joined Abcam as CFOelect on 18 July 2016 and was appointed as an Executive Director on 12 September 2016.
His base salary was set at 300000 to recognise the market value of the role and his skills and experience.
Taxable benefits Benefits comprise amounts in respect of life insurance private medical cover and annual health screening.
43 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration AUDITED INFORMATION continued a 201617 single figure for total remuneration for Executive Directors continued Details of individual elements of remuneration continued Annual and deferred bonus For the year ended 30 June 2017 the maximum bonus opportunity for Executive Directors was 150% of salary.
The bonus under the ABP consisted of three elements Group profit performance achievement of specific Group strategic goals and individual performance targets.
For Alan Hirzel and Gavin Wood 30% of the bonus will be deferred into Abcam plc shares which will vest on the second anniversary of the dealing day immediately following the period of ten dealing days beginning on the day on which the Company announces its preliminary results for the financial year subject to continuation of employment.
Jeff Iliffe received a prorated amount to his departure date in relation to the cash element of his award and Jim Warwick received an amount equal to 35% of his base salary.
In line with policy neither Jeff lliffe nor Jim Warwick will receive a deferred share award for the year ended 30 June 2017.
The Committee exercised its discretion to exclude the initial costs associated with the design and construction of the Groups new global headquarters in Cambridge UK from the profit before tax PBT calculation.
The targets and performance outcomes which resulted in the annual bonus shown in the total remuneration table on page 43 are as follows Annual Bonus Plan element Performance Financial 50% of total bonus
Groups adjusted PBT amended to reflect the initial costs associated with the design and construction of the Groups new global headquarters and bonuses on a budgeted exchange rate basis.
The table below shows the target ranges for 201617 % of maximum Threshold 57m59m 25% Target 59m61m 50% Exceed 61m63m 75% Maximum 63m 100% Overall outturn was in line with maximum.
Strategic 33% of total bonus The strategic goals performance measures are aligned to the Groups four KPIs RabMAb primaries revenue growth nonprimaries revenue growth NPS and market position.
Our performance in the year against these KPIs is presented on page 14.
The table below shows each strategic KPI measure its relative weighting and an indication of the targets Strategic measure Weighting Threshold Target Exceed Maximum
Nonprimaries CER revenue growth 7% 19%21% 21%23% 23%25% 25% NPS 10% 20%26% 26%30% 30%32% 32% Market position 3% Target to maintain 1 position in research primary antibodies as well 1 or 2 in at least two other areas Achievement was as follows
RabMAb primaries CER revenue growth Nonprimaries CER revenue growth
Market position Overall outturn was 59.1% of the maximum.
Personal 17% of total bonus The personal objective outturn was 50% of the maximum for Executive Directors against measures of employee engagement achievement of milestones in the ERP implementation business efficiencies and maximising the effectiveness of leadership teams.
Overall Overall outturn was 78% of the maximum.
44 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued AUDITED INFORMATION continued a 201617 single figure for total remuneration for Executive Directors continued Longterm incentives The values shown in the 201617 column in the total remuneration table on page 43 relate to the LTIP award granted on 4 November 2014.
The value of these at grant were a maximum 50% of salary and were based on EPS performance over the three years ended 30 June 2017.
Achievement was as follows Performance measure
Maximum target Achieved
Compound annual EPS growth 8% 12% 9.7% 71.6% 1 For the purpose of calculating EPS growth the Committee excluded the exceptional investment costs in relation to the implementation of the ERP system.
Pensionrelated and other benefits The Company operates a flexible benefits scheme under which the Executive Directors are entitled to contributions made by the Company on their behalf equivalent to 12% of base salary.
Each Executive Director can choose how to spend this contribution from the specific benefits available and has the option to sacrifice an element of base pay to make additional pension contributions into the Companys defined contribution pension plan or to purchase other benefits.
Where Executive Directors have elected to preserve their current lifetime or annual allowance for pension contributions they are entitled to draw a cash supplement or other benefits equivalent to the cost to the Company of their pension entitlement adjusted for employers National Insurance NI contributions such that the Company is in a neutral position.
These amounts have been included within the pensionrelated benefits disclosed in the total remuneration table on page 43.
The Company has a philosophy of share ownership which was extended to the Chairman and NEDs in the 201516 financial year by delivering onethird of their fees as Abcam shares.
Each NED has committed not to transfer or sell these shares during the term of their nonexecutive directorship.
Single figure for total remuneration
201617 201516 Total fee
To be delivered as shares Total fee
Delivered as shares
Murray Hennessy 453 Jonathan Milner 882 Sue Harris 615 Anthony Martin Louise Patten 626 Michael Ross Mara Aspinall 048 Total remuneration 39tel284 143 12878 1 The shares will be awarded at the beginning of the first open period following the announcement of the annual results in September 2017.
The number of shares delivered was calculated by converting one third of the NEDs 201516 fees into a fixed number of notional shares at 5.95 per share being the average share price for the ten dealing days following the announcement of the Companys annual results for the 201415 financial year.
The notional shares were valued at the end of the 201516 financial year at the closing price of the day of announcement of the Companys financial results being 7.91 normal PAYE and NI deducted and the net amount used to purchase the actual shares delivered to each NED.
Michael Ross and Anthony Martin stepped down from their roles as NEDs on 31 October 2016.
The 201617 Delivered as cash figures in the table above represent the prorated cash element of their fees to their departure date and the cash equivalent of their share entitlement prorated to this date converted at the closing share price on 31 October 2016 being 8.71.
45 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance AUDITED INFORMATION continued c Executive Directors scheme interests awarded during 201617
Director
Type of interest awarded Award basis Face value of award % vesting at minimum performance requirements Retention period
Date of award Date of vesting Alan Hirzel LTIP 125% of base salary 600 25% 40% on 4 Nov 19 20% on 4 Nov 20 20% on 4 Nov 21 20% on 4 Nov 22 4 Nov 16 4 Nov 19 Gavin Wood LTIP 100% of base salary 300 25% 50% on 4 Nov 19 25% on 4 Nov 20 25% on 4 Nov 21 4 Nov 16 4 Nov 19 Gavin Wood LTIP New joiner award 300 49% na 1 Jul 16 4 Nov 16 4 Nov 19 Alan Hirzel SIP  free shares Maximum award as per scheme rules 3 na na na 4 Nov 16 4 Nov 19 Gavin Wood 3 Jim Warwick Alan Hirzel SIP matching shares Maximum award as per scheme rules 2 na na na 4 Nov 16 4 Nov 19 Gavin Wood 2 Alan Hirzel ABP deferred share award Up to 45% of base salary 75 na na na 26 Oct 16 26 Sep 18 Jim Warwick The share price used to calculate the face value of the LTIP awards was the closing midmarket price on the day prior to the award date being 851 pence for the 4 November 2016 awards.
2 The share price used to calculate the face value of the free shares was the closing share price of the date of award being 841 pence.
3 The share price of the matching shares acquired on 7 December 2016 was 792.25 pence.
The share price used to calculate the face value of the deferred share awards was the tendealing day average beginning on the day on which the Company announced its financial results being 816.60 pence.
Awards made under the LTIP to Alan Hirzel are in the form of conditional shares and will be subject to an additional retention period following vesting as set out in the table above.
As disclosed in the 2016 Annual Report the Remuneration Committee awarded Gavin Wood a oneoff LTIP new joiner award equal to 100% of base salary on his appointment.
The Committee believed the award was necessary to secure his appointment from a small pool of talent with the international experience and calibre required for the role and to immediately align his interests with those of our shareholders.
Of the award 75% is subject to the same performance conditions as the 201617 LTIP award the remaining 25% will be released subject to his continued employment on the third anniversary of the date of grant of the award.
The share price used to calculate the value of the award was the average share price of the ten dealing days immediately preceding his start date which was 753.90 pence.
Free shares are awarded to all UK employees employed by the Company on the date of award even if under notice of retirement.
Jim Warwick therefore received his full entitlement before his retirement on 31 December 2016.
Jim Warwick was awarded 25% of the deferred share award he would have been granted in respect of the 201516 plan year to reflect his retirement.
The performance conditions for the 2016 LTIP awards are based 70% on target annualised compound EPS growth and 30% on strategic KPIs over the threeyear period ending on 30 June 2019.
In relation to EPS growth there will be 25% vesting at 8% compound growth and 100% vesting at 12% compound growth with proportionate straightline vesting between these two figures.
The remaining performance measures are the Groups four KPIs RabMAb primaries revenue growth nonprimaries revenue growth NPS and market position.
All ABP and LTIP targets will be fully disclosed after vesting unless full disclosure would expose the business to a clear competitive risk.
46 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued AUDITED INFORMATION continued d Executive Director departure arrangements Chief Financial Officer Jeff Iliffe Jeff Iliffe served notice of his intention to step down from the position of Chief Financial Officer on 14 September 2015.
The Committee considered the overall circumstances of his departure as an Executive Director as well as performance contractual obligations and scheme plan rules.
The Committees determinations as previously disclosed in the 2016 Annual Report and consistent with the Committees termination policy are set out below Remuneration element Description Payment in lieu of notice Jeff Iliffe worked and was paid for his full notice period which expired on 13 September 2016.
He stepped down from the Board on 12 September 2016.
No payment was made in respect of salary or benefits or compensation in lieu in respect of any period after his departure date of 13 September 2016 or compensation for loss of office.
Base salary No increase to base pay was awarded from 1 July 2015.
Retirement and other benefits The benefits package was maintained until his date of departure and not beyond.
ABP Jeff Iliffe received the cash element of his 201516 bonus whilst the deferred share element relating to 201516 was not granted.
In respect of his 201415 bonus only 50% of the deferred share award was made which was a prorated amount to reflect his announced departure.
Deferred share awards already accrued from previous years will vest at the normal time on the second anniversary of the date of grant.
For 201617 it was agreed by the Remuneration Committee that he would receive the cash element of bonus only at target and prorated to his date of departure.
No deferred share award will be paid in respect of the 201617 plan year.
LTIP Unexercised but vested LTIP awards are capable of exercise within twelve months from the departure date.
Unvested LTIP awards are subject to meeting the performance requirements and will be prorated for time and will be capable of being exercised within twelve months from their normal release dates.
No LTIP award was made following his resignation on 14 September 2015.
Chief Operating Officer Jim Warwick Jim Warwick retired from the position of Chief Operating Officer on 31 December 2016.
The Committee considered the overall circumstances of his departure as an Executive Director as well as performance contractual obligations and scheme plan rules.
The Committees determinations as previously disclosed in the 2016 Annual Report and consistent with the Committees termination policy are set out below Remuneration element Description Payment in lieu of notice No payment has been made in respect of salary or benefits or compensation in lieu in respect of any period after his departure date of 31 December 2016.
Base salary No increase to base pay was awarded from 1 July 2015.
Retirement and other benefits The benefits package was maintained until his date of departure and not beyond.
ABP Jim Warwick received the cash element of his 201516 bonus in the normal way and 25% of the deferred share award he would have been granted but for his retirement.
For 201617 he received a cash bonus of 35% of base salary in recognition of his satisfactory performance in his leadership of the implementation of the ERP system.
No deferred share award will be granted in respect of the 201617 plan year.
LTIP Unexercised but vested LTIP awards are capable of exercise within twelve months from the date of leaving.
Unvested LTIP awards are subject to meeting the performance requirements and will be prorated for time and will be capable of being exercised within twelve months from their normal release dates.
No LTIP award was made in the financial year of his retirement.
There have been no payments to the former CFO and former COO during the year other than the departure arrangements described above.
The Committee introduced a shareholding guideline of two times salary for all Executive Directors from the date of the 2015 AGM.
This level is to be built up over a period ending on the later of the fifth anniversary of appointment or the fifth anniversary of introduction of the policy and ceases to apply after they cease to be an Executive Director of Abcam.
Until the shareholding guideline is achieved an Executive Director is prohibited from selling any shares they have acquired through a Company scheme.
They can however sell sufficient shares to satisfy any tax liability that may arise on the release or exercise of an award.
47 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance AUDITED INFORMATION continued f Directors shareholdings and share interests continued The extent to which each Executive Director has met the shareholding guideline as at 30 June 2017 or their termination date where earlier is shown in the table below Executive Directors
Type
Owned
Outstanding scheme interests Total of allshare interests and outstanding scheme interests
Unvested not subject to performance measures Vested but unexercised Alan Hirzel 50310 Shares 50310    50310 102% CSOP options LTIP A awards LTIP B awards  175076   175076 Deferred awards   26106  26106 SIP free   1933  1933 SIP matching   1274  1274 50310 175076 29313  254699 Gavin Wood 11748 Shares 11748    11748 38% CSOP options  3525   3525 LTIP A awards 3525   3525 LTIP B awards  71520   71520 Deferred awards SIP free   428  428 SIP matching   227  227 11748 78570 655  90973 Jeff Iliffe 332973 Shares 332973    332973 1001% Unapproved options    170460 170460 CSOP options LTIP A awards LTIP B awards  12199  174363 186562 Deferred awards   6543 24715 31258 SIP free SIP matching 332973 12199 6543 369538 721253 Jim Warwick 2885122 Shares 2885122    2885122 8344% Unapproved options CSOP options LTIP A awards LTIP B awards  75281  139310 214591 Deferred awards   15638 25384 41022 SIP free SIP matching 2885122 75281 15638 164694 3140735 1 Interests in shares owned outright or held by connected persons as at 30 June 2017 or at their respective termination dates for Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe.
Based on share price of 973.5 pence and salary at 30 June 2017 for Alan Hirzel and Gavin Wood and on share prices of 767 pence and 797.5 pence respectively for Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe being the share price at their termination date and their salaries at their termination date.
Outstanding scheme interests under the LTIP the SIP and the ABP deferred share awards take the form of rights to receive shares nilcost share options or conditional share awards.
Outstanding Company Share Options Plan CSOP and unapproved options take the form of rights to receive shares on payment of the relevant exercise price.
4 Details of each scheme interest held by each Executive Director are set out on the following pages.
5 Outstanding scheme interests under the LTIP for which the performance conditions were not met have been excluded.
Part A awards under the LTIP refer to the first 30000 of LTIP value awarded at the date of grant.
A corresponding CSOP option was also granted with an exercise price equal to the share price at the date of grant and subject to the same performance conditions.
In respect of the LTIP part A award subject to achievement of the relevant performance conditions the participant will receive the lower of the number of shares with an aggregate value of 30000 at the date of release and the number of shares originally subject to the award.
Thus 30000 of gain will be subject to income taxNI and any increase in value between the date of grant of the award and the date at which the shares are sold is delivered through the CSOP option and is subject to capital gains tax.
48 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued AUDITED INFORMATION continued f Directors shareholdings and share interests continued NonExecutive Directors are not eligible to participate in the Companys share schemes.
Their shareholdings as at 30 June 2017 were as follows
Murray Hennessy 43245 Jonathan Milner 21994934 Sue Harris 1615 Louise Patten 38887 Mara Aspinall 6118 Interests in shares owned outright or held by connected persons as at 30 June 2017.
There have been no changes in the interests of the Executive Directors or the NEDs between 30 June 2017 and the date of approval of the 201617 Annual Report and Accounts.
With effect from 1 July 2015 it was agreed that the NEDs would receive a portion of their fees as a fixed number of fully paid ordinary shares delivered as soon as practicable in the first open period following the announcement of preliminary results each year.
Details of scheme interests exercised in the year
Type of award Number of shares Exercise price pence Market price on date of exercise pence Gain on exercise Jim Warwick LTIP B Unapproved 30000 0.2 808 242340 Details of outstanding scheme interests LTIP and CSOP awards Details of LTIP and CSOP awards outstanding for Directors who served during the year are as follows Name of Director Type of award
Number of awards at 30 June 2016 Awarded Exercised Lapsed Number of awards at 30 June 2017 Number of vested awards at 30 June 2017 Alan Hirzel CSOP 464 6465   6465 LTIP A 0.2 6465   6465 LTIP B 0.2 123210 70505  18639 175076 136140 70505  31569 175076 Jeff Iliffe CSOP 464 6465   6465 LTIP A 0.2 6465   6465 LTIP B 0.2 226767   40205 186562 174363 239697   53135 186562 174363 Jim Warwick CSOP 464 6465   6465 LTIP A 0.2 6465   6465 LTIP B 0.2 265385  30000 20794 214591 139310 278315  30000 33724 214591 139310 Gavin Wood CSOP 851  3525   3525 LTIP A 0.2  3525   3525 LTIP B 0.2  71520   71520 78570   78570 Total 654152 149075 30000 118428 654799 313673 1 The market price at the date of award for all awards made during the year was 851 pence.
For Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe these represent the number of awards at their termination date.
These relate to the 2008 2009 2010 and 2012 awards and are included in the number of awards at 30 June 2017 for Alan Hirzel and Gavin Wood and at their termination dates for Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe.
49 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance AUDITED INFORMATION continued f Directors shareholdings and share interests continued Annual Bonus Plan deferred share awards Deferred share awards made under the ABP which remain outstanding at 30 June 2017 are outlined below Executive Directors Nilcost options or conditional shares held as at 30 June 2016 Nilcost options or conditional shares awarded during the year ended 30 June 2017 Award date Market price per share at award
Maximum nilcost options or conditional shares held as at 30 June 2017 Alan Hirzel 27475 9169 26 Oct 16 816.6 pence 26 Oct 18 Jeff Iliffe 31258  31258 Jim Warwick 39123 1899 41022 Gavin Wood 97856 11068 98386 These relate to the awards made in September 2013 November 2014 and October 2015 under the ABP for financial years 201213 201314 and 201415 respectively.
The 201213 award vested on 10 September 2015 and the 201314 award vested on 23 September 2016 following satisfactory completion of a twoyear holding period.
The 201415 award will vest on 26 October 2017.
These relate to the awards made in October 2016 under the ABP for financial year 201516.
Jim Warwick received 25% of the award he would have received were it not for his retirement.
3 For Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe the figures relate to their holdings as at their respective termination dates.
Share Incentive Plan SIP Abcam operates an HMRCapproved SIP for all UK employees.
Under the SIP awards are made as follows Free share awards Annual awards are made to UKbased staff with a market value up to the HMRC limit which in 201617 was 3600 each 201516 3600.
Awards take the form of a conditional entitlement to shares and will vest after three years of continuous employment with the Company following the date of award.
Partnership and matching share awards All UKbased employees are given the opportunity to invest up to the HMRC limit which in 201617 was 1800 per annum 201516 1800 to acquire new partnership shares in the Company at market value.
If these shares are held for three years and the employee remains employed by the Company during that time then they will also receive an additional matching share for each share acquired.
Dividend shares Shares conditionally and beneficially held in the SIP are entitled to earn dividends in the form of shares.
These shares are immediately owned outright and can be removed from the SIP by the participant with no penalty.
The following table sets out the shares purchased and awarded under the SIP in respect of each of the Executive Directors during the year.
Executive Director Type of award Conditionally awarded shares Shares owned outright
30 June 2016
Number transferred to outright ownership during the year
30 June 2017
30 June 2016
Number owned outright as at 30 June 2017 Jeff Iliffe Free 2094  2094  7426 2094 9520 Partnership     4607  4607 Matching 1048  1048  3559 1048 4607 Dividend     1589  1589 3142  3142  17181 3142 20323 Jim Warwick Free 2094 428 2522  7426 2522 9948 Partnership     4607  4607 Matching 1048  1048  3559 1048 4607 Dividend     1589 171 1760 3142 428 3570  17181 3741 20922 Alan Hirzel Free 2094 428 589 1933  589 589 Partnership     1047 227 1274 Matching 1047 227  1274 Dividend     128 56 184 3141 655 589 3207 1175 872 2047 Gavin Wood Free  428  428 Partnership      227 227 Matching  227  227 Dividend      6 6 1 Conditionally awarded shares are dependent upon three years continuous employment from the date of award.
2 For Jim Warwick and Jeff Iliffe the figures relate to their holdings as at their respective termination dates.
50 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued AUDITED INFORMATION continued f Directors shareholdings and share interests continued Share Incentive Plan SIP continued Dividend shares continued The awardpurchase of free matching and partnership shares in the year took place on 26 October 2016 at a price of 841 pence per share.
The market price of the ordinary shares at 30 June 2017 was 973.5 pence and the range during the year was 721 pence to 995 pence.
Nonexecutive appointments at other companies The following Executive Directors served as NEDs elsewhere and received and retained the following fees up to their termination date Executive Director Company
Jeff Iliffe Treatt plc 7844 Jim Warwick Quartix Holdings plc 17500 Jeff Iliffe also served on the board of trustees of a charity and did not receive fees for this appointment.
Jim Warwick also served on the board of directors of an academy school and did not receive fees in respect of this position.
Neither the CEO Alan Hirzel nor the CFO Gavin Wood held any nonexecutive appointments at any other organisations during the year.
UNAUDITED INFORMATION The Companys Total Shareholder Return TSR over the previous eight years compared to a broad equity market is shown in the graph below.
The FTSE 250 index has been chosen as the comparator because Abcam would sit within this if it were listed on the Main Market of the London Stock Exchange.
The Committee considers the relatively complex international nature of this index to be comparable to the Companys business operations where a large proportion of revenues are generated outside the UK.
CEO remuneration The table below shows the historical total remuneration for the person undertaking the role of CEO Financial year CEO single figure for total remuneration Annual bonus awarded against maximum opportunity Longterm incentive vesting rates against maximum opportunity 201617 Alan Hirzel 1378 78% 71.6% 201516 Alan Hirzel 614 52% na 201415 Alan Hirzel 685 73.3% na 201314 Jonathan Milner 642 56.8% 201213 Jonathan Milner 821 71.2% 16.9% 201112 Jonathan Milner 739 60% 96.3% 201011 Jonathan Milner 805 62.7% 100% 200910 Jonathan Milner 716 100% na Vesting of longterm incentives is measured over a threeyear performance period.
For the 201415 and 201516 years Alan Hirzel had not been employed by Abcam for more than three years and therefore no longterm incentives had vested.
Abcam FTSE 250 01 July 01 July 01 July 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June 29 June 30 June 51 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance UNAUDITED INFORMATION continued h Percentage change in CEO remuneration Abcam has an international workforce of around 1000 employees in eight countries.
Due to the differing local pay levels across each of our overseas offices the Committee considers the most meaningful comparator group to be the average remuneration of UK employees.
The following table shows the percentage change in remuneration between the years ended 30 June 2016 and 30 June 2017 for the CEO and this comparator group.
Salary
Taxable benefits
CEO percentage change 50.0% 45.1% 124.6% Comparator group percentage change 6.5% 7.7% 1.4% 1 In 201617 Alan Hirzel elected to receive Companyfunded private medical insurance in addition to his existing benefits.
2 The comparator group is inclusive of promotions in the period.
3 The annual bonus award for the financial year paid in October following the end of the year.
The table below shows Abcams dividend payout increased by 14.9% versus the total Group employee pay expenditure increase of 29.3% between the financial years ended 30 June 2016 and 30 June 2017.
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 m % increase
20.8 18.1 14.9% Total employee pay 56.5 43.7 29.3% Dividends are the interim and final dividends paid in respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2016 and the interim dividend paid and the final dividend recommended in respect of the financial year ended 30 June 2017.
2 Total employee pay includes bonuses employer social security pension contributions redundancies and sharebased charges.
3 Increase in total employee pay due to an overall increase in headcount in addition to salary increases for existing employees during the year.
The following sections outline how the Remuneration Policy will be implemented in 201718.
Executive Directors base salaries The base salaries of the CEO and CFO were increased to 492000 and 307500 respectively with effect from 1 July 2017.
Salary
000 Change Salary as at 1 July 2017 Alan Hirzel CEO 480 2.5% 492 Gavin Wood CFO 300 2.5% 308 Annual incentive deferred bonus and LTIP awards The overall performance framework for 201718 for Executive Directors remains unchanged and is as follows Maximum % of salary 201718 measures Weighting Annual Bonus Plan 150% of which 30% of any bonus is deferred into shares Profit growth 50% Strategic targets 33% Personal objectives 17% Long Term Incentive Plan 125% for CEO 100% for the CFO Threeyear EPS growth 70% Threeyear strategic targets 30% The strategic targets for the ABP and LTIP awards are measurable quantifiable and aligned with the Groups KPIs as set out on page 14.
The EPS growth targets for the forthcoming LTIP award will be 8% growth per annum for threshold vesting and 12% growth per annum for maximum vesting.
Following the review of strategic priorities as set out on pages 12 and 13 we have aligned our strategic targets with them.
These targets are considered to be appropriately stretching and incentivising in the context of our business strategy.
52 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued UNAUDITED INFORMATION continued j Implementation of Directors Remuneration Policy in 201718 continued Annual incentive deferred bonus and LTIP awards continued The strategic targets for the forthcoming LTIP award will be based on recombinant antibody revenue growth immunoassay revenue and customer engagement NPS.
The ABP targets and the strategic targets for the LTIP will not be disclosed in advance as they are deemed by the Committee to be commercially sensitive.
Appropriate retrospective disclosure of targets will be provided when these are no longer considered commercially sensitive.
Annual incentive deferred bonus and LTIP awards The Committee introduced a performance crossunderpin to the ABP in 2015.
At the Committees discretion vesting may be restricted if any of the three performance elements financial strategic or personal shows serious underperformance or if the Committee determines that there has been underperformance on the part of an Executive Director in their role.
Pension
The Company retains its policy of contributing 12% of base salary prior to any voluntary waivers into each Executive Directors pension scheme.
For further details please refer to the pensionrelated and other benefits section on page 45.
NonExecutive Directors During 201516 the Company put in place fee arrangements for all NEDs where a portion of their fees would be delivered as a fixed number of fully paid ordinary shares.
Louise Patten Mara Aspinall and Sue Harris will receive an increase in fees to 70000 per annum 201617 50000 with effect from 1 July 2017.
There will be no increase in fees paid to Murray Hennessy and Jonathan Milner.
The Committee advises the Board on overall Remuneration Policy on behalf of the Board and with the benefit of advice from external consultants and the SVP Human Resources it also determines the remuneration of the Executive Directors and proposes a fee for the Chairman of the Board of Directors with the Chairman not being present for any discussions on his fee.
The remuneration of the NEDs is determined by the Chairman and the Executive Directors.
The Committee formulates and applies the policy with consideration to the prevailing economic climate in the major economies in which the Group operates.
It also observes the spirit of the Groups core values including responsible leadership in the external and internal social environment.
Consequently the Committee closely considers the Companys performance in building both longterm shareholder value and a secure future for all stakeholders.
The Committee currently comprises four NEDs each of whom the Company deems to be independent Louise Patten Chairman Murray Hennessy Sue Harris and Mara Aspinall.
Murray Hennessy is considered by the Company to be independent as he was independent on his appointment as Chairman.
The Company Secretary and the SVP Human Resources attend the Committee meetings by invitation and assist the Committee in the execution of its objectives except when issues relating to their own compensation are discussed.
No Director is involved in deciding his or her own remuneration.
While it is the Committees responsibility to exercise independent judgement the Committee does request advice from management and professional advisors so as to be informed given the internal and external environment.
No member of the Committee has any personal financial interest other than as a shareholder in the matters to be decided by the Committee.
The four independent members of the Committee have no conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships.
Members of the Committee have no daytoday involvement in the running of the Company.
The Committee met six times during the year.
Details of attendance can be found in the Corporate Governance Report see page 33.
53 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance UNAUDITED INFORMATION continued k Remuneration Committee continued External advisors to the Committee The following table sets out the details of external advisors who provided material assistance to the Committee during the year in its consideration of matters related to Directors remuneration Advisors Appointment and selection Other services provided to the Company Fees for Committee assistance Deloitte LLP Deloitte Appointed to provide ongoing advice to the Committee on various matters including Directors remuneration reporting regulations shareholder communication and other governance matters.
Advice on risk management.
Deloitte is a member of the Remuneration Consultants Group and as such voluntarily operates under the Code of Conduct in relation to executive remuneration consulting in the UK.
The Committee is satisfied that advice received from Deloitte during the year was objective and independent.
Statement of voting at general meeting The table below shows the advisory vote on the 201516 Remuneration Report at the 2016 AGM and the advisory vote on the Directors Remuneration Policy at the 2015 AGM.
The shareholder support we received for last years Annual Remuneration Report was lower than we have seen in previous years.
The main concern for shareholders was the salary increase we made for the CEO.
The Remuneration Committee unanimously agreed that it was in the best interests of the Company to make a oneoff stepchange adjustment to bring his salary in line with the market reflecting the value of his role.
Votes for Votes against Votes total
Remuneration Report 106188576 73.47 38342353 26.53 144530929 7943095 2015 Remuneration Policy 140865445 91.46 13160891 8.54 154026336 691369
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf by Louise Patten Remuneration Committee Chairman 8 September 2017 54 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Remuneration report continued Part 3  Annual Report on Remuneration continued The Directors present their report together with the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Pages 1 to 57 inclusive together with sections of the Annual Report incorporated by reference consist of a Strategic Report and a Directors Report that have been drawn up and presented in accordance with and in reliance upon applicable English company law and the liabilities of Directors in connection with those reports shall be subject to the limitations and restrictions provided by such law.
Additional information incorporated by reference into this Directors Report including disclosures required under the Companies Act 2006 the Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 and the UK Corporate Governance Code 2014 Code can be located as follows Disclosure Location Likely future developments Throughout the Strategic Report on pages 1 to 27 Research and development activities Business Model on page 6 and Our Financials on page 22 to 27 Financial risk management objectives and policies including hedging policies and the Groups exposure to financial risks Note 24 to the financial statements on pages 87 to 91 Statement on corporate governance Corporate Governance Report on pages 29 to 36 Employee involvement Our People on pages 20 and 21 Postbalance sheet events There have been no important events affecting the Company or the Group since the year end.
Dividends
The Directors recommend a final dividend of 7.355 pence 2015 16 6.556 pence per ordinary share to be paid on 8 December 2017 to shareholders on the register on 17 November 2017.
The associated exdividend date will be 16 November 2017.
Together with the interim dividend of 2.825 pence per share paid on 13 April 2017 this brings the total dividend for the financial year ended 30 June 2017 to 10.18 pence per share 201516 8.91 pence representing an increase of 14.3% over the previous year.
Disabled employees Abcam is an equal opportunities employer and ensures that applications for employment from people with disabilities and other underrepresented groups are given full and fair consideration.
Such individuals are given the same training development and job opportunities as other employees.
Every effort is also made to retain and support employees who have a disability during their employment including flexible working to assist their reentry into the workplace and making alternative suitable provisions.
Control and share structure Details of the authorised and issued share capital together with details of the movements in the Companys issued share capital during the year are shown in note 22 to the financial statements.
The Company has one class of ordinary share which carries no right to fixed income.
Each share carries the right to one vote at general meetings of the Company.
Other than specific lockins and orderly marketing provisions negotiated with vendors in connection with acquisitions made by the Company there are no specific restrictions on the size of a holding nor on the transfer of shares which are both governed by the general provisions of the Articles of Association and prevailing legislation.
The Directors are not aware of any agreements between the holders of the Companys shares that may result in a restriction on the transfer of securities or on voting rights.
No person has any special rights of control over the Companys share capital and all issued shares are fully paid.
Details of employee share schemes are set out in note 25 to the financial statements.
Shares held by the Abcam Employee Share Benefit Trust abstain from voting.
Agreements affected by change of control The Company is not party to any significant agreements that take effect alter or terminate upon a change of control of the Company following a takeover.
There are no agreements between the Company and its Directors providing for compensation for loss of office or employment whether through resignation redundancy or otherwise that occurs because of a takeover bid.
However members of the Executive Leadership Team excluding the Executive Directors are entitled to an agreed sum equal to six months basic salary in the event of a dismissal for any reason other than misconduct including constructive dismissal by reason of a fundamental breach of contract by Abcam or a successor employer within twelve months following a change of control provided that the individual enters into a settlement agreement and agrees to certain obligations regarding confidentiality intellectual property and restrictive covenants.
The agreed sum is payable in addition to any pay in lieu of notice but includes any entitlement to statutory redundancy pay.
Major interest in shares Details of the interests in voting rights in the Companys shares notified to the Company in accordance with Chapter 5 of the FCAs Disclosure Guidance and Transparency Rules excluding Directors interests which are set out on page 49 are set out below At 30 June 2017 At 7 September 2017 Fund Manager Number of ordinary shares held
Number of ordinary shares held
T.
Rowe Price Group 17385932 8.50% 17385932 8.50% Baillie Gifford and Co Ltd 15067537 7.37% 15067537 7.37% Select Equity Group Inc 12725812 6.22% 9693955 4.74% Wasatch Advisors Inc 11666484 5.71% 11666484 5.71% OppenheimerFunds Inc 7696950 3.76% 7696950 3.76% Harding Loevner LLC 7227282 3.53% 7227282 3.53% 55 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Directors report Purchase of own shares At the end of the year the Directors had authority under a resolution passed at the Companys AGM on 2 November 2016 to purchase through the market 20280000 of the Companys ordinary shares subject to the conditions set out in that resolution.
No shares were purchased under this authority during the year under review.
Directors
Brief biographical descriptions of the current Directors of the Company all of whom were in office during the year and up to the date of signing the financial statements are set out on pages 30 and 31.
The beneficial and nonbeneficial interests of the Directors in the Companys ordinary shares of 0.2 pence are disclosed in the Remuneration Report.
The names of previous Directors of the Company who resigned from the Board during the year are set out in the Board and Committee meeting attendance table on page 33.
The powers of the Directors are determined by UK legislation and the Companys Articles of Association together with any specific authorities that may be given to the Directors by shareholders from time to time for example the authority to allot or purchase shares in the Company.
Reelection of Directors Following performance evaluation the Chairman has determined that each individual continues to demonstrate commitment to his or her role and to display effective performance he is therefore recommending the reelection of all Directors seeking to remain on the Board.
Abcam has elected to comply with Code Provision B.7.1 and therefore all Directors shall retire and stand for reelection at the AGM to be held on 14 November 2017.
Articles of Association The rules governing the appointment and replacement of Directors are contained in the Companys Articles of Association.
The Articles of Association may be amended only by special resolution at a general meeting of shareholders.
Qualifying third party indemnity provisions The Company has made qualifying third party indemnity provisions for the benefit of its Directors during the reporting period and these remain in force at the date of this report.
Directors and officers insurance The Company has purchased and maintained throughout the financial year directors and officers liability insurance in respect of itself and for its Directors and Officers this gives appropriate cover for legal action brought against its Directors.
Going concern In adopting the going concern basis for preparing the financial statements the Directors have considered the business activities and reviewed the Group forecasts and budgets as well as the Groups principal risks and uncertainties as set out above.
The Directors are satisfied that the Group has adequate resources to continue to operate for the next twelve months.
For this reason the Group continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its financial statements.
Annual General Meeting The AGM will be held at 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL UK on 14 November 2017 at 2.00pm.
A presentation will be made at this meeting outlining the recent developments in the business.
All voting at the meeting will be conducted by show of hands where every shareholder present in person or by proxy will have one vote unless a poll is requested by a shareholder for which each shareholder present or by proxy will have one vote for each share of which they are the owner.
The Group will publish the results of the votes on its website after the
Shareholders are invited to submit written questions in advance of the meeting.
Questions should be sent to the Company Secretary Abcam plc 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL UK.
A resolution to reappoint PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP as independent auditor to the Group will be proposed at the AGM.
Details of the other resolutions to be proposed at the meeting are set out in the Circular and Notice of AGM 2017 which will be made available to all shareholders together with a proxy card.
Statement of Directors responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Company and the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Company and the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
56 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance Directors report continued Statement of Directors responsibilities continued The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information included on the Companys website.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and the Companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in the biographies on pages 30 and 31 confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and the Directors Report on pages 55 to 57 together with the Our Financials and Our Risks sections on pages 22 to 27 and pages 15 to 19 respectively of the Strategic Report include a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
Auditor
Each Director in office at the date the Directors Report is approved confirms that so far as the Director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and the Companys auditor is unaware and heshe has taken all the steps that heshe ought to have taken as Director in order to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP has expressed its willingness to continue in office as auditor.
On behalf of the Board Murray Hennessy
Suzanne Smith Chief Legal Officer and Company Secretary 8 September 2017 57 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Corporate governance Financial statements 59 Independent auditors report 65 Consolidated income statement 65 Consolidated statement of comprehensive income 66 Consolidated balance sheet Consolidated statement of changes in equity 68 Consolidated cash flow statement Notes to the financial statements 97 Company balance sheet 98 Company statement of changes in equity Notes to the Company financial statements 107 Technical glossary 108 Corporate directory 108 Shareholder information Report on the audit of the financial statements
In our opinion Abcam plcs Group financial statements and Company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the Companys affairs as at 30 June 2017 and of the Groups profit and cash flows for the year then ended the Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the Company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with United Kingdom Generally Accepted Accounting Practice United Kingdom Accounting Standards comprising FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and applicable law and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Accounts 2017 the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated and Company balance sheets as at 30 June 2017 the consolidated income statement and the consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the year then ended the consolidated cash flow statement for the year then ended and the consolidated and Company statements of changes in equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
2594000 2016 2270000  Group financial statements.
Based on 5% of profit before tax.
2377000 2016 2103000  Company financial statements.
Based on 5% of profit before tax.
We conducted audits of the complete financial information of Abcam plc Abcam Inc and Abcam Trading Shanghai Co.
Limited.
We performed specified procedures over certain account balances and transaction classes at other Group companies including another Chinese operation.
With the exception of the audit of Abcam Trading Shanghai Co.
Limited and certain specified procedures performed over another Chinese operation which were performed by the component auditor the Group engagement team performed all of the audit procedures.
Taken together the Group companies over which we performed our audit procedures accounted for 86% of the absolute profit before tax i. and 85% of revenue.
Inventory provisioning Group and Company.
Costing of inventory manufactured in house and hybridomas included within property plant and equipment Group and Company.
Classification of costs associated with systems and process improvements Group and Company.
Materiality
Audit scope Key audit matters Our audit approach
59 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Independent auditors report to the members of Abcam plc Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Key audit matters continued Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Inventory provisioning  Group and Company The Group and the Company had inventory of 21761000 and 15286000 respectively as at 30 June 2017.
Inventory principally comprises antibodies and reagents that bear a natural risk of obsolescence.
Furthermore owing to the low incremental cost of inhouse production of antibodies the Group and the Company often produce surplus inventories that are at risk of expiring before a sale can be achieved see note 4 and page 39 of the Audit and Risk Committee Report.
For new products the Directors apply a fixed percentage provision against the inventory levels held at the year end unless they believe that there are specific reasons that no provision is required.
For all other products the Directors calculate a specific provision for obsolescence by comparing inventories on hand at year end with forecast sales volumes on a productbyproduct basis providing fully against inventories regarded as surplus.
There is therefore judgement in the valuation of inventories owing to the estimation uncertainty that exists around future sales forecasts.
We understood and assessed the methodology utilised to estimate the Groups and the Companys inventory provisions and checked that the calculation of the provision was mathematically accurate.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
For new products against which the Directors had not recorded a provision we assessed the Directors rationale as to why no provision was required.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
For the other products we assessed the reasonableness of the Directors future sales forecasts by considering whether projected levels of sales growth were supported by historical trends or specific factors relevant to the product in question.
We considered both the risk of under and overstatement of the inventory provisions by performing sensitivity analysis on the forecast future sales and ascertaining the change that would be required to materially affect the determined provision.
We assessed that the likelihood of such a change was low.
Costing of inventory manufactured in house and hybridomas included within property plant and equipment  Group and Company The Group and the Company capitalise within property plant and equipment PPE costs arising from the production of hybridoma cells which are used to generate antibodies that the Group sells.
During the year 3595000 was capitalised by the Group and 3785000 was capitalised by the Company as part of the total additions to hybridomas and assays and hybridomas under construction see note 4 and page 39 of the Audit and Risk Committee Report.
The costs incurred both in producing the hybridomas held in PPE and in harvesting the antibodies held in inventory include a labour and overhead allocation.
This allocation is capitalised into PPE and inventory on the basis of the proportion of batches that pass internal quality tests.
No allocation is capitalised for the batches that do not pass the tests and the labour and overhead element is instead written off in the income statement.
The nature of the manufacturing process is such that there are fluctuations in the proportion of batches of hybridomas and antibodies that pass quality tests meaning that the total labour and overhead absorbed into PPE and inventory varies.
The relevant calculations are also performed manually necessitating a substantive approach to testing that appropriate amounts of labour and overhead cost have been capitalised.
We evaluated whether appropriate costs had been capitalised as inventory and property plant and equipment including checking on a sample basis the labour costs capitalised.
For labour costs we agreed on a sample basis the timesheet records used to allocate labour costs to the underlying records.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
For inventory manufactured in house and hybridomas we agreed on a sample basis the quality test results to underlying records.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
We also checked the mathematical accuracy of the calculations taking into account the proportion of batches passing quality tests and that only reasonable categories of overheads were absorbed into inventory and capitalised as property plant and equipment.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
60 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Abcam plc Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Key audit matters continued Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Classification of costs associated with systems and process improvements  Group and Company During the year the Group and the Company capitalised costs of 11202000 and 11131000 respectively in relation to the systems and process improvements project.
Further amounts in relation to systems and process improvements have been expensed to the consolidated income statement and to the extent this is incremental included in the reconciliation of the adjusted income measures within the Our financials section see note 4 and page 39 of the Audit and Risk Committee Report.
The Directors have assessed whether the costs incurred in relation to the implementation of the Groups and the Companys systems and improvements project meet the criteria for capitalisation and if not whether the costs were incremental to the ongoing costs of the Group.
The adjusted consolidated profit before tax which is considered by management to be a key metric and is discussed in the Our financials section is directly impacted by the amount of costs capitalised and the amounts included in the reconciliation of the adjusted income measures.
We focused on whether the costs capitalised met the criteria for capitalisation and whether for those costs classified as systems and process improvements costs on the face of the consolidated income statement they were indeed incremental.
We vouched a sample of the costs capitalised in relation to the system and improvements project to invoices from suppliers.
We agreed a sample of the internal staff costs capitalised to supporting calculations and time records.
In both cases we considered whether the nature of the costs met the criteria for the costs to be capitalised.
For costs expensed to the consolidated income statement and included within the reconciliation of adjusted income measures we considered whether the Directors policy for the treatment of such costs was reasonable and on a sample basis assessed whether the costs included in the reconciliation were in line with the Directors policy.
We found no material exceptions in our testing.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group and the Company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group financial statements are a consolidation of 17 reporting units comprising the Groups operating businesses and holding companies.
We performed audits of the complete financial information of Abcam plc Abcam Inc and Abcam Trading Shanghai Co.
Limited reporting units which were individually financially significant and accounted for 83% of the Groups revenue and 80% of the Groups absolute profit before tax i. the relevant reporting units.
We also performed specified audit procedures over goodwill and other intangible assets as well as certain account balances and transaction classes that we regarded as material to the Group at four further reporting units one based in China one in the UK one in Japan and another in the US.
The Group engagement team performed all audit procedures with the exception of the audit of Abcam Trading Shanghai Co.
Limited and certain specified procedures performed over another Chinese operation which were performed by a component auditor in China.
Our involvement in the work of the component auditor in China included regular communication with a formal meeting arranged following the performance of the procedures.
In addition a member of the Group engagement team met with the component auditor in China and conducted a review of the working papers.
Taken together the Group companies over which we performed our audit procedures accounted for 86% of the absolute profit before tax and 85% of revenue.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
61 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Our audit approach continued Materiality continued Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Company financial statements Overall Group materiality 2594000 2016 2270000.
2377000 2016 2103000.
How we determined it 5% of profit before tax.
5% of profit before tax.
Rationale for benchmark applied We believe that profit before tax is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the Group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
We believe that profit before tax is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the Company and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our Group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall Group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 965000 and 2464000.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall Group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit and Risk Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 130000 Group audit 2016 114000 and 119000 Company audit 2016 105000 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the Groups and Companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report and Accounts 2017 other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 and ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
62 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Abcam plc Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Reporting on other information continued Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 June 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group As a result of the directors voluntary reporting on how they have applied the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code we are required to report to you if we have anything material to add or draw attention to regarding The directors confirmation on page 15 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity.
The disclosures in the Annual Report that describe those risks and explain how they are being managed or mitigated.
The directors explanation on page 16 of the Annual Report as to how they have assessed the prospects of the Group over what period they have done so and why they consider that period to be appropriate and their statement as to whether they have a reasonable expectation that the Group will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the period of their assessment including any related disclosures drawing attention to any necessary qualifications or assumptions.
We have nothing to report in respect of this responsibility.
Other Code Provisions As a result of the directors voluntary reporting on how they have applied the Code we are required to report to you if in our opinion The statement given by the directors on page 57 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the Groups and Companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the Group and Company obtained in the course of performing our audit.
The section of the Annual Report on pages 37 to 39 describing the work of the Audit and Risk Committee does not appropriately address matters communicated by us to the Audit and Risk Committee.
We have nothing to report in respect of this responsibility.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors responsibilities set out on pages 56 and 57 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the Groups and the Companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the Group or the Company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
63 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Report on the audit of the financial statements continued Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit continued Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the Company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the Company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other voluntary reporting Going concern The directors have requested that we review the statement on page 56 in relation to going concern as if the Company were a premium listed Company.
We have nothing to report having performed our review.
The directors assessment of the prospects of the Group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the Group The directors have requested that we perform a review of the directors statements on pages 15 and 16 that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the Group and in relation to the longerterm viability of the Group as if the Company were a premium listed Company.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the Group and Company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
We have nothing to report having performed this review.
Other Code provisions The directors have prepared a corporate governance statement and requested that we review it as though the Company were a premium listed Company.
We have nothing to report in respect of the requirement for the auditors of premium listed companies to report when the directors statement relating to the Companys compliance with the Code does not properly disclose a departure from a relevant provision of the Code specified under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors remuneration The Company voluntarily prepares a Directors Remuneration Report in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
The directors requested that we audit the part of the Directors Remuneration Report specified by the Companies Act 2006 to be audited as if the Company were a quoted Company.
In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the CA06.
Simon Ormiston Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
8 September 2017 64 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Independent auditors report continued to the members of Abcam plc
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Revenue 5 217098 171673 Cost of sales 64998 51142 Gross profit 152100 120531 Administrative and management expenses before systems and process improvement costs 73963 57437 Systems and process improvement costs 4436 3955 Administration and management expenses 78399 61392 Research and development expenses 6 18565 12821 Operating profit 55136 46318 Finance income 9 162 146 Finance costs 9 3424 1052 Profit before tax 51874 45412 Taxation 10 9517 7983 Profit for the year attributable to the owners of the parent 6 42357 37429 Basic earnings per share pence 11 20.90 18.61 Diluted earnings per share pence 11 20.74 18.53
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Profit for the year 42357 37429 Other comprehensive gainslosses that may be reclassified to profit or loss in subsequent years Movement on cash flow hedges 24 8569 10819 Movement on net investment hedge 24 856 1677 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 5157 23903 Movement in fair value of available for sale asset 1824 164 Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income 1610 1995 Other comprehensive income for the year 11424 16756 Total comprehensive income for the year 53781 54185 65 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Consolidated statement of comprehensive income For the year ended 30 June 2017 Consolidated income statement For the year ended 30 June 2017 Note 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Noncurrent assets Goodwill 12 115511 112462 Intangible assets 13 73588 70208 Property plant and equipment 14 22321 17623 Deferred tax asset 15 6620 9615 Derivative financial instruments 19 193 218233 209908 Current assets Inventories 16 21761 19675 Trade and other receivables 17 34638 28504 Availableforsale asset 18 985 797 Derivative financial instruments 19 1327 11 Term deposits  1748 Cash and cash equivalents 84752 68919 143463 119654 Total assets 361696 329562 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 20 29288 20078 Current tax liabilities 1220 1958 Contingent consideration and fees 24  1990 Derivative financial instruments 19 2090 9267 32598 33293 Net current assets 110865 86361 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liability 15 21880 22938 Contingent consideration and fees 24  10910 Derivative financial instruments 19 99 1231 21979 35079 Total liabilities 54577 68372 Net assets 307119 261190
Share capital 22 409 405 Share premium account 22 23910 21549 Merger reserve 22 68073 61560 Own shares 22 3626 3231 Translation reserve 22 28072 23857 Hedging reserve 22 43 7066 Retained earnings 190324 164116 Total equity attributable to the owners of the parent 307119 261190 The financial statements on pages 65 to 96 of Abcam plc registered number  were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 8 September 2017.
They were signed on its behalf by Gavin Wood
8 September 2017 66 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Consolidated balance sheet As at 30 June 2017
Share capital
Merger reserve
Translation reserve
Retained earnings
Balance as at 1 July 2015 402 19522 56513 2812 1266 1758 139987 214104 Profit for the year       37429 37429 Other comprehensive income Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations     23446  457 23903 Movements on cash flow hedges 24      10819  10819 Movement on net investment hedge     1677   1677 Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income      1995  1995 25123 8824 457 16756 Total comprehensive income     25123 8824 37886 54185 Issue of share capital 3 2027 5047 658    6419 Own shares disposed of on release of shares    239   239 Credit to equity for sharebased payments net of tax       3222 3222 Payment of dividends 23       16740 16740 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity 3 2027 5047 419   13757 7099 Balance as at 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 405 21549 61560 3231 23857 7066 164116 261190 Profit for the year       42357 42357 Other comprehensive income Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations     5071  86 5157 Movements on cash flow hedges 24      8569  8569 Movement on net investment hedge 24     856   856 Movement in fair value of available for sale asset       164 164 Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income      1546 64 1610 4215 7023 186 11424 Total comprehensive income     4215 7023 42543 53781 Issue of share capital 4 2361 6513 921    7957 Own shares disposed of on release of shares    526   526 Credit to equity for sharebased payments net of tax       3365 3365 Purchase of own shares       104 104 Payment of dividends 23       19070 19070 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity 4 2361 6513 395   16335 7852 Balance as at 30 June 2017 409 23910 68073 3626 28072 43 190324 307119 1 Exchange differences on translation of overseas operations and net foreign investment hedges.
2 Gains and losses recognised on cash flow hedges.
The sharebased payment reserve and tax reserve which were previously shown separately have been combined within retained earnings for presentational purposes.
67 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Profit before tax 51874 45412 Finance income 9 162 146 Finance costs 9 3424 1052 Operating profit for the year 55136 46318 Adjustments for Depreciation of property plant and equipment 14 5613 3879 Amortisation of intangible assets 13 9713 7476 Financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss 6 1232 2404 Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment 3 2 Loss on disposal of intangible assets 6  164 Research and development expenditure credit 6 705 1947 Sharebased payments charge 8 3873 2243 Contingent consideration change in fair value 24 875 Unrealised currency translation lossesgains 185 631 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 71711 59908 Increasedecrease in inventories 2086 1261 Increase in receivables 767 4562 Increase in payables 7586 191 Cash generated from operations 76444 56798 Income taxes paid 10060 9477 Finance costs  7 Net cash inflow from operating activities 66384 47314 Investing activities Investment income 162 294 Purchase of property plant and equipment 10224 7974 Purchase of intangible assets 8947 7608 Transfer of cash in to escrow for future capital expenditure 6075 Acquisition of subsidiaries net of cash and cash equivalents acquired 24 9767 6258 Proceeds on disposal of property plant and equipment  3 Sale of term deposits 1827 Net cash outflow from investing activities 33024 21543 Financing activities Dividends paid 23 19070 16740 Proceeds on issue of shares 1442 1483 Purchase of own shares 104 114 Net cash outflow from financing activities 17732 15371 Increase in cash and cash equivalents 15628 10400 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 68919 57059 Effect of foreign exchange rates 205 1460 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 84752 68919 Cash and term deposits at end of year comprise 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Cash and cash equivalents 84752 68919 Term deposits current  1748 Total cash and cash equivalents and term deposits 84752 70667 68 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Consolidated cash flow statement For the year ended 30 June 2017 1.
Presentation of the financial statements a.
General information Abcam plc the Company is incorporated and domiciled in the UK and registered in England under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of the registered office is 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL UK.
The Company is a public limited company whose shares are listed on AIM of the London Stock Exchange.
The Company and its subsidiaries together the Group produce and distribute high quality researchgrade antibodies and associated protein research tools.
The Group operates through its ultimate parent company Abcam plc and through a channel of wholly owned manufacturing and distribution subsidiaries mainly based in the US and Asia Pacific which allows it to serve a global customer base of over 100 countries.
A list of all subsidiaries is contained in note 7 of the Company financial statements. b.
Basis of preparation The annual financial statements of Abcam plc are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS and IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations as adopted by the European Union and the Companies Act 2006 as applicable to companies reporting under IFRS and comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation.
The financial statements have been prepared on the historical cost basis except for the revaluation of certain financial instruments.
The Group financial statements are presented in Sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand pounds 000 except when otherwise indicated.
The accounting policies adopted in the preparation of the financial statements are consistent with those followed in the preparation of the statements for the year ended 30 June 2016 except where disclosed otherwise in this note. c.
Provision for bad or doubtful debts A review of historical debtor defaults undertaken during the year showed a low trend of actual writeoffs thereby resulting in a revision of the expected collectability of the Groups debtor portfolio.
Consequently 693000 of the provision has been released to the income statement in the year. d.
Presentation of goodsin processing costs Goodsin processing costs relate to costs incurred in receiving resizing and storing broughtin product.
These costs have previously been shown as operating expenses but as the costs are only incurred in relation to selling product management has concluded that it more appropriate to include the costs in gross margin as a cost of sales to give a more accurate representation of the true cost of product sales.
This has led to 2210000 being reclassified from operating expenses to cost of sales a reduction in gross margin of 1.0%.
The comparative costs for the year to 30 June 2016 were 1794000 representing a gross margin reduction of 1.0%.
The prior year income statement has not been restated on the grounds of immateriality. e.
Going concern The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements from the cash surpluses generated as a result of normal trading.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group should be able to operate within the limits of its available resources.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for at least one year from the date of approval of the financial statements.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
Changes in accounting policies and disclosures New standards amendments and interpretations adopted by the Group In the current year the Group has adopted the following new and revised standards amendments and Interpretations which have been assessed as having no financial or disclosure impact on the numbers presented IAS 19 Employee benefits Amendment IAS 38 Intangible Assets Amendment 69 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Notes to the financial statements For the year ended 30 June 2017 2.
Changes in accounting policy and disclosures continued New standards amendments and interpretations not yet adopted At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following standards and interpretations were in issue but not yet effective and have not been applied in preparing these financial statements Effective for accounting periods beginning on or after IFRS 1 amendment Removal of short term exemptions 1 January 2018 IFRS 2 amendment Classification and Measurement of Sharebased Payment Transactions 1 January 2018 IFRS 4 amendment Amendments regarding the interaction of IFRS 4 and IFRS 9 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 10 amendment Sale of Contribution of Assets between an investor and its associate or Joint venture IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 amendment Clarifications to IFRS15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 16 Leases 1 January 2019 IAS 7 amendment Amendment as a result of the disclosure initiative 1 January 2017 IAS 12 amendment Amendments to the recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses 1 January 2017 IAS 28 amendment Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures IAS 28 amendment Clarifying certain fair value measurements 1 January 2018 IAS 40 amendment Amendments to clarify transfers of property to or from investment property 1 January 2018 IFRIC 22 Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Consideration 1 January 2018 In December 2015 the IASB postponed the effective date of this amendment indefinitely pending the outcome of its research project on the equity method of accounting.
Impact on future periods of the adoption of new standards and interpretations IFRS 9 Financial Instruments IFRS 9 Financial Instruments was issued in July 2014 and replaces IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group will apply the standard retrospectively for the first time in the half year report ending 31 December 2018 and the annual report ending 30 June 2019.
IFRS 9 is applicable to financial assets and financial liabilities and covers classification measurement and derecognition.
On adoption of IFRS 9 the main areas of change that are relevant for the Group are requirement to use an expected credit loss method for impairment calculation and broadening of hedge accounting application with more focus on risk management alignment.
These areas are not expected to have a significant impact on the Groups net results or net assets.
An initial review of expected impairment losses on the current receivable ledger under the new methodology indicates an increase in the provision of less than 0.2m due to the Groups customer profile.
The full impact will be subject to further assessment and is dependent on the receivables open at the transition date.
The standard was endorsed by the EU on 22 November 2016.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers was issued in May 2014.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Group will apply the standard for the first time in the half year report ending 31 December 2018 and the annual report ending 30 June 2019.
The new standard will replace existing accounting standards used to determine the measurement and timing of revenue recognition and requires an entity to align the recognition of revenue to the transfer of goods or services at an amount that the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
The standard also requires enhanced revenue disclosure.
The adoption of IFRS 15 is not expected to have a significant impact on the Groups recognition of its catalogue product revenue which contributes approximately 93% of the Groups revenue.
For the Groups other revenue streams an initial review has been performed on a sample of custom service licence and royalty agreements and no significant change to the timing of revenue recognition has been identified.
However given the customised nature of these types of agreement and that the portfolio of open contracts will continue to change up to the transition date the final impact assessment may not reflect the current view of the likely impact based on the sample.
The Group is continuing to assess the full impact on these areas of revenue.
The standard was endorsed by the EU on 22 September 2016.
70 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 2.
Changes in accounting policy and disclosures continued Impact on future periods of the adoption of new standards and interpretations continued IFRS 16 Leases IFRS 16 Leases was issued in January 2016 and will replace IAS 17 Leases.
It is effective for accounting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019 with the Groups initial date of application being 1 July 2019.
The Group will apply the standard for the first time in the half year report ending 31 December 2019 and the annual report ending 30 June 2020.
The new standard will introduce a single lessee accounting model eliminating the previous classification of leases as either operating or finance.
All leases will require recognition of an asset and a related liability unless the lease term is 12 months or less or the underlying asset value is low.
The Group has conducted an initial review of its lease contracts and based on the operating leases in place at 30 June 2017 including judgements over expected extension options and lease terms for the new Group HQ property expects a decrease in net assets on transition to the new standard of less than 5m as at the date of transition 30 June 2019.
In the years after transition there would also be an impact on the Groups income statement when the fixed rental expense is replaced by a depreciation charge and an interest expense.
This will lead to an increase in operating profit as a result of removing the operating lease expense net of the new leased asset depreciation charge.
The overall impact to the Groups reported profit after tax is expected to be immaterial with a small net decrease in the initial years after transition which will reverse in later years as the leases in existence at transition come closer to ending.
The final transition impact assessment is still in progress and will be dependent on the transition method selected by the Group and the leases in existence at the transition date.
Consequently the actual transition impact may differ from the above impact guidance depending on business decisions made during the period to July 2019.
The standard has not yet been endorsed by the EU.
Significant accounting policies
The consolidated financial statements incorporate the financial statements of the Company and entities controlled by the Company made up to 30 June each year.
Control is achieved when the Company has power over the entity and the ability to use its power to affect the returns it receives from its involvement with the entity.
Consolidation of a subsidiary begins when the Group obtains control over the subsidiary and ceases when the Group loses control of the subsidiary.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies in line with those used by the Group.
All intragroup transactions balances equity income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation.
Business combinations Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method.
On the acquisition of a business fair values are attributed to the identifiable assets and liabilities and contingent liabilities unless the fair value cannot be reliably measured in which case the value is subsumed into goodwill.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition includes the fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement.
Contingent consideration may include specific research and development or other operational milestones andor financial targets.
Each element is fair valued at the date of acquisition using actual and projected data and statistical techniques.
Key inputs include probability of success and consideration of expected timing.
Future internal forecasts may also be used to help determine any financial targets.
Changes in the fair value of any contingent consideration from additional information obtained during the measurement period up to a year from date of acquisition about facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition date are adjusted retrospectively against goodwill.
Changes in the fair value that do not qualify as measurementperiod adjustments are not recognised until settlement if the contingent consideration was classified as equity at acquisition or are recognised immediately in profit if it was classified as an asset or liability on the balance sheet.
Unsettled amounts of consideration are held at fair value within the relevant category of the balance sheet.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed to the income statement in the period they are incurred.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination that meet the recognition criteria under IFRS 3 Business Combinations  are measured at their fair values at the date of acquisition except that deferred tax assets or liabilities and liabilities or assets related to employee benefit arrangements are recognised and measured in accordance with IAS 12 Income Taxes and IAS 19 Employee Benefits respectively liabilities or equity instruments relating to the replacement by the Group of an acquirees sharebased payment awards are measured in accordance with IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment and assets or disposal groups that are classified as held for sale are measured in accordance with IFRS 5 Noncurrent Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Operations.
Investments in subsidiaries are accounted for at cost less impairment.
Where applicable cost is adjusted to reflect changes in consideration arising from contingent consideration amendments.
71 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 3.
Significant accounting policies continued
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of the consideration over the fair value of the net assets acquired.
Where the fair value of the consideration is less than the fair value of the acquired net assets the deficit is recognised immediately in profit or loss as a bargain purchase.
Goodwill is capitalised and subject to an impairment review at least annually and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Impairment losses on goodwill are not reversed in subsequent periods.
For the purpose of impairment testing goodwill is allocated to cashgenerating units CGUs that are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination.
The CGUs to which goodwill has been allocated is tested for impairment annually or more frequently when there is an indication that the carrying value may not be recoverable.
If the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than the carrying amount of the unit the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit prorata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
In accordance with IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates goodwill arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation and any fair value adjustments to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities arising on the acquisition of that foreign operation are treated as assets and liabilities of that foreign operation and as such are translated at the relevant foreign exchange rate at the balance sheet date.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Revenue and income recognition Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods and services provided in the normal course of business net of discounts VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Sales of goods are recognised when title and risk have passed to the customer.
Custom service revenue is recognised proportionately when the outcome of each discrete stage of the contract can be estimated reliably and is based on the stage of completion of the contract activity per agreed milestones set out in the contract.
Where the outcome cannot be estimated reliably revenue is recognised to the extent of costs incurred where it is probable these will be recovered.
In instances where it is probable that the costs will be in excess of the contract revenue the expected loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
Licence fee income is recognised on delivery of the licensed technology where the Groups continued performance or future research and development services are not required.
Payments received prior to this are recorded as deferred income.
Royalty revenue is recognised on an accruals basis based on the contractual terms and the substance of the agreements with the counterparty provided that the amount can be reliably measured and it is probable that the economic benefit will flow to the Group.
Grant income is recognised in the same period as the related RandD expenses are incurred and is recorded through the corresponding expense line of the income statement.
Revenue derived from the Companys conferences is recognised when the conference is held however it is not material.
Interest income is accrued on a time basis by reference to the principal outstanding and the effective interest rate applicable which is the rate that exactly discounts estimated future cash receipts through the expected life of the financial asset to that assets net carrying amount.
Dividend income from investments is recognised when the shareholders rights to receive payment have been established.
Leasing
Leases are classified as finance leases whenever the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the lessee.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Rentals payable under operating leases are charged to the income statement on a straightline basis over the term of the relevant lease.
Benefits received and receivable as an incentive to enter into an operating lease are also spread on a straightline basis over the lease term.
Foreign currencies For the purposes of the consolidated financial statements the results and financial position of each Group company are expressed in Sterling which is the functional currency of the Company and the reporting currency for the consolidated financial statements.
Foreign currency transactions in the individual companies are booked in the functional currency of that entity at the exchange rate ruling at the date of the transaction.
Foreign currency monetary assets and liabilities are retranslated into their functional currency at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences are included in the income statement.
On consolidation the results and cash flows of overseas subsidiaries are translated into Sterling using the average exchange rates during the period and the balance sheets translated at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date.
Exchange differences arising on this translation are classified as equity and recognised in the translation reserve.
Nonmonetary items carried at fair value that are denominated in foreign currencies are translated at the rates prevailing at the date when the fair value was determined.
Nonmonetary items that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are not retranslated.
Exchange differences are recognised in profit or loss in the period in which they arise except for differences arising on transactions entered into to hedge certain foreign currency risks see below under financial instruments hedge accounting which are recognised through other comprehensive income and differences arising on foreign currency assets or liabilities designated as a net investment hedge of the Groups overseas operations which are recognised in the translation reserve.
72 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 3.
Significant accounting policies continued Retirement benefit costs Payments to defined contribution retirement benefit schemes are charged as an expense as they fall due.
Payments made to statemanaged retirement benefit schemes are dealt with as payments to defined contribution schemes where the nature of the Groups obligations under the schemes is equivalent to those arising in a defined contribution retirement benefit scheme.
The Group has no further obligations once the contributions have been paid.
Taxation
The tax expense represents the sum of the tax currently payable and deferred tax.
The tax currently payable is based on taxable profit for the year.
Taxable profit differs from net profit as reported in the income statement because it excludes some items of income or expense that are taxable or deductible in other years and it further excludes items that are never taxable or deductible.
The Groups liability for current tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date.
The benefit of UK research and development is recognised under the UKs Research and Development Expenditure Credit RDEC scheme.
The benefit is recorded as income included in profit before tax netted against research and development expenses as the RDEC is of the nature of a government grant.
Where the current tax deduction in respect of share option exercises exceeds the share option accounting charge for the period the excess is recorded in the reserves rather than the income statement.
Deferred tax is the tax expected to be payable or recoverable on differences between the carrying amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements and the corresponding tax bases used in the computation of taxable profit and is accounted for using the balance sheet liability method.
Deferred tax liabilities are generally recognised for all taxable temporary differences and deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profits will be available against which deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
Such assets and liabilities are not recognised if the temporary difference arises from the initial recognition of goodwill or from the initial recognition of other assets and liabilities in a transaction that affects neither the taxable profit nor the accounting profit.
Deferred tax liabilities are recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on investments in subsidiaries except where the Group is able to control the reversal of the temporary difference and it is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
A deferred tax asset is recognised for deductible temporary differences unused tax losses and unused tax credits to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the deductible temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each balance sheet date and reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that sufficient taxable profits will be available to allow all or part of the asset to be recovered.
The Groups liability for deferred tax is calculated using tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset is realised.
Deferred tax is charged or credited in the income statement except where it relates to items charged or credited directly to other comprehensive income or equity in which case the deferred tax is also dealt with in other comprehensive income or equity respectively.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when they relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority and the Group intends to settle its current tax assets and liabilities on a net basis.
Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment is stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any recognised impairment loss.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Depreciation is charged so as to write off the cost of assets over their estimated useful lives using the straightline method on the following bases Office equipment fixtures and fittings 2 to 5 years Laboratory equipment 1 to 5 years Computer equipment 3 years Hybridomas and assays 3 to 8 years Motor vehicles 5 years The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised in the income statement.
Residual values of assets and their useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each balance sheet date.
Assets under the course of construction are not depreciated.
73 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 3.
Significant accounting policies continued Intangible assets Payments made to acquire software distribution rights capitalised development work and contractbased intangibles from third parties are capitalised at cost and amortised on a straightline basis over their estimated useful lives.
The principal expected useful lives used for this purpose are as follows Upfront licence fees 3 years Distribution rights 1 to 10 years Software 1 to 5 years Contract based Term of contract Customer relationships 7 to 10 years Patents technology and knowhow 5 to 15 years Trade names 8 years Patents technology and knowhow assets are only amortised once the development is complete and being utilised for its intended purpose until this point the asset is deemed to be in progress.
Other assets under the course of construction are not amortised.
Expenditure on development activities including internally generated intangible assets is recognised as an asset if and only if it meets the recognition criteria set out in IAS 38 Intangible Assets.
Expenditure on research activities is recognised as an expense in the period in which it is incurred.
Intangible assets under construction are not amortised.
Impairment of tangible and intangible assets excluding goodwill At each balance sheet date a review of the carrying amounts of the Groups and the Companys tangible and intangible assets is performed to determine whether there is any indication that those assets have suffered an impairment loss.
If such indication exists the recoverable amount of the asset is estimated in order to determine the extent of the impairment loss if any.
The recoverable amount is the higher of fair value less costs to sell and value in use.
In assessing value in use the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a pretax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset for which the estimates of future cash flows have not been adjusted.
The recoverable amount of an asset is estimated to be less than its carrying amount the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to its recoverable amount.
An impairment loss is recognised as an expense immediately.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost comprises direct materials and where applicable direct labour costs and an attributable portion of production overheads that have been incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition.
Cost is calculated using the standard cost method.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less all estimated costs of completion and costs to be incurred in marketing selling and distribution.
Provision is made for obsolete slowmoving or defective items where appropriate.
Financial instruments Financial assets and financial liabilities are recognised on the Groups and the Companys balance sheets when the Group or the Company becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Availableforsale financial assets Where the Group holds an investment in shares which is classified as an availableforsale financial asset it is stated at cost less any provision for impairment and estimated costs associated with the sale unless the investment is in relation to shares traded on an active market where a fair valuation for all the shares can be obtained.
Such investments are held at fair value taken as the closing market value of the shares.
Any revaluation gain or loss is recorded through other comprehensive income.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are initially recognised at fair value and subsequently held at amortised cost less provision for impairment.
Appropriate allowances for estimated irrecoverable amounts are recognised in the income statement when there is objective evidence that the asset is impaired.
When a trade receivable is considered uncollectable it is written off.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited to the income statement.
Changes in the carrying amount of receivables are recognised in the income statement.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and demand deposits and other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to a known amount of cash and are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Term deposits Term deposits represent bank deposits and a charitable bond all with an original maturity of over three months.
74 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 3.
Significant accounting policies continued Financial liabilities and equity instruments Financial liabilities and equity instruments are classified according to the substance of the contractual arrangements entered into.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Group or the Company after deducting all of its liabilities.
The accounting policies adopted for specific financial liabilities and equity instruments are set out below.
Trade payables Trade payables are not interest bearing and are stated at amortised cost.
Equity instruments Equity instruments issued by the Company are recorded at the proceeds received net of direct issue costs.
Derivative financial instruments Forward contracts are used by the Group and the Company to manage the exposure to foreign exchange rate risk associated with the variability in foreign currency rates and values in relation to both recognised assets or liabilities and forecast future transactions.
Derivatives are initially recognised at fair value at the date a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to their fair value at each balance sheet date.
A derivative with a positive fair value is recognised as a financial asset whereas a derivative with a negative fair value is recognised as a financial liability.
The resulting gain or loss is recognised in the income statement immediately unless the derivative is designated and effective as a hedging instrument in which event the timing of the recognition in the income statement depends on the nature of the hedge relationship.
A derivative is presented as a noncurrent asset or noncurrent liability if the remaining maturity of the instrument is more than twelve months and it is not expected to be realised or settled within twelve months.
Other derivatives are presented as current assets or current liabilities.
Hedge accounting The Group and the Company designate certain derivatives as cash flow hedges of highly probable forecast foreign currency transactions.
The Group and the Company have also designated contingent consideration payable as a hedge of their net investment in foreign operations.
At the inception of the hedge relationship the Group documents the relationship between the hedging instrument and the hedged item along with its risk management objectives and its strategy for undertaking various hedge transactions.
Furthermore at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis the Group documents whether the hedging instrument that is used in a hedging relationship is highly effective in offsetting changes in cash flows or net investment of the hedged item.
Cash flow hedges The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives that are designated and qualify as cash flow hedges is deferred in other comprehensive income.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in profit or loss and is included in the administration and management expenses line of the income statement.
Amounts deferred in equity are recycled in the income statement in the periods when the hedged item is recognised in profit or loss in the same line of the income statement as the recognised hedged item.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the Group revokes the hedging relationship the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or exercised or it no longer qualifies for hedge accounting.
Any cumulative gain or loss deferred in other comprehensive income at that time remains in other comprehensive income and is recognised when the forecast transaction is ultimately recognised in profit or loss.
When a forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur the cumulative gain or loss that was deferred in other comprehensive income is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
Hedges of net investments in foreign operations Hedges of net investment in foreign operations are accounted for similarly to cash flow hedges.
Any gain or loss on the hedging instrument relating to the effective portion of the hedge is recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in the translation reserve.
The gain or loss relating to the ineffective portion is recognised immediately in profit or loss and is included in the administration and management expenses line of the income statement.
Amounts accumulated in the translation reserve are reclassified to profit or loss in the same way as exchange differences relating to the foreign operation.
Sharebased payments Incentives in the form of shares are provided to employees under share option Share Incentive Plan SIP Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP and Deferred Share Award schemes.
Equitysettled sharebased payments are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarketbased vesting conditions at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date of the equitysettled sharebased payments is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of the number of shares that will eventually vest.
The grant date fair value of options issued under the Groups share option schemes is measured by the use of the Monte Carlo simulation.
75 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 3.
Significant accounting policies continued Sharebased payments continued The grant date fair value of the awards under the Groups LTIP is measured by the use of the Monte Carlo simulation for any market related performance conditions and the Black Scholes model for EPS and strategic performance conditions.
The grant date fair value of an equitysettled payment under the SIP is measured as the face value of the award on the date of grant.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of nontransferability exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
Charges made to the income statement in respect of sharebased payments are credited to the reserves.
At the end of each reporting period the Group revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket based vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the income statement with a corresponding adjustment to equity.
The Group operates a scheme whereby the NonExecutive Directors of the Group are issued with options the fair value of which is issued measured by the use of the Black Scholes model.
The grant by the Company of options over its equity instruments to the employees of subsidiary undertakings in the Group is treated as a capital contribution.
The fair value of employee services received measured by reference to the grant date fair value is recognised over the vesting period as an increase to investment in subsidiary undertakings with a corresponding credit to equity in the parent entity financial statements.
When the options are exercised the Company issues new shares.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium.
The Group operates an employee share benefit trust as part of its incentive plans for UKbased employees.
All assets and liabilities of the trust are recorded in the balance sheet as assets and liabilities of the Company until such time as the assets are awarded to the beneficiaries.
All income and expenditure of the trust is similarly brought into the results of the Company.
Own shares Own equity instruments which are acquired are recognised at cost and deducted from equity.
No gain or loss is recognised in the income statement on the purchase sale issue or cancellation of the Groups own equity instruments.
Any difference between the carrying amount and the consideration is recognised in reserves.
Dividend distribution Dividend distribution to the Companys shareholders is recognised as a liability in the Groups financial statements in the period in which the dividends are approved by the Companys shareholders or in the case of interim dividends when paid.
Risks and uncertainties In the application of the Groups accounting policies which are described in note 3 the Directors are required to make judgements estimates and assumptions about the amounts of assets liabilities revenue and expenses reported in the financial statements.
Actual amounts and results may differ from those estimates.
The Directors regularly evaluate the estimates and judgements.
Any revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or prior periods or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
The key accounting judgements and estimates included in the Groups financial statements are discussed below. a.
Critical accounting judgements Capitalisation of intangible assets The Group capitalises internal software development costs relating to the enhancement of the Groups core IT systems architecture and developments where the costs meet the recognition criteria of IAS 38.
Judgement is required in applying the capitalisation criteria of IAS 38 differentiating between enhancements and maintenance and in assessing an expected useful life of the resulting enhancement or development.
During the year 11.2m was capitalised 8.7m within assets under construction and 2.5m within software assets in relation to the Groups systems and process improvement project.
The costs include external consultant costs and incremental staffing costs.
In establishing the principles on which the costs are capitalised the Directors have reviewed the nature of work being performed under the different phases of the project and the nature of the associated deliverables against the capitalisation criteria of IAS 38 and have identified the activities through the life of the project where the related costs should be expensed through the income statement.
Valuation of own manufactured inventory The costs absorbed into the value of own manufactured inventory require a number of assumptions concerning the allocation of materials labour and overheads.
The assumptions have been made with reference to the requirements of IAS 2 Inventories.
Judgement is used mainly in the application of materials to products produced and in selecting the types of overhead and company personnel that are appropriate to be included in the valuation.
76 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 4.
Risks and uncertainties continued b.
Key sources of estimation uncertainty Goodwill and other intangible asset impairment Goodwill is deemed to have indefinite life and so is not amortised.
The Group tests whether goodwill is impaired on at least an annual basis or more frequently when there are indications of possible impairment.
The impairment review requires estimating the valueinuse of the Groups CGU this estimation uses a number of input assumptions where management must apply judgement including the estimation of forecast future cash flows risk adjusted where relevant the selection of an appropriate discount rate in order to calculate present value and the selection of an appropriate terminal growth rate.
The assumptions used in the impairment test are set out in note 12.
The valuations indicate that the Group has sufficient headroom and that a reasonably possible change to key assumptions is unlikely to result in an impairment of the related goodwill.
Other intangible assets are amortised.
The Group reviews their carrying amount at each balance sheet date or if events occur which call into question the carrying values of the assets.
With the live release of certain initial modules of the Groups new Enterprise Resource Planning ERP system during the year a further review of the carrying value of existing software assets was conducted to identify any instances where the current development work will replace the predecessor development.
A number of assets were identified and their remaining useful life shortened based on the expected replacement date.
Consequently additional amortisation of 0.3m has been recognised in the current year 2016 1.3m to accelerate the amortisation.
The assumptions relating to future cash flows estimated useful lives and discount rates are based on business forecasts and therefore inherently include an element of management judgement.
Future events could cause the assumptions used in these impairment tests to change which may in turn mean future impairment charges to be recognised.
Provision for slowmoving or defective inventory The provision for slowmoving inventory is based on managements estimation of the future sales of each of the Groups products over the period from the balance sheet date to the expiry date of the product the next eight years where evidence of normal product life cycle is shorter.
Estimated future sales are based on historical actual sales and a growth rate assumption which is derived from the average annual growth over the product life to date.
If actual unit sales growth rates differ from those estimated by management both the level of provision against existing inventory and the rates of provision applied to inventory in future periods would need to be revised.
Provision for bad or doubtful debts The Group has a significant trade receivable balance from a large number of customers at any given point in time.
Consequently estimating the required provision for such a debtor book requires a regular review to identify those customers where events either historical or current give management an indication that future collectability may be uncertain.
During the year a review of the historical default rate was undertaken to update the provision input assumption.
The recent historical trend showed a very low level of actual writeoffs thereby resulting in a revision of the expected collectability of the Groups debtor portfolio.
Consequently 0.7m of the provision has been released to the income statement.
Taxation
The Group is subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions.
Significant judgement is employed to determine the income tax provision on a global basis.
There are numerous transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business.
The Group recognises liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on estimates of whether additional taxes will be due.
Where the final tax outcome of these matters differs from amounts initially recorded such differences will impact the income tax and deferred tax provisions in the period in which such determination is made.
The Group holds significant deferred tax assets on the balance sheet in relation to acquired tax losses.
Assessments were performed by third party experts to verify the availability of these acquired tax losses and as such partly utilise them within both the tax returns submitted for the year ended 30 June 2016 and against the provision at 30 June 2017.
The carrying value of the deferred tax asset is based on expected levels of future taxable profit in the relevant jurisdictions which are estimated from management forecasts.
If actual profitability differs significantly by jurisdiction in the future this could impact the level of losses that it is possible to utilise and therefore would require an impairment of the tax asset value.
77 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 5.
Operating segments Products and services from which reportable segments derive their revenues The Directors consider that there are no identifiable business segments that are engaged in providing individual products or services or a group of related products and services that are subject to risks and returns that are different to the core business.
The information reported to the Groups Chief Executive Officer who is considered the chief operating decision maker for the purposes of resource allocation and assessment of performance is based wholly on the overall activities of the Group.
The Group has therefore determined that it has only one reportable segment under IFRS 8 Operating Segments which is sales of antibodies and related products.
The Groups revenue and assets for this one reportable segment can be determined by reference to the Groups income statement and balance sheet.
The Group has no individual product or customer which contributes more than 10% of its revenues.
Geographical information The Groups revenue from external customers and information about its noncurrent segment assets excluding deferred tax and derivative financial instruments by geographical location is detailed below Revenue Noncurrent assets Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 As at 30 June 2017 As at 30 June 2016 US 91780 76817 172272 171228 China 26678 18844 3702 3912 Japan 18162 12321 61 57 UK 12660 11213 35315 25049 Germany 12400 9294 Other countries 55418 43184 70 47 217098 171673 211420 200293 Revenues are attributed to countries on the basis of the customers location.
No country included within Other countries contributes more than 5% of the Groups total revenue.
Revenue by type is shown below Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Catalogue revenue 202448 158961 Custom products and licensing revenue 14650 12712 Total reported revenue 217098 171673 1 Includes custom services IVDIHC royalties and licence income.
Profit for the year Profit for the year has been arrived at after chargingcrediting
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Cost of inventories recognised as an expense 54701 41379 Write down of inventories recognised as an expense 805 1536 UK RandD tax credits 705 1848 RandD expenditure including amortisation excluding UK RandD tax credits 19270 14669 Staff costs 8 52663 41492 Operating lease rentals  land and buildings 21 3953 3369 Auditors remuneration 7 205 171 Impairment gainloss recognised on trade receivables 17 693 29 Foreign exchange differences arising on financial instruments at fair value through profit or loss 1232 2404 Other net foreign exchange differences including cash flow hedge movements reclassified from other comprehensive income 10780 780 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 14 5613 3879 Amortisation of intangible assets included within administration and management expenses 13 3803 3749 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets included within administration and management expenses 13 1527 1260 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangible assets included within RandD expenditure 13 4383 2467 Loss on disposal of intangible assets 13  164 78 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 7.
Auditors remuneration A detailed analysis of the auditors remuneration on a worldwide basis is provided below Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Fees payable to the Companys auditors for the audit of the parent company and the consolidation 149 138 Total audit fees 149 138 Auditrelated assurance services Audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 29 10 Other services Total other services fees 56 33 Total auditor remuneration 205 171 1 This relates to the interim review.
2 This relates to subscription to accounting reference materials and grant claim reporting.
Details of the Groups policy on the use of the auditors for nonaudit services are set out in the Audit and Risk Committee Report on page 38.
No services were provided pursuant to contingent fee arrangements.
Employees and remuneration The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was
Year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June 2016
Management administrative marketing and distribution 647 572 Laboratory 30telTheir aggregate remuneration comprised
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Wages and salaries 45372 35090 Social security costs 4529 4086 Other pension costs 2759 2235 Charge in respect of share options and awards granted 3873 2243 Total staff costs 56533 43654 Staff costs capitalised 3870 2162 Net staff costs 52663 41492 Staff costs capitalised relates to Group staff costs directly attributable to system development which include the implementation of the new ERP system being capitalised as part of internally generated intangible software assets under IAS 38 see note 13.
The remuneration of the Directors and related share option grants are set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 41 to 54.
Finance income and costs Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Unwinding of discount on contingent consideration note 24 3399 1050 Interest expenses 25 2 Finance costs 3424 1052 Interest income on cash and term deposits 162 146 Finance income 162 146 Net finance costs 3262 906 79 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 10.
Taxation
Note
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Current income tax charge 11841 10466 Adjustment in respect of current income tax of prior years 1390 1200 Total current income tax charge 10451 9266 Origination and reversal of temporary differences 2039 1079 Adjustment in respect of deferred tax of prior periods 1100 466 Deferred tax rate change 5 262 Total deferred income tax credit 15 934 1283 Total income tax charge 9517 7983 UK corporation tax is calculated at 19.75% 2016 20% of the estimated assessable profit for the year.
Taxation for other jurisdictions is calculated at the rates prevailing in the respective jurisdictions.
The standard rate of UK corporation tax reduced from 20% to 19% on 1 April 2017.
In the budget of 16 March 2016 the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced that the Corporation Tax main rate will be reduced by an additional 1% for the Financial Year beginning 1 April 2020.
The legislation in Finance Act 2016 set the rate at 17% replacing the rate set for Financial Year 2020 in the Finance No.
2 Act 2015.
This will have an effect on the Groups future tax position.
The standard rate of UK corporation tax will now reduce to 17% from 1 April 2020.
These proposed changes were substantively enacted when the Finance Bill 2016 received Royal Assent on 15 September 2016.
The above changes to the rate of corporation tax will impact the amount of future cash tax payments to be made by the Group and also the future valuation of any deferred tax liabilities or assets.
The charge for the year can be reconciled to the profit per the income statement as follows Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2017 % Year ended 30 June 2016 Year ended 30 June 2016 % Profit before tax 51874 45412 Tax at the UK corporation tax rate of 19.75% 2016 20.0% 10245 19.8 9082 20.0 Adjusted in respect of foreign tax rates 945 1.8 1618 3.6 Tax effect of expenses that are not deductible in determining taxable profit 1307 2.5 697 1.5 Additional relief in relation to overseas entities 1391 2.6 1390 3.1 RandD tax credit uplift 344 0.7 416 0.9 Recognition of deferred tax previously unrecognised Adjustments in respect of prior years Effect of difference between closing deferred tax rate and current tax rate 5 0.0 262 0.6 Tax expense and effective rate for the year 9517 18.3 7983 17.6 Adjustments includes an additional tax charge in relation to the Companys election to move to the above the line research and development expenditure credit in relation to the years ended 30 June 2015 and 30 June 2014 a tax credit in relation to the usual two year claim and elections made in the resubmission of the UK tax return for the year ended 30 June 2014 and credits related to changes in estimates of the prior year tax charges following receipt of refunds.
The recognition of deferred tax not previously recognised relates to the tax attributes acquired from Epitomics Inc.
During the year ended 30 June 2017 a third party report to determine the availability of these attributes was analysed and implemented by management.
It was concluded that these attributes were available for utilisation and would be utilised within the required time limits.
Therefore a oneoff adjustment was made to recognise these attributes some of which has already unwound.
Earnings per share The calculation of the basic and diluted EPS shown below the income statement is based on the following data Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016
Earnings for the purposes of basic and diluted EPS being net profit attributable to owners of the parent 42357 37429 Number Number Number of shares Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of basic EPS 202655252 201147931 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares Share options 1568601 854936 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of diluted EPS 204223853 202002867 80 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 11.
Earnings per share continued Basic EPS is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to the owners of the parent by the weighted average number of shares outstanding during the year.
Diluted EPS is calculated on the same basis as basic EPS but with a further adjustment for the weighted average shares in issue to reflect the effect of all dilutive potential ordinary shares.
The number of dilutive potential ordinary shares is derived from the number of sharebased options and awards granted to employees where the exercise price is less than the average market price of the Companys ordinary shares during the year and where it is considered performance conditions will be met.
Adjusted earnings per share The calculation of adjusted EPS is based on adjusted profit after tax which is as follows Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Adjusted earnings Adjusted profit after tax 51995 45152 The adjusted EPS information is provided to allow a clear method for yearonyear comparison.
The denominators used are the same as those detailed above for both basic and diluted earnings per share.
A reconciliation from profit after tax to adjusted profit after tax is provided within the strategic report on page 26.
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Basic EPS 20.90p 18.61p Diluted EPS 20.74p 18.53p Adjusted basic EPS 25.66p 22.45p Adjusted diluted EPS 25.46p 22.35p
Cost and carrying amount At 1 July 2015 85200 Acquired on acquisition of subsidiary note 27 11837 Exchange differences 15425 At 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 112462 Exchange differences 3049 At 30 June 2017 115511 Accumulated impairment losses At 1 July 2015 1 July 2016 and 30 June 2017 Goodwill is converted at the exchange rate on the date of acquisition and retranslated at the balance sheet date.
Group goodwill acquired in the year ended 30 June 2016 relates to the acquisition of AxioMx Inc AxioMx on 11 November 2015.
Note 27 contains further details of the transaction and resulting financial impact on the Group.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination.
The Directors consider there to be one CGU as acquisitions are integrated into the Groups operations and product portfolio see note 5.
Any discrete financial information which is available for an individual entity does not reflect the true substance of the performance of that entity or its value in use within the Group.
There have been no changes to the Group organisation during the period which would require a reallocation of the goodwill balance.
The Abcam Group CGU is tested for impairment on a Groupwide basis using the future forecast cash flows arising from the Abcam business as a whole.
The Group performs an annual test for goodwill impairment or more frequently if there are any indications that goodwill might be impaired.
The recoverable amount of the CGU is determined from value in use calculations.
The key assumptions considered most sensitive for the value in use calculations are those regarding the discount rates and growth rates after five years.
Management has projected cash flows based on financial forecasts over a period of five years.
A growth rate of 2.3% has been used in the extrapolation of cash flows beyond the five years based on expected inflationary increases of the economies in which the Group predominantly trades.
A pretax discount rate of 9.4% has been estimated using pretax rates that reflect current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the CGU.
Management has performed a sensitivity analysis on the key assumptions mentioned above.
Based on the results of this analysis management is satisfied that the recoverable amount of goodwill exceeds its carrying amount.
As such no impairment of goodwill has been recognised at the balance sheet date.
Due to the headroom which exists between the recoverable amount and the carrying value there is currently no reasonable possible change in any of these key assumptions which would cause the CGUs carrying amount to exceed its recoverable amount.
81 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 13.
Intangible assets
Distribution rights
Contract based Assets under construction
Patents technology and knowhow
Total
Cost
At 1 July 2015 527 1097 8759 3532 203 5005 39625 2068 60816 Additions 30 259 566  6753    7608 Transfer to asset in use   2653  2653 Reallocations  209 132      341 Acquisition of subsidiary note 27    485   15928  16413 Disposals in year   231      231 Exchange differences 1  132 685  800 9023 365 11006 At 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 558 1565 12011 4702 4303 5805 64576 2433 95953 Additions 1 1 2515  8685    11202 Transfer to asset in use   736  736 Disposals in year  413 2      415 Exchange differences 2  24 136  154 1828 70 2214 At 30 June 2017 561 1153 15284 4838 12252 5959 66404 2503 108954 Accumulated amortisation At 1 July 2015 514 1009 3719 2361  1674 5900 824 16001 Charge for the year 13 149 3781 248  544 2468 273 7476 Reallocations  209 132      341 Disposals in year   67      67 Exchange differences   49 433  308 1028 176 1994 At 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 527 1367 7614 3042  2526 9396 1273 25745 Charge for the year 17 95 3921 356  624 4381 319 9713 Disposals in year  413 2      415 Exchange differences   9 81  At 30 June 2017 544 1049 11542 3479  3204 13925 1623 35366 Carrying amount At 30 June 2016 31 198 4397 1660 4303 3279 55180 1160 70208 At 30 June 2017 17 104 3742 1359 12252 2755 52479 880 73588 The amortisation period for the upfront licence fees software and distribution rights is referred to in note 3.
Material intangible assets Software intangible assets relate to software licences as well as the core IT systems inclusive of the new ERP system.
Contractbased intangibles relates to an agreement with the University of Oregon under which the university supplies monoclonal antibodies to MitoSciences Inc which has full rights and entitlement to commercially exploit these materials in exchange for an ongoing fee.
The remaining amortisation period is seven years being the remaining term of the agreement and a support agreement with a third party acquired during the year ended 30 June 2016 as part of the AxioMx acquisition that had a remaining term of three years at acquisition which has been adopted as the assets useful life.
The remaining amortisation period is four months.
Assets under construction are software related.
The costs capitalised relate to the development of the core IT systems architecture including the build of the new ERP system.
These are not amortised until available for use in the business.
Customer relationships mainly relates to access to new customers as part of the Epitomics acquisition namely in the reagents and services business.
The remaining amortisation period is five years in line with the history of the business.
Patents technology and knowhow relates to acquired technology as part of the Groups acquisitions multiplex and complex assay technology acquired as part of the Firefly BioWorks business.
The amortisation period will be the remaining term on the primary patent which is twelve years and in vitro monoclonal antibody production technology was acquired during the year ended 30 June 2016 with the acquisition of AxioMx.
The useful life was set in line with the remaining life on the patents existing at acquisition.
The remaining amortisation period is sixteen years.
Trade names relate to RabMAb and Epitomics.
The remaining amortisation period is three years.
82 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 14.
Property plant and equipment
Laboratory equipment
Leasehold improvements under construction
Hybridomas under construction
Total
Cost
At 1 July 2015 2429 11561 4177  6885 1378 150 26580 Additions 995 1370 3230  862 1517  7974 Acquisition of subsidiary note 27 1 109 5     115 Transfer to asset in use     1584 1584 Transfers  1725 1745  539   559 Disposals 41 190 1     232 Exchange differences 133 562 624  621 12 13 1965 At 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 3517 11687 9780  10491 1323 163 36961 Additions 530 2912 2121 1066 1494 2101  10224 Transfer to asset in use     1909 1909 Reclassification   577 577 Disposals 103 586 50     739 Exchange differences 31 224 103  At 30 June 2017 3975 14237 11377 1643 14017 1519 164 46932 Accumulated depreciation At 1 July 2015 1672 8149 2597  1657  54 14129 Charge for the year 561 1314 691  1297  16 3879 Transfers  1588 1608  539   559 Disposals 40 186 1     227 Exchange differences 103 331 298  260  6 998 At 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 2296 8020 5193  3753  76 19338 Charge for the year 962 1619 1162  1856  14 5613 Disposals 103 583 50     736 Exchange differences 30 224 96  46   396 At 30 June 2017 3185 9280 6401  5655  90 24611 Carrying amount At 30 June 2016 1221 3667 4587  6738 1323 87 17623 At 30 June 2017 790 4957 4976 1643 8362 1519 74 22321 Deferred tax assets and liabilities The following are the deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the Group and movements thereon during the current and prior reporting years.
Accelerated tax depreciation Cash flow hedges
Acquired intangible assets
Other temporary differences
At 30 June 2015 1277 441 1582 14779 1798 3436 9681 Creditcharge to income 11tel738 269 1283 Acquisition of subsidiary    6306 1173  5133 Creditcharge to equity  1995 613   173 2435 Exchange differences 142   2751 406 260 2227 At 30 June 2016 1307 1890 2601 22938 2639 3792 13323 Creditcharge to income 580 231 204 1779 814 176 934 Charge to equity  1546 731    2277 Exchange differences 5   721 65 57 594 At 30 June 2017 722 113 1666 21880 1890 3673 15260 83 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 15.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities continued Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Group has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets to be recovered after more than 12 months 3295 6652 Deferred tax assets to be recovered within 12 months 3325 2963 6620 9615 Deferred tax liabilities Deferred tax liabilities to be recovered after more than 12 months 19752 20806 Deferred tax liabilities to be recovered within 12 months 2128 2132 21880 22938 Deferred tax liabilities net 15260 13323 The deferred tax liability of 21880000 2016 22938000 has been recognised in relation to the acquired intangible assets as a result of the acquisitions.
Amounts released from this liability during the year were 1779000 2016 898000 representing the decrease of the deferred tax liability in line with amortisation charged against the carrying value of the associated intangible assets.
Inventories
30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Raw materials 3457 3075 Work in progress 2151 2221 Finished goods 16153 14379 21761 19675 Financial assets Trade and other receivables 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Amounts receivable for the sale of goods and services 21980 20292 Allowance for doubtful debts 26 698 21954 19594 Other receivables 10254 6255 Prepayments 2430 2655 34638 28504 Included within other receivables is 6.1m 2016 0.7m held in an escrow account.
This forms a deposit for work to be performed by contractors in the construction of the Groups new global headquarters at the Cambridge Biomedical Campus.
Trade receivables Ageing of trade receivables 30 June 2017
30 June 2017
30 June 2016
30 June 2016
Not past due 17156  14918 0 to 30 days overdue 3238 2 3636 307 30 to 60 days overdue 600 1 891 66 60 to 90 days overdue 669  371 34 More than 90 days overdue 317 23 476 291 21980 26 20292 698 Movement in the allowance for doubtful debts 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Balance at the beginning of the year 698 565 Impairment gainslosses recognised in the income statement 693 29 Additional provision in the year 9 23 Exchange differences on translation of foreign operations 12 81 Balance at the end of the year 26 698 84 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 17.
Financial assets continued Trade receivables continued Movement in the allowance for doubtful debts continued The average credit period taken for sales is 31.8 days 2016 36.5 days.
No interest has been charged on the receivables.
Trade receivables are provided for based on estimated irrecoverable amounts determined by reference to past default experience.
A detailed review of historical debtor default was undertaken during the year which demonstrated a low trend of actual write offs and thereby resulted in a revision of the expected collectability of the Groups trade receivable portfolio.
Consequently 693000 of the provision has been released to the income statement in the period.
Credit limits for each customer are reviewed on a monthly basis.
No customer represents more than 5% of the total balance of trade receivables.
The Group does not hold any collateral or other credit enhancements over its trade receivables nor do they have a legal right to offset against any amounts owed to the counterparty.
In determining the recoverability of a trade receivable the Group considers any change in the credit quality of the receivable from the date credit was initially granted up to the reporting date.
The concentration of credit risk is limited due to the customer base being large and unrelated.
Accordingly the Directors believe that there is no further credit provision required in excess of the allowance for doubtful debts.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates their fair value.
Availableforsale financial asset 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Shares 985 797 The Group holds a 3.92% interest in PlexBio Co.
Limited PlexBio a biotechnology company headquartered in Taiwan which was listed on the Taiwan Emerging Stock Board in the year ended 30 June 2016.
PlexBio was established to research develop and manufacture IVD kits.
For the year ended 30 June 2016 the Directors did not believe that the conditions for an active market had been met and determined the fair value to be in line with the original cost.
A further twelve months of trading has allowed trading prices to stabilise from initial listing and are therefore a more reliable indication of the investment fair value.
Consequently the fair value at 30 June 2017 is based on the yearend quoted market price.
See note 24 for further details.
Derivative financial instruments 30 June 2017 Current Noncurrent
Asset
Liability
Asset
Liability
Derivatives carried at fair value through profit and loss FVTPL Forward exchange contracts that are not designated in hedge accounting relationships 227 845   618 Derivatives that are designated and effective as hedging instruments carried at fair value Forward exchange contracts 1100 1245 193 99 51 1327 2090 193 99 669 30 June 2016 Current Noncurrent
Asset
Liability
Asset
Liability
Derivatives carried at fair value through profit and loss FVTPL Forward exchange contracts that are not designated in hedge accounting relationships 6 1856   1850 Derivatives that are designated and effective as hedging instruments carried at fair value Forward exchange contracts 5 7411  1231 8637 11 9267  1231 10487 Further details of derivative financial instruments are provided in note 24.
85 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 20.
Trade and other payables 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Trade payables 6872 4241 Accruals 18984 14067 Other taxes and social security 1375 743 Other payables 2057 1027 29288 20078 Trade payables and accruals principally comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
At 30 June 2017 the Group had an average of 29.3 days of purchases 2016 22.8 days outstanding in trade payables excluding accruals and deferred income.
Most suppliers do not charge interest for the first 60 days of the invoice.
The Group has financial risk management policies in place to ensure that all payables are paid within the credit timetable.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Commitments
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Lease payments under operating leases recognised as an expense in the year Land and buildings 3953 3369 At the balance sheet date the Group had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases all of which relate to land and buildings which fall due as follows 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Falling due before one year 4674 3855 Between one to five years 10047 12592 After more than five years 355 650 15076 17097 The above table reflects the committed cash payments under operating leases rather than the expected charge to the income statement in the relevant periods.
The charge in the year ended 30 June 2018 on these operating leases is expected to be 4.7m.
At the year end the Group had additional commitments of 6.3m relating to the acquisition of property plant and equipment and intangible assets 2016 0.8m most of which relates to the construction of the Groups new global headquarters at the Cambridge Biomedical Campus.
Capital and reserves Share capital 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Issued and fully paid 204469825 2016 202601452 ordinary shares of 0.2 pence each 409 405 The movement during the year on the Companys issued and fully paid shares was as follows
Balance at beginning of year 202601452 405 402 Issue of share capital 1868373 4 3 Balance at end of year 204469825 409 405 The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carries no right to fixed income.
The share capital issued during the year arose from the exercise of share options the settlement of an element of the contingent consideration and the issue of shares to the Abcam Employee Share Benefit Trust.
Share premium Balance at 1 July 2015 19522 Premium arising on issue of equity shares 2027 Balance at 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 21549 Premium arising on issue of equity shares 2361 Balance at 30 June 2017 23910 There were no costs of issue incurred during the year or the previous year.
86 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 22.
Capital and reserves continued Own shares Balance at 1 July 2015 2812 Issuedacquired in the year 658 Disposed of on exercise of options 239 Balance at 30 June 2016 and 1 July 2016 3231 Issuedacquired in the year 921 Disposed of on exercise of options 526 Balance at 30 June 2017 3626 This balance represents the cost of 728909 shares with a nominal value of 1458 in Abcam plc 2016 772936 with a nominal value of 1546 which were issued by the Company at market value and held by the Abcam Employee Share Benefit Trust.
These shares are held in order to satisfy the Free Shares and Matching Shares elements of the SIP.
See note 25 for further details of this scheme.
Reserves
Translation reserve The translation reserve comprises foreign currency differences from the translation of the financial statements of foreign operations and movements in the net investment hedge.
Sharebased payment reserve and tax reserve The sharebased payment reserve comprises the IFRS 2 charge for the fair value of sharebased options and awards.
In accordance with IAS 12 the tax reserve comprises the portion of the deferred tax arising on outstanding share options not taken to the income statement and the portion of current tax on exercised share options not taken to the income statement.
Both reserves are presented as part of retained earnings.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises gains and losses recognised on cash flow hedges and the associated deferred tax assets and liabilities created.
Merger reserve The merger reserve comprises the premium issued on shares allotted as consideration for acquisitions where conditions for merger relief are satisfied.
Dividends
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Amounts recognised as distributions to the owners of the parent in the year Final dividend for the year ended 30 June 2016 of 6.556 pence 2015 5.92 pence per share 13316 11975 Interim dividend for the year ended 30 June 2017 of 2.825 pence 2016 2.354 pence per share 5754 4765 Total distributions to owners of the parent in the period 19070 16740 Proposed final dividend for the year ended 30 June 2017 of 7.355 pence 2016 6.556 pence per share 15039 13297 The proposed final dividend is subject to approval of the shareholders at the AGM and has not been included as a liability in these financial statements.
Financial instruments Capital risk management The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and total equity attributable to the owners of the parent.
The Group maintains a capital structure with the following objectives to protect the ability of the Group to continue as a going concern and maintain sufficient available resources as protection for unforeseen events to provide flexibility of resource for strategic growth and investment where opportunities arise and to provide reasonable returns to shareholders whilst maintaining a limited level of risk.
As part of achieving these objectives the Group identifies the principal financial risk exposures that are created by the Groups financial instruments and monitors them on a regular basis.
These are considered to be foreign currency risk a component of market risk credit risk and liquidity risk.
Where appropriate the Group uses financial derivatives to help mitigate the key risks.
The use of financial derivatives is governed by the Groups policies approved by the Board of Directors.
The Group does not enter into or trade financial instruments including derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
87 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 24.
Financial instruments continued Foreign currency risk Currency risk is the risk that a change in currency rates causes an adverse impact on the Groups performance or financial position.
The Group has transactions denominated in various currencies other than the Groups presentational currency GBP.
The Groups principal currency exposure is to fluctuations in USD Euro Chinese Renminbi and Yen.
Collectively these currencies make up approximately 89% of the Groups revenue.
Whilst a large portion of the manufacturing and research and development costs are USD and RMB giving a natural offset against the currency inflows the majority of administration costs remain as GBP leaving an overall net currency inflow in the Groups operating profit and cash flows.
This remaining currency exposure is centrally managed with the objective being to secure a level of certainty of GBP value for up to 90% of the future net exposure based on forecast cash flows expected to occur up to 18 months ahead.
The Group uses forward currency contracts to achieve this objective and applies hedge accounting where applicable.
Foreign currency forward contracts are valued using quoted forward exchange rates and the yield curves derived from quoted interest rates matching maturities of the contracts.
The Groups open forward currency contracts and their maturity profile as at the yearend is as follows Outstanding contracts 30 June 2017
30 June 2017 Foreign currency 30 June 2016
30 June 2016 Foreign currency Sell US Dollars Less than 3 months 1.3409 10081 1.5274 10122 3 to 6 months 1.2958 8598 1.5245 7625 7 to 12 months 1.2708 13827 1.4806 15094 13 to 18 months 1.2916 7479 1.4681 5863 1.2966 39985 1.4992 38704 Sell Euros Less than 3 months 1.2304 9521 1.3744 9427 3 to 6 months 1.1829 11149 1.3588 10929 7 to 12 months 1.1477 18253 1.3197 18885 13 to 18 months 1.1375 8024 1.2849 7904 1.1705 46947 1.3332 47145 Sell Yen Less than 3 months 146.17 408637 182.13 337224 3 to 6 months 139.63 425766 175.49 552379 7 to 12 months 137.80 877640 168.97 841098 13 to 18 months 140.35 360647 158.90 297713 Sell Chinese Renminbi Less than 3 months 8.7851 13618 8.8832 4400 3 to 6 months 8.9766 9748 8.9415 3300 8.8640 23366 8.9081 7700 At 30 June 2017 the fair value of contracts held as cash flow hedges is a liability of 0.1m 2016 liability of 8.6m.
The remaining contracts are not held as cash flow hedges.
The gain on the financial assets at fair value through the profit and loss account was 1.2m 2016 loss of 2.4m.
The gain of 8.6m 2016 10.8m loss recognised through comprehensive income is the combination of fair value gains in the year of 1.2m 2016 8.6m losses and transfers to the income statement of 7.4m 2016 2.2m loss included within administration and management expenses.
The Group may also use other currencydenominated financial instruments such as contingent consideration as net investment hedges against the currency translation of overseas subsidiaries results.
During the year the USD contingent consideration which was designated as a hedging instrument against the net investment of the US subsidiaries was settled.
Currency risk sensitivity analysis The following table shows the sensitivity of the Groups financial instruments to changes in exchange rates by detailing the impact on profit and other comprehensive income of a 10% change in the sterling exchange rate against the relevant foreign currencies.
10% represents managements assessment of the reasonable possible change in foreign exchange rates over a 12month period.
This is a lower assessment than in the prior year as a reflection of the less volatile currency environment experienced through the last 12 months since Brexit.
The sensitivity analysis only includes financial instruments denominated in nonfunctional currency and forward currency contracts outstanding at the reporting date.
It represents the impact of an immediate 10% change in currency rates on that position.
10% is a strengthening in sterling against the other currencies 10% is a weakening of sterling against the other currencies.
88 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 24.
Financial instruments continued Currency risk sensitivity analysis continued US Dollar currency impact Euro currency impact Yen currency impact RMB currency impact 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 30 June 2017 Other comprehensive income 2315 2829 3269 3995 1043 1275 99 121 30 June 2016 Other comprehensive income 2189 1953 3132 3828 1134 1386 46 52 In managements opinion the sensitivity analysis is unrepresentative of the inherent foreign exchange risk since it is limited to the year end exposure and does not reflect the exposure during the year.
Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk that the Group will have insufficient funds available in the right currency to settle its obligations as they fall due.
The Group generates funds from operational activities in excess of its operational requirements and has substantial cash balances available for its current investment activities.
The Board reviews the funding requirement of the Group as part of the budgeting and long term planning processes and considers as necessary alternative possible sources of funding where the requirement is not satisfied by the Groups forecast operational cash generation.
The Group manages liquidity risk by maintaining an adequate level of easily accessible cash reserves in a currency profile representative of the Groups cost base and matching customer and supplier terms where possible.
The Group also has access to daily currency trading facilities which provides the ability to convert currency within the agreed settlement limits as required.
The maturity profile of financial liabilities shown below represents the Groups gross expected contractual cash flows.
Less than six months
Over
Total
Trade and other payables 23606 1995  25601 Derivative Financial Instruments 39797 33153 15417 88367 Less than six months
Over
Total
Trade and other payables 18052 1283  19335 Derivative Financial Instruments 32394 29482 12019 73895 The Group holds sufficient funds to meet these commitments as they fall due.
Credit risk Credit risk refers to the risk that a counterparty will default on its contractual obligations resulting in financial loss to the Group.
The Group is exposed to credit risk on its financial assets which consist of cash derivative instruments and trade and other receivables to the extent that settlement is cashrelated.
The Group does not have a significant exposure to this type of financial risk due to the nature of its customer base and the types of transaction that are undertaken.
Trade receivables consist of a large number of customers spread globally with the majority being in economically strong geographies.
The Group has a high volume of transactions spread across its customer base and therefore does not have a significant exposure to the credit worthiness of any single counterparty.
The Groups customer base is predominantly representatives from governmentfunded institutions pharmaceutical companies conducting research and local distributors.
Whilst there is some exposure for future sales linked with the local economies a significant portion of the existing Group receivables are funded in advance of purchase due to the nature of the counterparty thereby giving a lower likelihood of default.
Trade receivables are managed and monitored locally which includes deciding whether to allow credit setting an appropriate credit limit and subsequent ongoing monitoring of receivable aging along with other indicators where credit risk on a given customer or group of customers may have changed such as an observable change in local economic conditions.
The standard payment terms for receivables is 30 days.
Any receivable where collectability is considered doubtful based on past experience or due to a trigger event occurring specific to that customer is provided in full.
At the point when it is certain that a receivable will not be settled the carrying value is written off and the related provision released against the expense.
Further information on the Groups trade receivable aging and impairment can be found in note 17.
89 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 24.
Financial instruments continued Credit risk continued The Group generates significant levels of operational cash.
Where these are not yet required for business opportunities the excess cash is remitted and managed centrally.
The maximum exposure to counterparty default is the carrying amount of cash and open currency contracts held at any given time.
This exposure is managed by limiting the concentration of funds and contracts held with any individual financial institution.
Funds are only placed with institutions or in products rated BBB or above by Standard and Poors.
The Group monitors the credit rating of the major institutions along with any increasing cash concentration on a quarterly basis to identify any change in credit risk exposure.
Interest rate risk Interest rate risk is the risk that a change in interest rates adversely effects the Group or Companys performance or ability to settle financial obligations.
As the Group does not hold any external debt and is not dependent on income from investment returns to settle operational obligations exposure to interest rate risk is considered minimal and consequently no sensitivity analysis is presented.
Financial instruments Financial instruments principally consist of those arising directly from the operations of the Group such as cash trade and other receivables and trade and other payables and nonoperational instruments such as forward currency contracts and equity investments.
Significant accounting policies Details of the significant accounting policies and methods adopted including the criteria for recognition the basis of measurement and the basis on which income and expenses are recognised in respect of each class of financial asset financial liability and equity instrument are disclosed in note 3.
Foreign exchange contracts are measured using quoted forward exchange rates and the yield curves derived from quoted interest rates matching maturities of these contracts.
Categories of financial instruments for items held at amortised cost Carrying and fair value 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Financial instruments held at amortised cost Trade receivables 21954 19594 Other receivables 1611 3573 Cash and cash equivalents and term deposits 84752 70667 Trade and other payables excluding contingent consideration and fees 25601 19335 Financial instruments held at fair value Derivative financial instruments 669 10487 Available for sale asset 985 797 Contingent consideration and fees  12900 1 Financial instruments within trade and other payables consist of trade payables certain accruals and other payables.
The Directors consider there to be no material difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the financial instruments classified as held at amortised cost due to the short maturity of these items.
For the items classified as held at fair value the fair value is recognised on the balance sheet as the carrying amount as required by IAS 39.
Financial instruments held at fair value Financial instruments that are measured at fair value are classified using a fair value hierarchy that reflects the source of inputs used in deriving the fair value.
The three classification levels are Level 1 fair value measurements are those derived from quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 fair value measurements are those derived from inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly i. as prices or indirectly i.
Level 3 fair value measurements are those derived from valuation techniques that include inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data unobservable market inputs.
The following table presents the Groups assets and liabilities carried at fair value by valuation method.
30 June 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Derivative financial instruments  1520  1520 Availableforsale asset 985   985 Total assets 985 1520  2505
Derivative financial instruments  2189  2189 Total liabilities  2189  2189 90 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 24.
Financial instruments continued Financial instruments held at fair value continued 30 June 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Assets
Derivative financial instruments  11  11 Availableforsale asset   797 797 Total assets  11 797 808
Derivative financial instruments  10498  10498 Contingent consideration and fees   12900 12900 Total liabilities  10498 12900 23398 Level 2 derivative financial instruments comprise forward foreign exchange contracts.
The fair value is remeasured on a monthly basis with reference to available forward market rates and comparative instrument pricing.
The Level 3 contingent consideration and fees payable was recognised as part of the AxioMx Inc acquisition in November 2015.
During the year a negotiation for settlement of certain milestones early for commercial purposes was concluded in November 2016 at 2.4m less than the original liability estimate.
Management also reassessed the probability of the other milestones being achieved increasing the fair value of the related liability by 1.5m with a net credit to the income statement of 0.9m.
The remaining milestones were achieved in August 2016 and April 2017.
As a result no liability remains at the balance sheet date the Group has satisfied all obligations under this arrangement.
The movement in the liability during the year is detailed below
At 1 July 2016 12900 Change in fair value assessment 875 Settlement of consideration Unwinding of discount 3399 Exchange differences 856 At 30 June 2017 1 Consists of a 9.8m cash settlement and a 6.5m equity settlement.
Changes between classifications During the year the availableforsale asset which consists of an equity investment listed on the Taiwan Emerging Stock Board has been transferred from Level 3 classification to Level 1 following a further year of inclusion on the market.
The Directors believe that the additional 12 months of trading has allowed trading prices to stabilise from initial listing and are therefore a more reliable indication of the investment fair value.
Consequently the fair value is based on the year end quoted market price.
Sharebased payments Equitysettled share option scheme The Company operates a number of share option schemes for certain employees of the Group.
The sharebased payments charge relates to option awards from the Enterprise Management Incentive EMI scheme the Unapproved Share Option Plan the Abcam Inc share scheme the Abcam 2005 Share Option Scheme the Abcam Company Share Option Plan CSOP the Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP the deferred share award the Share Incentive Plan SIP and the NED share award.
Option or conditional share grants under each scheme have been aggregated.
The vesting period ranges from one to four years.
If the options remain unexercised after a period of ten years from the date of grant the options expire.
Options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Group before the options vest.
The Group recorded a total equitysettled sharebased payments expense of 3496000 in the year 2016 1962000 of which 3075000 2016 1627000 was included within administration and management expenses and 421000 2016 301000 was included within RandD expenses.
91 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 25.
Sharebased payments continued Summary of all schemes excluding SIP LTIP and deferred share awards The outstanding options had a weighted average remaining contractual life of 7.49 years 2016 7.09 years.
The weighted average fair value of the options outstanding at the end of the year was 114.29 pence 2016 90.78 pence.
The Group recorded a total sharebased payments expense of 304000 2016 152000 in the year relating to all schemes excluding the SIP LTIP and deferred share awards.
2017 2016 Number of share options
Weighted average share price at date of exercise pence Number of share options
Weighted average share price at date of exercise pence Outstanding at beginning of year 1729807 407.3  2145081 364.6 Granted during year 419111 613.6  423706 598.0 Forfeited during year 198673 517.9  396119 473.0 Exercised during year 493852 289.0 882.0 442861 325.4 605.4 Outstanding at end of year 1456393 491.7  1729807 407.3 Exercisable at end of year 455562 399.4  431614 250.2 The vesting dates and expected cash receivable on exercise subject to performance conditions being met for options yet to vest relating to the options outstanding are detailed in the table below.
Vesting date Expiry date 2017 2016 Number of options outstanding Exercise price pence Cash receivable on exercise Number of options outstanding Exercise price pence Cash receivable on exercise 8 November 2010 8 November 2017    170460 62.4 106 6 November 2011 6 November 2018 19250 92.4 18 21550 92.4 20 9 November 2012 9 November 2019 15475 180.8 28 17300 180.8 31 2 December 2013 2 December 2020 23301 345.0 80 38238 345.0 132 1 November 2014 1 November 2021 54230 370.0 201 95440 370.0 353 1 November 2014 1 November 2022 19099 385.0 74 34244 385.0 132 1 November 2015 1 November 2022 70401 385.0 271 115883 385.0 446 1 November 2016 1 November 2022 20806 464.0 97 53780 464.0 250 25 November 2015 25 November 2023 59135 385.0 228 92110 385.0 355 25 November 2016 25 November 2023 93271 464.0 433 207644 464.0 963 25 November 2017 25 November 2023 59473 464.0 276 66549 460.0 270 4 November 2016 4 November 2024 80594 464.0 374 171674 464.0 797 4 November 2017 4 November 2024 158669 406.0 644 176170 406.0 716 4 November 2018 4 November 2024 77721 406.0 316 85893 406.0 349 26 October 2017 26 October 2025 162894 598.0 974 187160 598.0 1119 26 October 2018 26 October 2025 89895 598.0 538 102042 598.0 611 26 October 2019 26 October 2025 81523 598.0 488 93670 598.0 560 4 November 2018 4 November 2026 169325 851.0 1441 4 November 2019 4 November 2026 116668 851.0 993 4 November 2020 4 November 2026 84663 851.0 720 Total 1456393 8194 1729807 7210 Option fair values The Abcam 2005 Share Option Scheme and Abcam CSOP The fair value of options issued with marketbased performance criteria is calculated using a Monte Carlo simulation.
The inputs into the Monte Carlo simulation for options issued during the current and prior years were as follows The Abcam 2005 Share Option Scheme Grant date 4 November 4 November 4 November 26 October 26 October 26 October Share price at grant pence 841.0 841.0 841.0 595.5 595.5 595.5 Fair value at valuation date pence 147.0 168.0 176.0 110.0 114.0 125.0 Exercise price pence 841.0 841.0 841.0 595.5 595.5 595.5 Expected volatility 25% 26% 25% 26% 24% 25% Expected life years Expected dividend yield 1.06% 1.06% 1.06% 1.38% 1.38% 1.38% Riskfree rate 0.15% 0.26% 0.40% 0.52% 0.75% 0.98% Employee exercise multiple Employee exit rate 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 92 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 25.
Sharebased payments continued Option fair values continued The Abcam CSOP Grant date 4 November 26 October Share price at grant pence 841.0 595.5 Fair value at valuation date pence 169.0 116.0 Exercise price pence 841.0 595.5 Expected volatility 26% 24% Expected life years 6 6 Expected dividend yield 1.06% 1.38% Riskfree rate 0.26% 0.75% Employee exercise multiple 2 2 Employee exit rate 0.00% 0.00% The volatility of the options is based on the average of standard deviations of historical daily continuous returns on Abcam plc shares looking back over the same period as the expected life of the option.
The dividend yield is based on Abcam plcs actual dividend yield in the past.
The riskfree rate is the yield on UK government gilts at each date of grant.
The employee exercise multiple is based on published statistics for a portfolio of companies.
The employee exit rate is based on managements expectations at the valuation date.
Share Incentive Plan All UKbased employees are eligible to participate in the SIP whereby employees buy shares in the Company.
These shares are called Partnership Shares and are held in trust on behalf of the employee.
For every Partnership Share bought by the employee up to a limit of 1800 per tax year the Company will give the employee one share free of charge Matching Shares provided the employee remains employed by the Company for a period of at least three years.
The employees must take their shares out of the plan on leaving the Company and will not be entitled to the Matching Shares if they leave within three years of buying the Partnership Shares.
In addition the Company can also award employees up to a maximum of the HMRC approval limit which during the year was 3600 of shares Free Shares per tax year.
There are no vesting conditions attached to the Free Shares other than being continuously employed by the Company for three years from the date of grant.
Number of Free Shares Number of Matching Sharestel 2016 Outstanding at beginning of year 571500 571679 151601 156065 Granted during year 109816 141374 26198 34303 Forfeited during year 51436 40041 10193 38767 Released during year 114487 101512 33405 Outstanding at end of year 515393 571500 134201 151601 Exercisable at end of year 217424 239141 100329 42488 For the purposes of IFRS 2 the fair value of these Matching Shares and Free Shares is determined as the market value of the shares at the date of grant.
No valuation model is required to calculate the fair value of awards under the SIP.
The fair value of an equitybased payment under the SIP is the face value of the award on the date of grant because the participants are entitled to receive the full value of the shares and there are no marketbased performance conditions attached to the awards.
The Group recognised a total expense of 765000 2016 642000 in the year relating to Matching and Free Share awards.
Long Term Incentive Plan The Company approved a new LTIP in 2008.
Full details of the performance conditions are outlined in the Remuneration Report.
All awards are nilcost options or conditional shares which vest subject to achievement of the relevant performance conditions after three years and can be exercised over the following seven years.
Save as permitted in the LTIP rules awards lapse on an employee leaving the Company.
Details of performance share awards outstanding during the year are as follows Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Outstanding at beginning of year 1050604 941309 Granted during year 290082 384565 Forfeited during year 189707 193301 Exercised during year 382420 81969 Outstanding at end of year 768559 1050604 Exercisable at end of year 38007 261106 The weighted average sales price for exercises in the year was 942 pence 2016 580 pence.
Of the 382420 options exercised during the year none were exercised in exchange for cash 2016 5008.
The aggregates of the fair values of the awards made in the year were 2201000 and 149000 granted on 4 November 2016 10 November 2016 respectively 2016 2140000.
93 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 25.
Sharebased payments continued Option fair values continued Long Term Incentive Plan continued Fair values of the awards with a performance condition based on EPS are calculated using the Black Scholes model.
The inputs into the models for awards granted in the current year were as follows Grant date 4 November 4 November 4 November 4 November 10 November Share price at grant pence 841.0 841.0 841.0 841.0 822.0 Expected volatility 26% 25% 25% 28% 26% Expected life years Expected dividend yield 1.06% 1.06% 1.06% 1.06% 1.08% Riskfree rate 0.26% 0.40% 0.54% 0.68% 0.37% The Group recognised an expense of 1737000 2016 696000 in the year related to performance share awards under the LTIP.
Annual Bonus Plan  deferred share award The Company approved a new component to the Annual Bonus Plan in 2013 whereby a portion of the annual amount awarded to certain senior management would be deferred in shares.
The number of deferred shares granted is dependent on certain performance criteria consisting of a oneyear profit target and achievement of strategic and personal objectives.
There is a further twoyear compulsory deferral period at the end of which the deferred share awards will become exercisable subject to continued employment.
All awards are nilcost options or conditional shares.
Details of performance share awards outstanding during the year are as follows Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Outstanding at beginning of year 236945 185855 Granted during year 61808 83541 Forfeited during year 6209 17690 Exercised during year 95791 14761 Outstanding at end of year 196753 236945 Exercisable at end of year 67128 54039 The aggregate of the fair values of the awards granted on 4 November 2016 was 356000 2016 343000.
Fair values of the awards are calculated using the Black Scholes model due to the grants having performance conditions based on nonmarket conditions.
The inputs into the model for awards granted in the current and prior years were as follows Grant date 4 November 10 October Share price at grant pence 841.0 595.5 Expected volatility 24% 24% Expected life years 3 3 Expected dividend yield 1.37% 1.91% Riskfree rate 0.98% 1.10% The Group recognised an expense of 507000 2016 338000 in the year related to deferred share awards under the Annual Bonus Plan.
NonExecutive Directors  share award During the year ended 30 June 2016 the Company approved a new component to the NonExecutive Directors remuneration whereby a portion of the annual fees agreed would be deferred in shares.
The number of deferred shares granted will be settled in the open period following the completion of the one year vesting period.
The Group recognised an expense of 183000 2016 135000 in the year related to these share awards under the NonExecutive Directors share plan.
Further details are included in the Remuneration Report on page 45.
Cashsettled share option scheme In addition to the equitysettled schemes the Group operates a cashsettled scheme for certain overseas employees.
The total charge for the year was 377000 2016 281000 and the liability was 534000 2016 195000 of which 25000 2016 54000 relates to options that have vested.
94 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 26.
Retirement benefit schemes Defined contribution schemes The UKbased employees of the Group have the option to be members of a defined contribution pension scheme managed by a third party pension provider.
For each employee who is a member of the scheme the Company will contribute a fixed percentage of each employees salary to the scheme.
The only obligation of the Group with respect to this scheme is to make the specified contributions.
Employees of the Groups subsidiaries in the US Japan China and Hong Kong are members of statemanaged retirement benefit schemes operated by the governments of the US Japan China and Hong Kong respectively.
Depending on location the subsidiaries are required to contribute a specified percentage of payroll costs to the retirement benefit schemes to fund the benefits.
The only obligation of the Group with respect to the retirement benefit schemes is to make the specified contributions as required by law.
The total cost charged to the income statement in respect of these schemes during the year ended 30 June 2017 was 2759000 2016 2235000.
As at 30 June 2017 contributions of 227000 2016 181000 due in respect of the current reporting period had not been paid over to the schemes.
Business combinations During the year ended 30 June 2017 a negotiation for early settlement of certain milestones for commercial purposes was concluded in November 2016 at 2.4m less than the original liability estimate.
Management also reassessed the probability of the other milestones being achieved increasing the fair value of the related liability by 1.5m with a net credit to the income statement of 0.9m.
The remaining milestones were achieved in August 2016 and April 2017 and the consideration for these settled during the year.
The Group has satisfied all obligations under this arrangement refer to note 24 for a reconciliation of contingent consideration.
Details of acquisition in the year ended 30 June 2016 On 11 November 2015 the Group completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued share capital of a private Delaware corporation AxioMx Inc AxioMx.
Upfront consideration including payments for working capital of 19.3m was exchanged on the acquisition date with a payment of 2.4m made after the acquisition to settle preexisting liabilities to largely offset the 2.0m cash and cash equivalents acquired.
Further consideration payments of up to 23.5 million were payable on successful completion of future development and technology milestones.
As a result of the acquisition Abcam now has access to AxioMxs technology which potentially provides scalable capabilities to produce highly validated recombinant monoclonal antibodies within weeks significantly faster than in vivo methods.
The goodwill of 18.2m 11.8m arising from the acquisition consists largely of the production opportunities derived from the acquired technology and the value of the highly knowledgeable and skilled workforce.
The tax benefit recognised within goodwill in relation to the acquired AxioMx losses has been concluded by a section 382 loss analysis.
The following table summarises the consideration transferred and the fair value of the assets and liabilities recognised at the date of acquisition.
Recognised amounts of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed Fair value Noncurrent assets Intangible assets 16413 Property plant and equipment 115 Deferred tax asset 1173 Other longterm assets 3 Current assets Cash and cash equivalents 1326 Trade and other receivables 167 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 1924 Noncurrent liabilities Contingent fees 594 Deferred tax liability 6306 Total identifiable assets acquired 10373 Goodwill 11837 Total consideration 22210 Consideration at 11 November 2015 000 Cash 7584 Equity 5047 Contingent consideration  cash 5747 Contingent consideration  equity 3832 Total consideration 22210 Cash consideration 7584 Cash and cash equivalents acquired 1326 Net cash outflow arising on acquisition 6258 Acquisitionrelated expenses totalling 0.5m are included within administrative expenses in the consolidated income statement for the year ended 30 June 2016.
95 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 27.
Business combinations continued Details of acquisition in the year ended 30 June 2016 continued The fair value of the acquired identifiable intangible assets consists of 15.9m attributable to technology and 0.5m attributable to license support agreements.
The values have been assessed by an independent third party valuation company.
A related deferred tax liability of 6.3m has also been recognised.
The fair value of the equity consideration was determined using the midmarket close price on the date of the acquisition.
The Group recognised a contingent consideration liability of 9.6m in relation to the acquisition which represents the total calculated present value of expected payments due upon achievement of predetermined development milestones.
This value was also assessed as part of the independent third party valuation.
The total contingent consideration and fees recognised by the Group at acquisition was 10.2m.
During the period from the date of acquisition to 30 June 2016 AxioMx contributed 0.4m to the Groups revenue from sales to third parties and a loss before tax of 1.7m over the same period.
Had AxioMx been consolidated from 1 July 2015 the consolidated income statement for the year ended 30 June 2016 would show a Group proforma revenue of 172.0m and profit before tax of 44.4m.
Related party transactions Remuneration of key management personnel The remuneration of the key management personnel of the Group is set out below in aggregate for each of the categories in IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures.
The key management team for the prior year comprised the NonExecutive Directors the Executive Directors and the Senior Leadership Team.
In April 2016 the key management team was restructured and the Senior Leadership Team replaced by the Executive Leadership Team.
The prior year figures therefore represent prorated amounts for the change in structure.
The NonExecutive Directors fees for the year ended 30 June 2017 represent amounts received in cash and an element receivable in shares.
Further information about the remuneration of individual Directors is provided in the audited section of the Remuneration Report on pages 41 to 54.
30 June 30 June Shortterm employee benefits and fees 3627 4204 Postemployment benefits 165 84 Sharebased payments charge 1458 458 5250 4746 Directors transactions The Group has a licence and supply agreement for access to knockout cell lines with Horizon Discovery Group plc of which Jonathan Milner is a nonexecutive director.
A total of 220000 2016 220000 has been paid during the year under the terms of the agreement with additional productrelated fees of 41595 2016 4700.
The balance outstanding at 30 June 2017 was 6000 30 June 2016 3000.
Total sales of 17000 2016 53000 have been made during the year to companies of which Jonathan is the chairman or a significant investor.
The balance outstanding at 30 June 2017 was 1000 30 June 2016 3000.
In the year ended 30 June 2016 the Group also made a software subscription purchase from Dynamic Action for 35000 of which Michael Ross is a director and a payment of 6000 to Mara Aspinall for consultancy services in addition to her NonExecutive Directorship fee.
Neither of these were outstanding at 30 June 2016.
96 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017
30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Noncurrent assets Goodwill 4 7658 7658 Intangible assets 5 15949 8604 Property plant and equipment 6 11753 8866 Investments 7 137150 93961 Deferred tax asset 8 1805 4192 Loan receivable 9 51981 82065 Derivative financial instruments 10 193 226489 205346 Current assets Inventories 11 15286 13532 Trade and other receivables 12 34050 37295 Derivative financial instruments 10 1327 11 Term deposits  1000 Cash and cash equivalents 72712 60953 123375 112791 Total assets 349864 318137 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 13 38730 38486 Current tax liabilities 1500 498 Derivative financial instruments 10 2090 9267 Borrowings with group companies 6842 6801 49162 55052 Net current assets 74213 57739 Total assets less current liabilities 300864 263085 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred tax liability 8 204 119 Derivative financial instruments 10 99 1231 303 1350 Total liabilities 49465 56402 Net assets 300399 261735
Share capital 14 409 405 Share premium account 14 23910 21549 Merger reserve 14 68073 61560 Own shares 14 3626 3231 Hedging reserve 14 43 7066 Retained earnings 14 211676 188518 Total shareholders funds 300399 261735 The Company reported a profit for the financial year ended 30 June 2017 of 39508000 2016 45901000.
The Company financial statements on pages 97 to 106 of Abcam plc registered number  were approved by the Board of Directors and authorised for issue on 8 September 2017.
They were signed on its behalf by Gavin Wood
8 September 2017 97 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements Company balance sheet As at 30 June 2017 Called up share capital
Merger reserve
Hedging reserve
Total shareholders funds Balance as at 1 July 2015 402 19522 56513 2812 1758 156337 231720 Profit for the year      45901 45901 Other comprehensive income Movements on cash flow hedges     10819  10819 Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income     1995  1995 8824  8824 Total comprehensive income     8824 45901 37077 Issue of share capital 3 2027 5047 658   6419 Own shares disposed of on exercise of share options    239  239 Sharebased payments charge recognised on behalf of subsidiaries      635 635 Credit to equity for sharebased payments net of tax      2624 2624 Payment of dividends      16740 16740 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity 3 2027 5047 419  13720 7062 Balance as at 30 June 2016 and at 1 July 2016 405 21549 61560 3231 7066 188518 261735 Profit for the year      39508 39508 Other comprehensive income Movements on cash flow hedges     8569  8569 Tax relating to components of other comprehensive income     1546  1546 7023  7023 Total comprehensive income     7023 39508 46531 Issue of share capital 4 2361 6513 921   7957 Own shares disposed of on exercise of share options    526  526 Sharebased payments charge recognised on behalf of subsidiaries      872 872 Credit to equity for sharebased payments net of tax      2478 2478 Payment of dividends      19070 19070 Purchase of own shares      104 104 Transactions with owners recognised directly in equity 4 2361 6513 395  16350 7867 Balance as at 30 June 2017 409 23910 68073 3626 43 211676 300399 1 Gains and losses recognised on cash flow hedges.
The sharebased payment reserve and tax reserve which were previously shown separately have been combined within retained earnings for presentational purposes.
98 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Company statement of changes in equity For the year ended 30 June 2017 1.
Significant accounting policies The separate financial statements of the Company which are prepared on the historical cost convention as modified to include revaluation of certain financial instruments and on the going concern basis are presented as required by the Companies Act 2006.
The Company meets the definition of a qualifying entity under Financial Reporting Standard FRS 100 Application of Financial Reporting Requirements issued by the Financial Reporting Council FRC.
Accordingly in the year ended 30 June 2017 the Company has decided to adopt FRS 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework and has undergone transition from reporting under IFRSs adopted by the European Union to FRS 101 as issued by the FRC.
Accordingly the financial statements have therefore been prepared in accordance with FRS 101 incorporating the amendments to FRS 101 issued by the FRC in July 2015 and July 2016.
This transition is not considered to have had a material effect on the financial statements.
The Company is included in the Group financial statements of Abcam plc presented on pages 65 to 96.
The following exemptions from the requirements of IFRS have been applied in the preparation of these financial statements in accordance with FRS 101 Paragraphs 45b and 46 to 52 of IFRS 2 Sharebased Payment.
IFRS 7 Financial Instruments Disclosures.
Paragraphs 9199 of IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement.
Paragraph 38 of IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements and comparative information requirements in respect of paragraph 79a iv of IAS 1.
Paragraph 73e of IAS 16 Property Plant and Equipment and 118e of IAS 36 Impairment of Assets.
Paragraphs 10d 10f 16 38a 38b to d 40a to d 111 and 134 to 136 of IAS 1.
IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows.
Paragraphs 30 and 31 of IAS 8 Accounting Policies Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors.
Paragraph 17 of IAS 24 Related Party Disclosures and the further requirement in IAS 24 to disclose related party transactions entered into between two or more members of a group.
The basis for all of the above exemptions is because equivalent disclosures are included in the Group financial statements in which the entity is consolidated.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclosure Framework FRS 101 and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 except for the departure from the Companies Act explained in note 4.
The financial information has been prepared on the going concern and historical cost basis.
The principal accounting policies adopted are the same as those set out in note 4 paragraph a of the Group financial statements except in respect of investments in subsidiaries which are stated at cost less where appropriate provisions for impairment.
All accounting policies have been applied consistently.
Critical accounting judgements The preparation of Company financial statements in conformity with FRS 101 requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Company financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period.
Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised if the revision affects only that period or in the period of the revision and future periods if the revision affects both current and future periods.
The critical accounting judgements have been set out in note 4 of the Group financial statements.
These judgements have been applied consistently within the Company financial statements.
Profit for the year As permitted by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has elected not to present its own profit and loss account or statement of comprehensive income for the year.
The profit attributable to the Company amounted to 39508000 2016 45901000.
The auditors remuneration is disclosed in note 7 of the Group financial statements.
99 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements For the year ended 30 June 2017 3.
Employees and remuneration Details of Directors remuneration sharebased payments and pension entitlements in the Remuneration Report on pages 41 to 54 form part of these Company financial statements.
Information on the main employee sharebased payments is given in note 25 to the Group financial statements.
Details of the key management personnel are given in note 28 of the Group financial statements.
The average monthly number of employees including Executive Directors was Year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June 2016
Management administrative marketing and distribution 405 333 Laboratory Their aggregate remuneration comprised Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Wages and salaries 23108 18381 Social security costs 2154 2057 Other pension costs 1014 1538 Charge in respect of share options and awards granted 2619 1292 Total staff costs 28895 23268 Capitalised employee costs 3870 2162 Net staff costs 25025 21106
Cost
At 1 July 2016 and 30 June 2017 7658 Accumulated impairment losses At 1 July 2016 and 30 June 2017 Carrying amount At 30 June 2016 7658 At 30 June 2017 7658 The Company does not amortise goodwill in accordance with the requirements of IFRS as applied under FRS 101.
Instead an annual impairment test is performed and any impairment that is identified is recognised in the income statement.
The nonamortisation of goodwill conflicts with paragraph 22 of Schedule 1 to The Large and Mediumsized Companies and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 SI 2008410 which requires acquired goodwill to be written off over its useful economic life.
As such the nonamortisation of goodwill is a departure from the Companies Act 2006 for the overriding purpose of giving a true and fair view from the requirement of paragraph 22 of Schedule 1 to the Regulations.
It is not possible to quantify the effect of the departure from the Companies Act 2006 because a finite life for the goodwill has not been identified.
However the effect of amortising over a useful life of 20 years would be a charge of 0.4 million 2016 0.4 million against operating profit and a reduction of 0.8 million 2016 0.4 million in the carrying value of goodwill in the balance sheet.
Goodwill impairment review The Company goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if there are any indications that the goodwill might be impaired.
The forecast cash flows arising in the Company have been projected using the same key assumptions as used for the Group testing.
Management has performed a sensitivity analysis on the key assumptions and based on the results of this analysis management is satisfied that the recoverable amount of goodwill exceeds its carrying amount.
As such no impairment of goodwill has been recognised at the balance sheet date.
100 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 5.
Intangible assets
Distribution rights
Assets under construction
Patents technology and knowhow
Cost
At 1 July 2016 527 1957 11078 4303 190 412 18467 Additions 1 1 2496 8685   11183 Disposals in year  414     414 Transfers   736 736 At 30 June 2017 528 1544 14310 12252 190 412 29236 Accumulated amortisation and impairment At 1 July 2016 525 1758 7167  60 353 9863 Charge for the year 3 95 3621  60 59 3838 Disposals in year  414     414 At 30 June 2017 528 1439 10788  120 412 13287 Carrying amount At 30 June 2016 2 199 3911 4303 130 59 8604 At 30 June 2017  105 3522 12252 70  15949 The amortisation period for the upfront licence fees software and distribution rights is referred to in note 3 of the Group financial statements.
Assets under construction are software related.
The costs capitalised relate to the development of the core IT systems architecture including the build of the new ERP system.
These are not amortised until available for use in the business.
Customer relationships in the Company balance sheet have been acquired as part of the trade transfer of Ascent Scientific Ltd Ascent and represent access to new customers in the biochemical industry.
The remaining amortisation period is two months.
Patents technology and knowhow relates to acquired technology as part of the Companys acquisitions.
These are included in note 13 of the Group financial statements.
The technology asset in the Company balance sheet was acquired as part of the trade transfer of Ascent and represents the cost to recreate unique production processes that were assessed during the original acquisition of Ascent by the Group.
This has been fully amortised in the year.
Property plant and equipment
Laboratory equipment
Leasehold improvements under construction
Hybridomas under construction
Total
Cost
At 1 July 2016 2302 6590 4158  6548 1138 6 20742 Additions 242 358 53 1066 1496 2289  5504 Transfer to asset in use     1909 1909 Reclassification   577 577 Disposals  14 6     20 At 30 June 2017 2544 6934 3628 1643 9953 1518 6 26226 Accumulated depreciation At 1 July 2016 1554 5233 3017  2067  5 11876 Charge for the year 580 495 263  1276  1 2615 Disposals  12 6     18 At 30 June 2017 2134 5716 3274  3343  6 14473 Carrying amount At 30 June 2016 748 1357 1141  4481 1138 1 8866 At 30 June 2017 410 1218 354 1643 6610 1518  11753 101 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 7.
Investments
Share in Group undertakings At 1 July 2016 93961 Capital contribution Purchase of shares in subsidiary undertakings 153 Capitalisation of borrowing costs At 30 June 2017 137150 The capital contribution represents sharebased payment charges for share options issued by the Company to employees of its subsidiaries and shares issued on behalf of subsidiaries as part of the consideration payable on acquisition.
2 Increasing the investment value within Abcam US Group Holdings Inc through the capitalisation of debt funding provided by Abcam plc see note 9.
Subsidiary undertakings Directly held Registered office
Abcam Australia Pty Limited Level 16 414 La Trobe Street Melbourne VIC 3000
Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam KK Sumitomo Fudousan Ningyocho Bldg 2F 221 Nihonbashi Horidomecho Chuoku Tokyo 1030012 Japan Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam Hong Kong Limited Unit 712 7th Floor Lakeside 1 No.
8 Science Park West Avenue Hong Kong Science Park Pak Shek Kok New Territories Hong Kong Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam Taiwan Company
7F.
No 420 Fuxing N.
Rd Zhongshan District Taipei City 10476 Taiwan Republic of China Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam US Group Holdings Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Rd Suite 400 Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 USA Financing and investing Ordinary 100 Ascent Scientific Limited 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL United Kingdom Dormant Ordinary 100 Abcam Singapore Pte.
Limited 77 Robinson Road 1300 Robinson 77 Singapore  Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 The Abcam Employee Share Benefit Trust Limited 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL United Kingdom
Ordinary 100 Indirectly held Registered office
Abcam Inc 1 Kendall Square Suite B2304 Cambridge MA 02139 1517 USA Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam LLC Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Rd Suite 400 Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 USA
Ordinary 100 AxioMx Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Rd Suite 400 Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 USA RandD and manufacturing Ordinary 100 Epitomics Inc National Registered Agents Inc 160 Greentree DR Ste 101 Dover Kent DE 19904 USA RandD and manufacturing Ordinary 100 Epitomics Hangzhou Biotechnology Co.
Limited
1418 Moganshan Road Hangzhou Zhejiang China  RandD and manufacturing Ordinary 100 Firefly BioWorks Inc The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Centre 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 USA RandD and manufacturing Ordinary 100 MitoSciences Inc The Corporation Trust Company Corporation Trust Centre 1209 Orange Street Wilmington New Castle DE 19801 USA RandD and manufacturing Ordinary 100 Abcam Epitomics Holdings Inc Corporation Service Company 2711 Centerville Rd Suite 400 Wilmington New Castle DE 19808 USA
Ordinary 100 Abcam Trading Shanghai
Limited
Room 5401 Floor 4 Building 5 No.
338 Galileo Road Pudong New Area Shanghai China Sales and distribution Ordinary 100 Abcam US Limited 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL United Kingdom Financing and investing Ordinary 100 102 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 8.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities The following are the deferred tax liabilities and assets recognised by the Company and movements thereon during the current reporting year.
Accelerated tax depreciation Cash flow hedges
Acquired intangible assets Other temporary differences
At 1 July 2016 464 1890 2601 119 165 4073 Creditcharge to income 260 231  119 137 11 Credit to equity  1546 937   2483 At 30 June 2017 204 113 1664  28 1601 The Companys deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using tax rates that are expected to apply in the period when the liability is settled or the asset realised based on tax rates that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Deferred tax is provided using the balance sheet liability method providing for temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the asset can be utilised.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset where the Group has a legally enforceable right to do so.
The following is the analysis of the deferred tax balances after offset for financial reporting purposes 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Deferred tax assets Deferred tax assets to be recovered after more than 12 months 1651 2524 Deferred tax assets to be recovered within 12 months 154 1668 1805 4192 Deferred tax liabilities Deferred tax liabilities to be recovered after more than 12 months Deferred tax liabilities to be recovered within 12 months 204 119 Deferred tax assets net 1601 4073 No deferred tax asset or liability is recognised in respect of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries where the Company is able to control the timing of reversal of the temporary differences and it is probable that the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
The Directors believe that all dividends to be paid by the Companys subsidiaries will meet the UK tax legislation amendment largely exempting dividends from the UK if received on or after 1 July 2009.
Loan receivable 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Amount owed by subsidiary undertakings 51981 82065 The amount owed to the Company represents interestbearing loans due from subsidiary undertakings with terms as follows
Principal
000 Repayment date
Book value 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Term loan 1 Abcam US Group Holdings Inc 33000 20 December 2019 7.34% 25404 24686 Term loan 2 Abcam US Group Holdings Inc 34000 20 December 2019 8.69% 26174 25434 Term loan 3 Abcam US Group Holdings Inc 28153 1 October 2020 3.50%  21060 Term loan 4 Abcam US Group Holdings Inc 11468 11 November 2020 3.50%  8579 Term loan 5 AxioMx Inc 2417 11 November 2020 3.50%  1808 Other loans Various Various Various Various 403 498 51981 82065 All the loans are unsecured.
Term loans 3 and 4 have been capitalised at their yearend value of 35649000 see note 7 and term loan 5 has been fully settled.
Any other changes in the book values of each loan are attributable to foreign exchange movements and intergroup settlements.
Other loans represent the startup funding for new entities within the Company from prior year.
As at 30 June 2017 amounts consisted of funding to MitoSciences Inc.
Abcam Singapore Pte Limited and Abcam Australia Pty Limited.
103 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 10.
Derivative financial instruments The fair value of derivative financial instruments has been disclosed in the Companys balance sheet as 2017 2016 Due within one year Due after more than one year
Due within one year Due after more than one year
Derivative financial assets 1327 193 1520 11  11 Derivative financial liabilities 2090 99 2189 9267 1231 10498
30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Raw materials 291 557 Work in progress 188 413 Finished goods 14807 12562 15286 13532 The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales amounted to 180000 2016 328000 and are reflected in the Group profit and loss account.
Trade and other receivables 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Amounts receivable for the sale of goods and services 6759 5027 Allowance for doubtful debts 4 104 6755 4923 Amounts owed by subsidiary undertakings 19064 27824 Other receivables 6865 3295 Prepayments 1366 1253 34050 37295 Included within other receivables is 6075000 2016 650000 held in an escrow account.
This forms a deposit for work to be performed by contractors in the construction of the Groups new global headquarters at the Cambridge Biomedical campus.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates their fair value.
A measurement change correlating to the allowance for doubtful debts has been identified and discussed in note 17 of the Group financial statements.
Trade and other payables 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Amounts falling due within one year Trade payables 6100 4190 Amounts owed to subsidiary undertakings 13931 21495 Accruals 17506 10597 Other taxes and social security 1183 667 Other payables 10 1537 38730 38486 All amounts payable to Group undertakings are unsecured interest free and repayable on demand.
Capital and reserves Called up share capital 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Issued and fully paid 204469825 2016 202601452 ordinary shares of 0.2 pence each 409 405 The movement during the year on the Companys issued and fully paid shares was as follows
Balance at beginning of year 202601452 405 402 Issue of share capital 1868373 4 3 Balance at end of year 204469825 409 405 The Company has one class of ordinary shares which carries no right to fixed income.
104 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 14.
Capital and reserves continued Share premium account Balance at 1 July 2016 21549 Premium arising on issue of equity shares 2361 Balance at 30 June 2017 23910 There were no costs of issue incurred during the year or the previous year.
Own shares Balance at 1 July 2016 3231 Issued in the year 921 Disposed of on exercise of options 526 Balance at 30 June 2017 3626 This balance represents the cost of 728909 shares with a nominal value of 1458 in Abcam plc 2016 772936 shares with a nominal value of 1546 which were issued by the Company at market value and held by the Abcam Employee Share Benefit Trust.
These shares are held in order to satisfy the free share and matching share elements of the SIP.
See note 25 of the Group financial statements for further details of this scheme.
Reserves
Sharebased payment reserve The Group operates a number of equitysettled sharebased payment plans for the employees of subsidiaries using the Companys equity instruments.
The fair value of the compensation given in respect of these sharebased payment plans is recognised as a capital contribution over the vesting period.
Full details of sharebased payments share option schemes and share plans are disclosed in note 25 to the Group financial statements.
The sharebased payment reserve and tax reserve which were previously shown separately have been combined with retained earnings for presentational purposes.
Tax reserve The tax reserve comprises the portion of the deferred tax arising on outstanding share options not taken to the income statement and the portion of current tax on exercised share options not taken to the income statement.
The sharebased payment reserve and tax reserve which were previously shown separately have been combined with retained earnings for presentational purposes.
Hedging reserve The hedging reserve comprises gains and losses recognised on cash flow hedges and the associated deferred tax assets and liabilities created.
Merger reserve The merger reserve comprises the premium issued on shares allotted as consideration for acquisitions where conditions for merger relief are satisfied.
Commitments
Operating lease commitments 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Minimum lease payments under operating leases recognised in the income statement for the year 1020 925 At the balance sheet date the Company had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases all of which relate to land and buildings which fall due as follows 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Within one year 1043 925 Between one and five years 517 1346 After five years 1560 2271 The above table reflects the committed cash payments under operating leases rather than the expected charge to the income statement in the relevant periods.
The charge for the year to 30 June 2018 on these operating leases is expected to be 1043000 for the Company 2016 925000.
Future capital expenditure 30 June 2017 30 June 2016 Contracted for but not provided 6237 819 At the year end the Company had additional commitments of 6237000 relating to the acquisition of property plant and equipment and intangible assets 2016 819000.
105 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements 16.
Dividends
For details of dividends see note 23 of the Group financial statements.
Retirement benefit schemes Defined contribution schemes The total cost charged to the income statement in respect of these schemes during the year ended 30 June 2017 was 1014000 2016 1538000.
As at 30 June 2017 contributions of 146000 2016 122000 due in respect of the current reporting period had not been paid over to the schemes.
Related party transactions Company transactions with its subsidiaries The Company provided goods for resale to purchased goods from received dividends from and was charged fees by its subsidiaries in the current and prior years.
The Company has applied the exemption available not to disclose transactions with its wholly owned subsidiaries.
Directors transactions The remuneration of the Directors and senior managers who are key management personnel of the Company is set out in the Remuneration Report on pages 41 to 54.
The Company has a licence and supply agreement for access to knockout cell lines with Horizon Discovery Group plc of which Jonathan Milner is a NonExecutive Director.
A total of 220000 2016 220000 has been paid during the year under the terms of the agreement with additional productrelated fees of 41595 2016 4700.
The balance outstanding at 30 June 2017 was 6000 2016 3000.
Total sales of 17000 2016 53000 have been made during the year to companies of which Jonathan Milner is the Chairman or a significant investor.
The balance outstanding at 30 June 2017 was 1000 2016 nil.
Sharebased payments The Company has a number of sharebased payment arrangements that existed during 2017 the details of which can be found in note 25 of the Group financial statements.
106 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial statements Notes to the Company financial statements continued For the year ended 30 June 2017 Antibody A protein made by the immune system that binds specifically to an antigen.
When an antibody detects this antigen in the body it will contribute to an immune response to rid the body of the antigen.
Amino acids The basic building blocks of proteins and peptides.
Antigen A molecule that is recognised by the immune system and which can be specifically bound by an antibody.
Assay A laboratory test for assessing the presence amount or functional activity of a chemical or biological molecule.
Biological pathway A series of molecular interactions that leads to a change in a cell in response to a stimulus.
For example biological pathways can trigger the assembly of new molecules turn genes on and off or spur a cell to move.
Biomarker A measurable indicator of a biological state or condition.
For example increased amounts of a particular protein in a blood sample may indicate the presence of a particular disease.
Conjugated antibody Antibodies that are chemically bound to molecules that enable detection of the antibody.
For example an antibody might be bound to a fluorescent dye.
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid  a polymeric molecule that comprises both the coding and noncoding elements of the genome of an organism.
Coding elements are transcribed into RNA while noncoding elements exert cellular control functions.
ELISA Assay that uses antibodies to detect and quantify proteins and peptides in a biological sample.
Acronym for enzymelinked immunosorbent assay.
ERP Acronym for enterprise resource planning.
It refers to business process management software that allows an organisation to use a system of integrated applications to manage the business and automate many back office functions related to technology services and human resources.
Gene A section of DNA that acts as the blueprint for making a particular protein.
Every human being except identical twins has a unique set of genes half of which came from their mother and the other half from their father.
Immunoassay A test that uses the binding of antibodies to antigens to detect and quantify a biological molecule in a sample.
In vitro Describes studies that are performed with microorganisms cells or biological molecules outside their normal biological context.
For example an in vitro experiment might involve extracting a blood sample from a patient and performing an assay on that sample in a test tube.
In vivo Describes a biological process that takes place in a living cell or organism including animals and plants.
Kits and assays Multicomponent products comprising antibodies and other reagents that can be used to detect a wide range of biological molecules.
Knockout cell lines A cell line that has had a particular gene removed or knocked out.
The protein that the knockedout gene encodes for is therefore not produced.
Lysate The fluid produced by lysis of cells and tissues.
Lysates are used as controls in biological experiments to confirm the absence or presence of proteins of interest.
Lysis The disruption of cells by mechanical chemical or enzymatic means.
Matched antibody pairs A pair of antibodies that binds to an individual protein at different sites meaning that both antibodies of the pair can bind the protein at the same time.
Matched antibody pairs are used in assays such as ELISA. microRNA or miRNA Small RNAs that are involved in regulating gene expression.
Monoclonal antibodies Identical antibodies derived from a group of identical cloned cells.
Monoclonal antibodies recognise only one kind of antigen i. they bind to the same site on a protein.
Multiplex immunoassays Immunoassays that can detect multiple proteins at once within a single sample.
They allow scientists to increase the efficiency and scope of their experiments.
Net Promoter Score or NPS A management tool that can be used to gauge the loyalty of a companys customer relationships.
It serves as an alternative to traditional customer satisfaction research and can be correlated with revenue growth.
Peptides Short chains of amino acids.
PDL1 Acronym for programmed deathligand 1.
It is a protein that plays a major role in suppressing the immune system and is an important target in difficult to treat cancers.
Polyclonal antibodies Antibodies that target the same antigen but are derived from different cell lineages.
Polyclonal antibodies bind to different sites on the antigen.
Proteins Large complex molecules made up of amino acids.
Proteins are required for the structure function and regulation of the bodys tissues and organs.
RabMAb
Abcams patented technology for the generation of high quality rabbit monoclonal antibodies.
Rabbitrecombinant monoclonal antibodies Antibodies made by cloning DNA sequences from cell lines that produce rabbit monoclonal antibodies.
Cloned recombinant antibodies are identical and are therefore not susceptible to lottolot variation.
Reagent A product used in an experiment to detect or measure biological processes.
Recombinant An antibody or protein that is synthesised from modified DNA in an artificial system that permits rapid production of large quantities of the protein.
RNA Ribonucleic Acid  a polymeric molecule that is transcribed from DNA.
Various forms of RNA are involved in protein synthesis.
Specificity This refers to the ability of an antibody to bind only the desired antigen.
SimpleStep ELISA kits Kits that deliver fast results in just 90 minutes by reducing antibody and sample additions to a single step.
107 Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Abcam plc Financial statements Financial statements Technical glossary Registered office 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL
Websites site site Registered number Company Secretary Suzanne Smith Nominated advisor and broker
Morgan Cazenove 25 Bank Street London E14 5JP
Independent auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditor Abacus House Castle Park Cambridge CB3 0AN
Public relations advisor
200 Aldersgate London EC1A 4HD
Banker
National Westminster Bank plc Kings Parade Cambridge CB2 3PU
Registrar
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
West Sussex BN99 6DA
Shareholder information Shareholder enquiries Any shareholder with enquiries should in the first instance contact our registrar Equiniti Limited using the address provided in the Corporate Directory.
Share price information London Stock Exchange Alternative Investment Market AIM symbol ABC.
Information on the Companys share price is available on the Abcam investor relations website at site Investor relations 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL
Phontel
Website site Financial calendar Financial year end 30 June 2017 Full year results announced 11 September 2017 Annual General Meeting 14 November 2017 Exdividend date for final dividend 16 November 2017 Record date for final dividend 17 November 2017 Final dividend payment 8 December 2017 108 Abcam plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate directory The Abcam Groups commitment to environmental issues is reflected in the production of this Annual Report which has been printed on Cocoon 100 an FSC certified and PCF Process Chlorine Free paper made from 100% postconsumer waste paper fibres.
The report is printed in the UK by Pureprint Group using their environmental printing technology and vegetable based inks.
Pureprint Group is a CarbonNeutral of this document being reduced to net zero through a verified carbon offsetting project.
Both the paper manufacturing mill and the printer are registered to the Environmental Management System ISO14001 and FSC chainofcustody certified.
Groundbreaking ceremony June 2017 for Abcams new global headquarters at the Cambridge Biomedical Campus.
Abcam plc 330 Cambridge Science Park Milton Road Cambridge CB4 0FL
Phontel
Faxtel
