AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Turning knowledge into advantage Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Stock Code WIL 255704 AR2017 27 September 2017 1058 AM Shell Welcome to Our Annual Report 2017 Wilmington operates in three key knowledge areas Risk and Compliance Healthcare and Professional Wilmingtons vision To be the recognised knowledge leader and partner of choice for information education and networking in Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare.
Reasons to invest Clear vision and focus Emphasis on organic growth Increasing international opportunities Strong positions in wellfunded professional markets High conversion of operating profits into free cash flows High proportion of subscription and repeatable revenues Read more in our Chairmans Statement page 06 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL INVESTOR WEBSITE Our corporate website at site contains a wide range of information of interest to institutional and private investors including z Latest news and press releases z Annual reports and investor presentations Read more in this report Read more online Getting around this report Financial and Operational Highlights 02 At a Glance 04
Chairmans Statement 06
Group Strategy 10 Key Performance Indicators and Operational Measures 12
Chief Executive Officers Review 14
Corporate Environment and Social Responsibility 20
Financial Review 22
Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business 25 Strategic Report Our Governance Financial Statements Board of Directors 34 Directors Report 36 Corporate Governance Report 38 Audit Committee Report 44 Nomination Committee Report 46
Directors Remuneration Report 47
Statement of Directors Responsibilities 63
Independent Auditors Report 64
Financial Statements 70 Pro Forma Five Year Financial Summary 115 Advisers and Corporate Calendar 117
Strategic Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4tel 2014 2013 105.7tel 2014 2013 eltel eltel 15.9tel 2014 2013 23.4tel 2014 2013 21.4tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 105.7tel 2013 2012 Group Revenue m Adjusted Earnings per Share Adjusted EBITA margins Revenues also up Cash flowconversion at Adjusted measures Adjusted EBITA m Adjusted Profit before Tax Basic Earnings per Share Final dividend increased Organic revenue down Profit before tax m 19.4% 9% 114% 7.0% to 4.6p 0.8% 14% 5% 6% 5% 2016 105.7m 2016 18.17p 2016 20.8% on a constant currency basis 2016 108% now stated inclusive of share based payments cost 2016 0.6m 2016 4.3p Total dividends up 5.0% to 8.5p 2016 8.1p 2016 22.0m 2016 20.3m 2016 Loss per share 7.39p 2015 loss 3.4m Financial highlights Adjusted EBITA  see note 3 Adjusted Profit before Tax  see note 3 Adjusted Earnings per Share  see note 9 Cash conversion represents the Operating Cash Flow for the year as a percentage of adjusted operating profit before interest and amortisation.
Constant currency  eliminating the effects of exchange rate fluctuation Organic revenue  eliminating the effects of exchange rate fluctuation and the impact of acquisitions Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Financial and Operational Highlights Financial Results for the twelve months ended 30 June 2017 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Operational Highlights
Healthcare division z Professional division revenue up 7% driven by the maiden contribution from SWAT Group Limited SWAT which adds scale to the Professional division z Exiting legal practice support market with planned closure of Ark businesses z Project Sixth gear progressing well on the consolidation of the London offices marketing best practice procurement and key account management z London leasehold premises sold for 7.3m and new central London leasehold headquarters acquired z Subscription and repeatable revenue at 77% of total revenue 2016 75% z International revenues increased to 43% of total revenue 2016 42% Outlook and Current Trading z Satisfactory albeit slow start for first two months of the year but revenue up 7% over the same period in 2016 driven by HSJ contribution z Exit from legal practice support market will reduce unprofitable revenue and help restore stability to Professional division z Increased operating costs of 0.75m across the Group to capitalise on opportunities from changing customer demands z Increased annual operating costs from London property move of 0.9m p.
Compliance and Healthcare businesses Wilmington continues to make good strategic progress as we focus the business on key areas of growth.
With three logical divisions in place and an ongoing commitment to investing in the digitisation of our business we are confident in our prospects for the future.
PEDRO ROS
Chief Executive Officer
Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 At a Glance At Wilmington plc we transform knowledge into advantage keeping our clients at the centre of everything we do.
In todays knowledge economy where differentiation using traditional criteria is often difficult we help our clients to better understand their challenges and to use information to improve their businesses.
We aspire to treat every client as we would treat our only client we equip our businesses accordingly and provide bestin class support and infrastructure.
We are innovative adopting new technologies and embracing the digital environment we understand that todays organisations are as concerned with sustaining the pace of change in business generally as they are with competition.
Throughout Wilmington plc we are fortunate to have highly talented people working in our businesses.
People whose energy and shared commitment to success drives exceptional performance.
Wherever in Wilmington plc you look the power of our people working towards common objectives is immense we set ourselves demanding goals and we achieve them.
Consequently we deliver consistent growth  both personal and financial  and aim to deliver increased stakeholder value for clients employees and shareholders alike.
Effective from 23 February 2017 our business has been further simplified into three divisions Risk and
2016 38.8m
This division includes Wilmingtons financial training businesses financial networking events and our repositioned legal product lines.
The Professional division provides expert and technical training as well as support services to professionals in corporate finance and capital markets and to qualified lawyers and accountants in the UK in both the profession and in industry.
This division serves primarily tier 1 banks the international financial services industry US Capital Markets and small to medium sized professional accountancy and law firms.
Professional
2016 36.7m
Healthcare
2016 30.2m
This division provides in depth accredited regulatory and compliance training and information market intelligence and analysis.
It focuses on the international financial services and international insurance markets as well as the UK pensions industry.
The main communities that use our offerings are risk and compliance officers globally.
The Healthcare division provides analysis and clarity to customerfocused organisations predominantly in the Healthcare and Life Science markets enabling them to better understand and connect with their markets.
This division includes our UK healthcare information businesses our Paris based European healthcare news agency healthcare networking events and our legacy non healthcare data suppression and charity information businesses.
The main communities that use our offerings are healthcare professionals on an increasingly global basis.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL Revenue analysis Revenue can be analysed by segment as follows Total Revenue % of Group revenue Revenue can be analysed by geography as follows Revenue can be analysed by type as follows Total Revenue % of Group revenue Total Revenue % of Group revenue Risk and
Professional
Healthcare
35% 37% 33% 35% 32% 28%
Europe excluding UK North America Rest of the World 57% 58% 15% 15% 19% 9% 18% 9%
Training
Networking
47% 44% 40% 44% 13% 12% The Group has offices in the following locations UK unless otherwise stated z Barcelona Spain z Birmingham z Boston US z Bristol z Charlotte US z Chicago US z Dubai UAE z Dublin Ireland z Essex z Glasgow z Hong Kong z Leicester z London Head Office z Madrid Spain z New York US z Newry Northern Ireland z Paris France z Plymouth z Santa Cruz US z Singapore z West Yorkshire The Groups largest revenue generating countries are z UK z US z France z Singapore z Spain z Republic of Ireland z Germany z Hong Kong z Switzerland z United Arab Emirates z Channel Islands z Malaysia z Bermuda z Canada z Poland z Belgium z India z Turkey z Bahamas z Sweden 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Chairmans Statement
I am pleased to present my report on Wilmingtons results for the twelve months ended 30 June 2017.
Overall It has been a positive financial performance as we move towards our objective of becoming a single integrated international business.
Wilmington has continued to meet the challenges that necessary change inevitably brings a balance of growing revenue and profits whilst making material investments in new products systems offices personnel and in new businesses.
Wilmington delivered revenue growth of 14% up 9% on a constant currency led by excellent contributions from the acquisitions made during the year and supported by organic growth from our core offerings.
We have seen strong growth from Healthcare up 28% and good growth from Risk and Compliance up 9% as well as growth from Professional which increased its revenue by 7% albeit benefiting from the acquisition of SWAT.
Adjusted profit before tax which now for the first time includes share based payment costs of 0.6m 2016 0.6m increased 5% to 21.4m 2016 20.3m.
Business strategy Wilmingtons strategy is to further develop its business into a knowledge based model and structure focussing on serving the needs of chosen communities with an overall objective of becoming a single integrated international business.
This business structure will maximise Wilmingtons opportunities to help its clients and communities meet their information education and networking requirements as well as drive operational efficiencies.
As part of its evolution Wilmington has and is continuing to be more focussed on its core communities that provide a higher quality of earnings.
Vision
The vision which acts as our guide and underpins our strategy is To be the recognised knowledge leader and partner of choice for information education and networking in Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare.
By achieving our vision we aim to turn knowledge into competitive advantage for our clients.
This year has been a positive one for Wilmington with overall solid financial performance delivered in the context of accelerating change in our endmarkets.
Wilmington is well positioned to benefit from this change and we continue to see significant demand for our products and services from our customers.
We enter the new financial year anticipating continued momentum particularly in our Risk and Compliance and Healthcare divisions.
We are also excited about the prospects for our newly created Professional division which promises to benefit in the medium term from the convergence in education requirements across the professional services.
MARK ASPLIN NonExecutive Chairman 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL Project Sixth Gear On 23 February 2017 we announced project Sixth Gear which is the next stage in our strategic development.
This project builds upon the first stage which focussed on the simplification of group structure and the selective acquisition of businesses to fill gaps in our product offerings.
The prime objective of Sixth Gear is to accelerate the move to a single One Wilmington simplifying and integrating the business further maximising client relationships and providing the basis for organic and acquisitionled growth and scale.
The accelerated integration and pooling of resources will help to capitalise on growing economies of scale.
New Reporting Structure As previously announced to help simplify Wilmington still further we reorganised our business into three divisions Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare.
The combination of the former divisions of Legal and Finance into one new division Professional is a natural outcome from the restructuring downsizing and refocusing of our Law for Lawyers business over the last few years.
This combination which is facilitated by the decision to exit from the legal practice support market also brings greater clarity to this division.
Risk and Compliance division concentrates on servicing the strong organic global demand for our offerings supported by selective earnings enhancing acquisitions in the areas of risk and compliance as well as investments in new products data services offices and in new territories.
The emphasis continues to be servicing the needs of risk managers and compliance officers globally.
Professional division provides information education and networking support to professionals in the accountancy financial services and legal markets.
This division focuses on supporting the postqualification needs of individual professionals and SMEs with an increasing emphasis on exploiting international opportunities and an accelerated move to expand our digital learning solutions areas where we feel the revenue growth opportunities are greatest.
The emphasis in the short term will be on organic rather than acquisition led growth with capital allocated accordingly.
Healthcare division is the renamed Insight division recognising that well over 80% of its revenue following the HSJ acquisition comes from healthcare markets globally.
We are replicating the successful model of providing information particularly insight data and analytics education and networking capabilities on a country by country basis.
The emphasis will be to build on our existing market presence in the EU and in the US either organically or by acquisition.
In line with our strategy all three divisions offer information networking and education capabilities servicing key defined communities supported by best inclass technology.
The divisions will look to exploit international and increasingly digital opportunities using and replicating expertise from their existing market positions.
Each division will also act as our specialist knowledge expert and centre of excellence providing expertise and RandD to support the two other divisions.
Our people As a digital information education and networking business operating in dynamic and competitive markets we are fundamentally reliant upon the quality and professionalism of our people.
I would once again like to express my own and my fellow Board members appreciation of the hard work and dedication of our Wilmington colleagues across the globe.
Financial and operational targets I am pleased to report progress in all but one of our key financial and operational targets.
We have seen growth in Adjusted Profit before Tax Adjusted Earnings per Share and Return on Equity although we saw a drop in the level of Adjusted EBITA margins from 20.8% to 19.4% reflecting inter alia significant investment expenditure during the year.
As you will read in the Chief Executive Officers review in our compliance business alone we have invested an additional 1.0m in new initiatives which represents one percentage point off our overall margin.
We see further necessary operational investment during 201718 offsetting the underlying improvement to margins that integration previous investment projects and the impact of higher margin acquired businesses bring on our Adjusted EBITA margins.
The four financial measures above form the basis of the Executive Directors incentive plans.
We closely monitor cash conversion which we expect to exceed 100% on an annual basis and in 2017 that conversion rate was 114% 2016 108%.
This excellent cash conversion illustrates the strength of the business as well as the efficiency in our stewardship of working capital.
The positive cashflow characteristics of Wilmington matched with clear fiscal discipline in turn help us attract and maintain significant finance from third party providers.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 We continue to generate a high proportion of our revenue derived from quality and sustainable income streams and in 2017 revenue from subscriptions and repeatable revenue was 77% of group revenue 2016 75%.
A high proportion of repeatable revenue provides a good degree of earnings visibility as well as security.
We continue to seek to increase each year our proportion of revenue generated outside the UK where we see good prospects for long term sustainable growth.
Revenue outside the UK has grown again and was 43% of total revenue compared to 42% last year with the underlying relative growth in nonUK revenue from our portfolio mitigated by our acquisitions this year which were both focussed on the UK market.
These financial and operational performances are reflective of the quality of our portfolio of offerings which benefit from a significant proportion of revenues derived from subscriptions and from products which disseminate increasingly international contentrich highvalue information and increasingly digitally along with certificated education and compliance programmes.
Acquisitions
In support of our growth strategy we continue to seek selective earnings enhancing acquisition opportunities to add additional growth scale and expertise in our chosen markets.
In this context we were delighted to announce two acquisitions during the year both of which were consistent with our strategy of acquiring complementary businesses with high repeat revenues in our chosen knowledge areas and communities.
The acquisitions of SWAT in July 2016 and HSJ in January 2017 enhanced and added further scale to our offerings by providing information education and for HSJ networking capability in our Professional and Healthcare divisions respectively.
Cash and borrowings Net debt which includes cash and cash equivalents bank loans excluding capitalised facility fees and bank overdrafts was 40.0m 2016 34.7m an increase of 5.3m on last year during another period of considerable growth and change in which we spent 20.3m including deferred consideration on acquisitions offset by the proceeds of 7.3m from the disposal of the Underwood Street offices.
The Group continues to demonstrate excellent cash generative characteristics as mentioned above with consistently high levels of cash conversion.
These characteristics were recognised by the continued support from our principal bank debt providers who extended the multicurrency 65m debt facility on 1 July 2015 until 1 July 2020.
This facility was increased to 85m in support of the acquisition of HSJ in January 2017.
The facility can be extended by a further 15m to 100m if required with majority lending bank consent.
Our ability to use third party debt finance remains a key component of our business development strategy and our debt capacity remains strong.
As we increase our profits given the cash generative ability of our business this combines to provide increased capacity for selective earnings enhancing acquisitions and other capital investments.
Board changes Anthony Foye has informed the Board of his intention to step down from his position as Chief Financial Officer in due course.
Anthony will remain in his position until June 2018 while a successor is found and to ensure a smooth and orderly handover.
The Board will initiate a search for his successor and an update in relation to a new Chief Financial Officer will be made in due course.
Dividend
I am proud of the Groups record of maintaining its dividend over recent years and the resumption in 201314 of a progressive dividend policy reflecting our improving financial performance.
Our
I am pleased to confirm that the final dividend for this year will be increased again to 4.6p 2016 4.3p per share an increase of 7% on last year.
This together with an increased interim dividend makes a total dividend of 8.5p up 5% from 2016 8.1p reflective of confidence in our future.
It is the Boards intention to maintain its progressive dividend policy whilst ensuring that suitable dividend cover of at least two times adjusted earnings per share is maintained.
The final dividend of 4.6p per share will be paid on 17 November 2017 to shareholders on the share register as at 20 October 2017 with an associated ex dividend date of 19 October 2017.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Chairmans Statement 255704
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Current trading and outlook The first two months of the year have started satisfactorily albeit slowly across the Group with revenue up 7% against the same period last year supported by the acquisition of HSJ.
In Risk and Compliance our compliance training businesses which make up the bulk of the compliance business have started in line with plan although down against a strong comparator period in 2016.
The sales pipeline for compliance training remains strong continuing the momentum we have seen over the last few years and in Risk we have also seen a good start from Axco which was up 6% on the same period in 2016.
The Professional division has started in line with the same period in 2016 with good early performance from Accountancy product lines offsetting slightly weaker performances mainly from the re positioned Legal product which currently includes Ark.
Healthcare which has the benefit of HSJ has seen good growth overall as a consequence of the acquisition and that has more than offset a slower start across the division.
Relationships with our chosen communities and clients continue to evolve at an increasing pace with commensurate demand for more sophisticated interaction and bespoke products and services delivered instantly and efficiently.
We see this evolution as an opportunity to increase our engagement with our markets making us an even more essential business partner as well as creating barriers to our competitors.
We need therefore to ensure our businesses are equipped with the appropriate extra resources systems and support to capitalise on this opportunity.
The opportunity also comes at a cost and we expect to step up our operating expenditure in 201718 in addition to our increased annual London property costs of 0.9m by a further 0.75m across the business.
The additional costs which are discussed in the Chief Executives report are in people IT infrastructure automated marketing and in the digitisation of up to 250 of our training programmes over the next 18 months predominantly in the Risk and Compliance and Professional divisions as part of our digital learning investment.
We continue to see tighter regulatory control and more complex legislation implemented in most of our key markets and we remain confident that these changes will continue to drive the demand for our products and services globally.
Wilmington has been acquisitive in the past and we will continue to review opportunities to enhance growth and to add expertise through selective earnings enhancing acquisitions consistent with our strategy.
Our priority areas for capital allocation remain compliance risk insurance and healthcare as we focus on adding further scale to our existing market positions.
The Board our management team and our staff are excited and energised about the opportunities driving Wilmington in the next stage in its development.
Wilmington will also benefit in 201718 from a full year of contribution from HSJ as well as the impact of the investments made during 201617.
MARK ASPLIN
12 September 2017 Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Group Strategy Our strategy is to further develop its business into a knowledge based model and structure focussing on serving the needs of chosen communities with an overall objective of becoming a single integrated international business.
This business structure will maximise Wilmingtons opportunities to help its clients and communities meet their information education and networking requirements as well as drive operational efficiencies.
We set out below our strategic objectives that aim to achieve this and in so doing increased shareholder value.
Strategic Objective 2017 Progress z Launched project Sixth Gear to accelerate the move to a single One Wilmington providing the basis for organic and acquisitionled growth and scale z Reorganised our business into three divisions Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare simplifying and integrating the business further z Made the decision to exit the legal practice support market allowing us to focus on our core business z The recent acquisition of Health Services Journal HSJ.
Creates unparalleled insight into the UK healthcare market and adds scale to the healthcare division z The acquisition of SWAT Group extends our presence in training and technical compliance support market adding scale to the professional division z Sold or assigned our existing London premises leases and signed a lease for a new Head Office building which will encourage greater collaboration flexible working and the building of One Wilmington Focus 20182019 z To further unlock the potential across the knowledge centres z Connect our Wilmington brands enabling clients to better access our available and appropriate services z Acquiring new clients by identifying opportunities from greater collaboration and combined product offerings z Enhance our expertise in our information education and networking z Selected earnings enhancing acquisitions that meet our strategic criteria z Our people are key to our success create an improved environment for them to achieve z Leveraging our knowledge to support our client communities z Implement the move to our new London Head Office z Invest to benefit from evolving customer demands for more sophisticated interaction and bespoke products and services
Strategic Objective 2017 Progress z Further increased proportion of international revenues despite two UK acquisitions z Opened our new North American compliance office z Built strategic partnerships with our global clients to review expansion into Europe and Asia bringing teams together to create hubs in our focused regions Focus 20182019 z Continue to invest in the infrastructure of our North American and Asian operations to allow for continued expansion z Working closely with our clients globally following their expansion and work together across the geographical borders growing partnerships further to expand in North America Europe and Asia z To develop a global culture and attract talent to support these ambitions z Target acquisitions that meet our strategic criteria and fill strategic gaps z Crosspollination of our recently acquired and existing businesses between knowledge centres and geographies
Strategic Objective 2017 Progress z Set up a dedicated digital learning team to bolster our existing programme of digital training products z Selected Totara as our new learning management system to provide a platform for our ambitious roll out of new digital training courses z Selected Marketo cutting edge marketing technology to streamline and enhance the way marketing teams personalise communicationssite to better understand our clients needs to further assist them to create advantage for their business
To build a truly international business To accelerate growth through our knowledge based model To create a fully digital enterprise Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 10 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 In the mid1980s HSJ enjoyed a healthy period of growth but at the turn of the decade it was suddenly in danger of joining many other B2B print titles which were in slow decline.
Fortunately the last five years have seen HSJ transformed into a highly successful digital intelligence service an achievement which resulted in it being named the best B2B media brand in two out of the last three years.
HSJs success can be attributed to a number of different factors.
Firstly its focus on digital delivery and engagement across a range of platforms.
The weekly print magazine has been slowly phased out July 2017 saw its last edition printed.
Secondly development of a range of new services most notably the strategic targeting and insight tool along with the best practice database  HSJ Solutions  has enabled HSJ it to serve the evolving needs of the healthcare suppliers.
Each of these services won major industry launch awards in both 2015 and 2017.
Additionally leaving behind its legacy of targeting individual subscribers HSJ is now focusing on organisational deals with NHS trusts and the suppliers who trade with them all along demonstrating unwavering commitment to excellence in editorial sales and marketing.
An interesting fact is that the HSJ content team led by Editor Alastair McLellan contains twice as many expert healthcare correspondents as employed by the BBC.
The sales team led by the Commercial Director Will Johnston with a mix of specialist new business leads senior account managers and customer relationship executives has powered the growth in HSJs revenues increasing subscription revenue by over 60% during the last three years.
The marketing team led by Marketing Director Dan Gorringe has been responsible for migrating subscribers from print to digital with the minimum impact on revenues and reach.
The HSJ events team led by the Events Director Fiona Miller holds an impressive portfolio which encompasses the 36yearold HSJ Awards the largest healthcare awards in the world and the prestigious invitationonly HSJ summits which are attended by the sectors leading figures including Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt and NHS England chief executive Simon Stevens.
HSJ complements the existing Wilmington Healthcare business by providing an intelligence service to the leaders of UK healthcare including the NHS itself.
Its integration will enable Wilmington to play a wider and more valuable role solving the challenges facing the numerous stakeholders striving to deliver highest quality healthcare outcomes in the most efficient way.
HSJs unparalleled brand heritage provides a level of credibility earned over many years of providing superlative information resources to customers and together with Wilmingtons other healthcare solutions it positions the division to deliver unique value to this multibillion pound sector.
Born in 1892 as the Poor Law Officers Journal and after serving the leaders of the UKs health services for 125 years the Health Services Journal HSJ was acquired by Wilmington in 2017 .
CASE STUDY HSJ ACQUISITION site Stock Code WIL Strategic Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The first three measures referred to below adjusted EBITA adjusted Profit Before Tax and adjusted Earnings per Share are alternative performance measures which are also referred to elsewhere in the annual report.
Where adjusted measures are used in this annual report they are clearly presented and chosen to provide a balanced view of the group.
These measures in the opinion of the Directors can be useful to readers when they provide relevant information on our future or past performance and equivalent information cannot be presented by using financial measures defined under IFRS.
Adjusted EBITA This measure presents trading profits of the Group before amortisation and impairment of intangible assets  excluding computer software impairment of goodwill gains on disposals of property plant and equipment when they are material or of a significant nature and adjusting items.
Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software and impairment are noncash technical accounting adjustments and therefore do not necessarily reflect the inherent value of assets which can and often does appreciate.
This is particularly the case where the value of assets has been enhanced as a consequence of management action.
The group integrates acquired businesses into existing companies over time and therefore the Board does not deem it appropriate or practical to identify income relating specifically to acquired intangible assets so no adjustment is made in this respect.
Each business unit in the group is assessed and in many cases bonuses are calculated on adjusted EBITA and margins.
These adjusted performances are aggregated to produce the Group adjusted EBITA.
We do not allocate the impairment of acquired goodwill or intangible assets aborted or successful acquisition costs material gains on disposals of fixed assets or the amortisation of acquired intangibles to our business units.
See note 1 for the group policy on adjusting items and note 2 for the calculation of Adjusted EBITA.
In the year ended 30 June 2017 Adjusted EBITA increased by 6% to 23.4m 2016 2 Adjusted Profit before Tax Adjusted Profit Before Tax is a product of Adjusted EBITA after charging finance costs.
This again reflects the underlying performance of the business but includes finance charges associated with group debt.
Adjusting finance costs such as write off of fees in relation to a refinancing of debt are excluded as Adjusting items.
See note 2 for the calculation of Adjusted Profit before Tax.
In the year ended 30 June 2017 Adjusted Profit before Tax increased by 5% to 21.4m 2016 20.3m.
Adjusted Profit before Tax m 5% 2016 13% Adjusted Earnings per Share pence 5% 2016 14%tel el 2015 Adjusted EBITA m 6% 2016  11% Free Cash Flow 3% 2016 29% Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Key Performance Indicators and Operational Measures At a Group level we have eight key financial and operational measures.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 3 Adjusted Earnings per Share This key measure indicates the underlying profit attributable to individual shareholders.
It measures not only trading performance but also the impact of treasury management capital structure bank and interest charges as well as the efficient structuring of the Group to appropriately manage tax.
Our business and financial strategies are directed at delivering consistent adjusted earnings per share growth and our incentive programmes are designed to support this strategy.
For the year ended 30 June 2017 Adjusted Earnings per Share increased by 5% to 19.05p per share 201618.17p.
The increase was due to better overall financial performance achieved by the businesses the efficient use of debt finance and falling UK tax rates.
Cash Conversion Cash conversion represents the Operating Cash Flow for the year as a percentage of adjusted operating profit before interest and amortisation.
This measure is used as an indicator of successful stewardship of cash resources as well as corroboration of the quality of the operating profits compared to the associated cash flow.
The Groups business is strongly cash generative Cash Conversion for the year ended 30 June 2017 was 114% 2016 108%.
Cash
Conversion
114% 2016 108% 5 Free Cash Flow Free Cash Flow is an important indicator of resources available for payment of the equity dividend and for support of our acquisition strategy.
Free Cash Flow which is calculated after deduction from operating cash flow of capital expenditure payment of corporation tax and payment of interest increased by 3% to 18.2m 2016 17.7m.
We seek to maintain a cover of at least two times the equity dividend.
Adjusted EBITA margin Return on sales Adjusted EBITA margin or return on sales ROS is defined as Adjusted EBITA see note 2 expressed as a percentage of revenue.
During the year ended 30 June 2017 ROS was 19.4% compared to 20.8% in the prior year.
This is a measure of efficiency albeit also a measure reflecting the mix of revenue streams and business units.
We aim to maintain Adjusted EBITA margins at over 20.0%.
Adjusted operating margin Return on Sales 19.4% 2016 20.8% 7 Return on equity ROE ROE is defined as the Adjusted Profit before Tax see note 2 divided by the average equity attributable to owners of the parent ROE was 46.2% for the year to 30 June 2017 compared to 41.5% in the prior year.
ROE adjusted to remove all impairment of goodwill and intangible assets since 30 June 2012 from Equity was 31.6% for the year to 30 June 2017 compared to 33.2% in the prior year.
This measure reflects our ability to maintain an efficient equity base and acts as an indicator of our stewardship of shareholder funds.
When making investment decisions we focus on the impact on our equity.
One important measure is the ROE which we seek to maintain at over 30.0% pre tax.
Return on equity
46.2% 2016 41.5% Consistent and Sustainable Revenue Streams The disposal of noncore predominantly advertising based trade magazines and media brands over recent years has allowed the Group to focus on a portfolio of assets based in key professional markets with the emphasis on provision of information education and networking to these markets.
This push towards more robust and sustainable revenue streams has resulted in a strong portfolio of offerings often sold on annual subscription which includes z data information intelligence and solution sales z professional education training events and services z professional accreditation and assessment and z large industry leading annual networking events.
The Group has continued to increase the availability and variety of its products and services online and digitally but remains conscious of the needs of markets which continue to prefer some products produced in hard copy format or in person.
Our
We have continued to invest considerable resources in the improvement of our operating systems and online services which will deliver benefits in the current year and beyond.
Subscriptions and repeatable revenue represent 77% of Group turnover compared to 75% in the prior year.
Consistent and sustainable revenue streams 77% 2016 75% At Divisional level we have a number of measures At Divisional level we maintain a number of Key Performance Indicators KPIs specific to the performance of each business within the division.
Each of the operating divisions monitors and is in turn assessed on their own key performance measures.
This year we delivered an improved performance against the majority of our Divisional financial and operational targets.
By continuing to focus on these benchmarks we have been able to concentrate on mitigating the adverse effects of the downturn in some global markets and produce good results whilst establishing a more resilient and efficient platform to support future growth.
Free cash flow  see note 28 to the financial statements.
Average equity attributable to owners of the parent  the sum of opening and closing equity attributable to the parent divided by two.
Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 I am pleased to present my report on Wilmingtons performance for the 12 months to 30 June 2017.
During the year revenue increased by 14% 14.6m and was up 9% in constant currency terms.
Adjusted EBITA was also up increasing by 6% to 23.4m.
We achieved good revenue growth from our Risk and Compliance division up 9% overall 3.5m and from our Healthcare division which was up 28% 8.4m.
The Professional division also recorded growth up 7% 2.8m albeit supported by acquisitionled growth from SWAT 4.7m.
HSJ acquired on 31 January 2017 added 3.7m to Healthcare revenue.
Organic revenue growth excluding currency and acquisitions remains a priority but this years overall organic growth was down 0.8%.
Organic
Adjusting for these two businesses over 85% by value of the remainder of our businesses delivered on average organic growth in excess of 2%.
This represents an improvement over the performance for the first half year which showed an organic revenue decline of 2%.
The growth within Healthcare of 28% reflects excellent returns from acquisitions we have made since the beginning of 2016 and supported by 9% organic growth from our UK healthcare business.
Overall
The Risk and Compliance increase of 9% 4% organic constant currency continued its trend of strong organic growth led by the compliance training business which was up 8% despite some slippage into 201718.
Whilst the Professional division recorded revenue growth up 7% this was due to the acquisition of SWAT and support from underlying growth from Accountancy which more than offset the issues with our law for lawyers product lines and AMT our Investment bank training business.
Profit growth generally was constrained by the previously announced planned investments particularly in our compliance businesses from the weaker performance from AMT and from our US operations and some slippage of compliance training assignments.
Recent acquisitions have however performed strongly in both revenue and profit contribution terms and these results have also benefited from favourable currency exchange effects on both revenue and on profits adding around 5.0m and 1.0m respectively.
Finance costs before adjusting items were up 16% 0.3m compared to 201516 reflecting inter alia 20.3m spent on acquisitions net of cash acquired and deferred consideration during the year which contributed to an increase in net debt of 5.3m to finish at 40.0m.
The growth in Adjusted EBITA offset by the increase in adjusted finance costs resulted in Adjusted Profit before Tax up 1.1m 5% to 21.4m 2016 20.3m.
Risk and Compliance 35% 44% % of Group revenue % of Group contribution This division provides in depth accredited regulatory and compliance training and information market intelligence and analysis.
It focuses on the international financial services and international insurance markets as well as the UK pensions industry.
The main communities that use our offerings are risk and compliance officers globally.
2017 2016 Movement m m m % Revenue 42.3 38.8 3.5 9 Contribution 12.3 12.7 0.4 3 Margin % 29 33 Divisional revenue increased by 9% 3.5m and contribution was down slightly by 3% 0.4m reflecting investment within our compliance business in new products the new North American compliance operation and in additional support staff to expand our infrastructure and to help in the drive to boost ICA membership.
We had also increased resources during the final quarter of 2017 on the back of our recent success in winning two large international training programmes which are now expected to be delivered during 201718.
These additional resources and investments have impacted margins in the short term but are expected to benefit contribution in 201718 and indeed future years.
During the year the net investment in our North American office amounted to 0.5m and additional resources in terms of senior appointments trainers sales and administrative support staff together with digital learning capability and bespoke compliance programmes to expand our infrastructure were 0.5m.
This year we will sharpen our focus further still.
We will continue the integration of our Professional division and accelerate the digital transition of our products.
Later in the year we will also be bringing 300 nearly one third of our global workforce of Wilmingtons people under one roof reinforcing our culture as One Wilmington ensuring we can collaborate effectively and helping us to attract and retain the best talent in our industry.
PEDRO ROS
Chief Executive Officer
5% to 21.4m 6% to 23.4m 14% to 120.3m Adjusted profit before tax up Adjusted EBITA up Group revenue up Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Chief Executive Officers Review 255704
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Our compliance business which accounts for just over 50% of the divisions revenue grew by 10% compared to 201516 4% constant currency.
However within this our compliance training businesses which are the divisions main engine of growth grew by 12% 8% constant currency slightly down on our expectations due to some slippage of assignments into 201718.
Compliance Week our US Governance Risk and Compliance GRC events and information business reported revenue up 16% and on a constant currency basis revenue was flat.
There is an ongoing programme of investment in new content and technology to reposition the business as a GRC resource centre and events business collaborating with other parts of Wilmington in particular ICT and ICA but also FRA on joint events.
The flagship event in Washington held in May 2017 enjoyed continued success and again attracted record delegates and sponsorship offsetting some decline in subscribers and sponsored events in the rest of the business.
For 201718 continued investment is being made to strengthen the content offering and more topic areas will be added together with supporting databases.
Risk
Axco the industry leading provider of insurance market intelligence regulation and compliance information reported 8% revenue growth 3% constant currency helped by the continued success of its digital subscription products and the insight products which enhance our analytical insurance offerings.
The remainder of the risk part of the division performed well recording 9% growth overall 3% constant currency.
In
August 2016 we successfully opened a new insurance events and training office in Barcelona in response to increasing localised demand for our insurance offerings.
Overall divisional contribution decreased by 0.4m 3% to 12.3m 2016 12.7m.
Margins were down to 29% 2016 33% reflecting the investments outlined above which were predominantly in the compliance training businesses.
Professional
33% 21% % of Group revenue % of Group contribution This division includes Wilmingtons financial training businesses financial networking events and our repositioned legal product lines.
The Professional division provides expert and technical training as well as support services to professionals in corporate finance and capital markets and to qualified lawyers and accountants in the UK in both the profession and in industry.
This division serves primarily tier 1 banks the international financial services industry US Capital Markets and small to medium sized professional accountancy and law firms.
2017 2016 Movement m m m % Revenue 39.5 36.7 2.8 7 Contribution 5.9 6.2 0.3 5 Margin % 15 17 The division recorded overall revenue growth of 7% 2.8m attributed to the acquisition of SWAT which contributed 4.7m of revenue and to foreign currency benefits of 1.2m.
The integration process for SWAT is progressing well and the business is performing in line with plan.
Organic constant currency revenue which was down overall by 8% was reflective of the issues at AMT and our Law for Lawyers business.
Investment bank training as previously reported had a weak first half year which was mainly due to the competition issues previously highlighted but also due to some softening of training assignments in the Asia Pacific region.
The second half year saw stabilisation of the business and we are now entering the busy summer training period with early indications of slow but more stable trading.
The division saw good underlying growth from accountancy training adjusting for the benefit from the one off double UK Government fiscal budget in 201516 offset by previously reported challenging market conditions in the Law for Lawyers businesses following changes to the Legal CLE rules.
Divisional contribution was down 5% 0.3m on last year at 5.9m and margins as we saw at the half year were particularly impacted by the issues at AMT.
The Professional division is being refocussed and integrated as an integral part of project Sixth Gear under the leadership of its new Divisional Director appointed on 1 July 2017.
Healthcare
32% 35% % of Group revenue % of Group contribution The Healthcare division provides analysis and clarity to customerfocused organisations predominantly in the Healthcare and Life Science markets enabling them to better understand and connect with their markets.
This division includes our UK healthcare information businesses our Paris based European healthcare news agency healthcare networking events and our legacy non healthcare data suppression and charity information businesses.
The main communities that use our offerings are healthcare professionals on an increasingly global basis.
2017 2016 Movement m m m % Revenue 38.6 30.2 8.4 28 Contribution 9.7 7.3 2.4 33 Margin % 25 24 Revenue was up 28% 8.4m and adjusting for the impact of favourable currency movements and the contribution from the acquisitions made over the prior 18 months underlying revenue was up 3% in organic terms compared to 201516.
Group contribution of 27834000 see note 3 Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington Healthcare business which following the HSJ acquisition will represent over 80% of the division by revenue on a proforma basis had a good year with organic revenue from the UK businesses up 9%.
The legacy UK businesses and brands have been successfully supplemented by strategically relevant acquisitions and unified under the Wilmington Healthcare brand and a single management team.
This performance was supported by good performances from APM and from our US healthcare networking events.
HSJ which was acquired on 31 January 2017 has had an excellent start and has been fully integrated with the employees transferred to our Underwood Street offices in March and all transactional processes and functions transferred onto Wilmington systems by 30 June 2017.
The legacy data suppression and charities businesses were marginally down 4% as expected in revenue terms compared to last year and the focus continues to be on delivering higher margins through ongoing reorganisation and the review of marginal business operations.
Benefiting from profit contributions from acquisitions overall contribution increased by 33% 2.4m to 9.7m.
Contribution growth was 27% in constant currency terms.
Group overheads Group overheads which include board costs head office salaries as well as unallocated central overheads increased by 0.4m 11% to 3.9m 2016 3.5m.
Project Sixth Gear update As outlined in the Chairmans section we are progressing well with project Sixth Gear which is a project to speed up the integration of Wilmington.
Sixth gear is already well advanced in the achievement of many of its objectives including the consolidation of the London offices the consolidation of all UK travel and subsistence marketing best practice procurement key account management and centralised functions.
New London Head Office A key objective of project Sixth Gear was the consolidation of the remaining London office locations into an appropriate single location bringing Wilmington businesses closer together.
On 20 June 2017 we completed the sale of our Underwood Street lease and signed a 10year lease for new premises in the Aldgate area of
The Underwood Street premises has served Wilmington well for many years but given its modular structure arranged over 4 floors it was not consistent with our vision and strategic objective of encouraging greater collaboration flexible working and the building of a one Wilmington team.
The investment and step change in our working conditions will undoubtedly lead to many benefits both financial and operational over time.
Initially there will be an annual step up in operating costs of around 0.9m pa starting from occupation in January 2018.
However given the disposal proceeds from Underwood Street the cash outflow including fit out costs and associated tax will be neutral for the first 5 years.
The Underwood Street sale produced a net profit of 6.3m which is shown on the face of the income statement.
We expect an adjusting operating expense in 201718 of 1.4m in respect of property costs.
Included in this item is 0.4m in respect of the noncash write off of the remaining property plant and equipment in use in existing properties and 1.0m of the double running costs covering part of the rent free period of the new Aldgate premises.
Exit from Legal practice support market As previously announced and resulting from our decision to focus Wilmington around three divisional knowledge areas we decided to exit the legal practice support markets.
We therefore looked to dispose of our Ark business which contributed 2.8m 2.6m constant currency 2016 3.0m to revenue and 0.1m to profit before central overhead allocations in 201617.
The fivemonth sale process to find a new home for the Ark business ultimately proved unsuccessful so we are closing all operations except the US events business and some parts of the UK events businesses which remain profitable and are consistent with our strategy.
We have entered into consultation with the staff affected and redundancy and other related costs are expected to come to 0.2m.
We have also decided to impair the remaining associated goodwill and intangible fixed assets relating to this investment.
This impairment is shown as a 2.4m impairment charge.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Chief Executive Officers Review 255704
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 New learning management system
Wilmington has already invested significant resource in setting up and developing an embryonic programme of next generation digital training products and learning support systems.
During
201617 we set up a dedicated elearning team and we selected Totara as our new learning management system.
Totara integrates with other key systems such as SalesForce and our new automated marketing system Marketo and provides the end to end platform for our all products facilitating an ambitious roll out of new digital training courses.
The market for bespoke digital training programmes and other allied products is evolving rapidly and we believe it is set to grow strongly over the next few years.
Wilmington like its larger competitors is positioning itself to take advantage and is investing in blended digital learning solutions taking an increasingly digital first approach to new training product launches.
We have identified up to 250 existing training courses across the Group which can be repurposed and restructured as blended digital training products learning and building from the established pioneering digital training programmes of SWAT and AMT and coordinated by the newly formed digital learning team.
The cost of conversion of existing and the launch of new courses is likely to see an increase in operational costs and working capital as investment feeds through.
We however expect to see many commercial advantages including higher adjusted EBITA margins in the medium term greater ability to repurpose and repackage products across Wilmington communities and the exploitation of overseas market opportunities.
As explained in the Chairmans statement the costs of this are included in the expected 0.75m of additional costs for 201718.
Acquisitions
In July 2016 Wilmington acquired SWAT Group Limited SWAT a leading provider of training and technical compliance support to accountancy firms in London and the South West of England.
SWAT sits inside the professional division offering training and technical accounting services.
The consideration paid was an initial cash payment of 2.5m and a deferred consideration payment of up to 3.0m payable in September 2018 in cash subject to SWAT achieving challenging profit targets over the two financial years ending 30 June 2018.
On 31 January 2017 Wilmington acquired HSJ for 16.9m after an adjustment for working capital.
HSJ is one of the UKs leading health information insight and networking business with a highlytrusted brand providing unparalleled penetration into the NHS and private vendor space through subscription information and data products events and awards and marketing solutions.
HSJ has a growing recurring revenue stream from subscriptions and annual events.
The HSJ business is integral to Wilmingtons market leading healthcare business significantly enhancing the Groups presence across the UK healthcare market.
Uniquely Wilmington Healthcare now has a complete UK industry presence across both provider payer and the private sector in Pharma and MedTech and other healthcare providers.
Executive team To support our exciting growth strategy we have continued to strengthen our executive team with the appointment of a senior executive with particular experience and a successful track record in designing and implementing large scale digital learning initiatives to head up our Professional division.
The integration of the Professional division is a priority objective and consequence of project Sixth Gear which will particularly benefit from the key account management common platforms and work flow processes which should in turn reflect in improving margins over the next few years.
Pedro Ros
Chief Executive Officer
12 September 2017 Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Case studies Lead with conviction passion and purpose.
Give people wings and let them fly then recognise and reward success while allowing room for error without blame.
Aged 21 Nicola Hurley already managed her own graphics studio working primarily for Londonbased print consultancies.
In 2006 she was working for Mercia Group  a leading provider of training support services to the accountancy profession in the UK and Ireland  and when that year Mercia was acquired by Wilmington Nicola was the first nonaccountant to be appointed a Director.
In 2014 Nicola was promoted to Managing Director and since has been instrumental in the drive to move the company firmly into the digital era developing and enhancing its online presence on all fronts.
Mercia firmly employs technology as an enabler for its clients accountancy businesses ranging in size from sole practitioners to topten firms.
Keeping them competitive is as important as future proofing Mercia itself.
Wilmingtons core values feature prominently in Nicolas approach to managing her people.
They mean everything If you lead by example and embed all four values within your team your business cant help but grow she says.
You develop an exciting environment both to work within and to partner with.
You become an employer and business partner of choice providing products that clients need and which help their businesses to grow.
Nicola is adamant that Wilmingtons values also encourage team members to grow and reach their potential.
Give people wings and let them fly is her mantra  one that both shapes and exemplifies her leadership style.
In 2017 Mercias overriding priority was to complete the integration of SWAT UK Limited one of Wilmingtons 2017 acquisitions.
SWATs business largely mirrors Mercias with complementary geographical coverage of the same target market.
Nicolas objective is to exploit business opportunities and to realise efficiencies through a unified set of business tools bestinclass processes and a shared innovative culture.
We have to become one team selling an extensive portfolio of products that supports our clients through a period of major change in the sector she insists.
Small wonder then that her secondary objective is to improve Mercias use of technology enlarge its portfolio of online courses and broaden its range of publications.
These are projects that mean recruiting new team members highly capable people who thrive on responsibility enjoy technical challenges and exceed demanding targets.
Nicola Hurley Managing Director Mercia Group Limited In 1993 it would have been difficult to predict how successful Semana del Seguro Ineses Insurance Week conference would become.
Today it attracts delegates from around the Spanishspeaking world.
If theres anything you need to know about the Spanish insurance market you wont find anyone better qualified to tell you than Susana Prez Managing Director of Wilmingtons flagship insurance business in Spain.
In 1988 after completing a law degree at one of Spains top universities she started what was to become a singlecompany career with Inese then a familyowned business in Madrid grasping the opportunity she advanced rapidly to become Director of Training and Studies.
In 2001 Inese was acquired by Reed Business Information with Susana being appointed to the advisory board and subsequently becoming Ineses Managing Director in 2007.
Under her leadership the company has moved from strength to strength and it joined Wilmingtons Risk and Compliance division in 2013.
Inese provides training information communication and global marketing solutions for the insurance industry in Spanishspeaking countries.
Refusing to conform to the industrys reputation for being dry and dull Susana has driven the company to embrace the digital revolution in its own operations and pushes the boundaries with unrelenting persistence at Ineses many industry events including the highly successful Semana del Seguro Insurance Week conference.
I have been part of every Semana del Seguro since its inception in 1993 she says.
Today it attracts delegates from around the Spanishspeaking world.
Last year there were nearly 4000 registered visitors and more than 300 speakers.
Sometimes its hard for people to accept the degree of change that Inese is facing Prez responses include an innovation competition for her staff frequent inhouse training on the use and benefits of new tools and resources plus regular initiatives to retire products and services that are no longer relevant.
If we focus only on introducing new offerings she says we are at risk of confusing our customers.
Moving them away from familiar but outdated products and supporting the transition to new digital alternatives is essential.
Alongside with growing business in Spain Susana finds time to progress another of her key strategic tasks  expanding Ineses business into Latin America.
Its vital she says that Inese is ready to help insurers in these Spanishspeaking countries to accelerate digital transformation and to expand market reach.
Susana accepts that the next decade will probably see even faster rates of change in the insurance sector than Inese has experienced in the past ten years.
But its clear that under her leadership Inese is ready for the challenge.
Susana Prez Managing Director Inese 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL We aim to own the information education and intelligence space in healthcare in France and a few specific areas internationally.
Loc Lebrun is a man for whom actions speak louder than words.
Described by a former colleague as having an outstanding ability to execute Loc is a finance professional who worked in the aerospace and defence industries before moving in the early 2000s to what was then an emerging digitalinsights sector for healthcare professionals.
For the next decade Loc broadened his experience in financial sales and generalmanagement roles with a leading international healthcareinsight company.
He soon recognised the potential of premium niche products as a means of attracting and retaining high value subscribers who want to be part of specialinterest communities a realisation that has driven his work since then.
In 2014 he was appointed the Managing Director of Wilmingtons first international acquisition Agence de Presse Mdicale APM an independent press agency specialising in the healthcare sector in France and across Europe.
Unlike many Wilmington businesses which made the transition from printbased models APM is a digital native company  it embraced electronic formats from the day it was founded Loc explains.
APM plans to launch two or three new products  typically subscriptionbased niche websites  each year.
The healthcare landscape is evolving rapidly and this forces us to rethink our approaches continually  which is sometimes difficult but always interesting Loc continues.
As you would expect from a proven early adopter there is clear evidence of successful innovation at APM in 2016site an online job board  and the companys first non editorial product.
APM without innovation is unthinkable says Loc.
In fact Im very comfortable with all Wilmingtons core values as they have been guiding my career for many years.
My favourite Without doubt its Enabling as its the key to developing our people.
APMs subscribers can continue to rely on the company to set the daily news agenda for the European healthcare markets reflecting Locs deep understanding of the business drivers behind APMs financial outcomes.
His keen sense of appreciation for his clients requirements will surely continue to drive APMs success  or to use his own words Im just doing something I really enjoy and working very hard at it the rest simply follows.
Loc Lebrun Managing Director APM International I often say that I am a doer learning how to dream.
Challenges give rise to opportunities to think differently and to provide insightful solutions.
Growing up in Malaysia Quin quickly learned that girls are not expected to have careers but rather than discouraging her this realisation spurred her to believe ever more strongly in her potential.
In the early 1990s backing herself to succeed in a heavily maledominated profession Quin applied for a junior role in PricewaterhouseCoopers audit and businessadvisory division.
Selected from hundreds of candidates for one of only twenty positions Quin seized her moment in the sun.
I carried as many hardfolder files as my male colleagues worked at least as diligently and even won a gold medal in the national CPA exams she recalls.
Quins cando attitude launched a successful accountancy career that saw her working in the worlds leading financial centres including Hong Kong Shanghai London and Melbourne.
She gravitated into senior strategic roles that went beyond a typical CFOs remit making her the ideal candidate when in 2016 Wilmington sought a business leader to deliver the companys Asia strategy.
Where others see challenges Quin sees opportunities I often say that I am a doer learning how to dream.
Challenges give rise to opportunities to think differently and provide insightful solutions sparking the doer in me into action.
The most exciting challenge we face is expanding Wilmington in Asia against the swelling tide of small players with varying qualities of services with some resorting to pricewar tactics.
The key to winning is to provide unique highquality services setting a consistently professional tone this is Wilmingtons hallmark differentiating us from other players.
We succeed by being innovative with our marketing programmes by engaging actively with our clients and by being close to the heartbeat of the industry.
Ten years ago Quin set herself a simple but powerful aspiration to create opportunities for people to develop their potential At that time I did not have a clear plan how to go about doing that.
However what I did know was that I would need to be creative and innovative and I must collaborate with others.
Ten years on I walked into Wilmington headquarters in London and the words Collaborate Innovate Enhance and Enable welcomed me.
If felt like coming home.
Since then her greatest discovery is that all of us can do something to help even something small and that lives can be transformed as a result.
We all have the power to make that one phone call that costs us nothing to lend a helping hand or say a kind word of encouragement.
It may go a long long way for that person she reminds colleagues frequently.
Quin Thong Managing Director Asia Strategic Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 We seek to employ a workforce that reflects both the diversity of our customers and the communities where we have a presence.
We do not discriminate on grounds of age sex race ethnicity religion sexual orientation or disability.
We strive to provide all our employees opportunities to grow and develop whilst at Wilmington.
These opportunities include excellent working conditions access to the latest technology and appropriate training and development to help and encourage our employees to fulfil their potential.
Our apprentice and intern programmes have also continued to grow over time across different businesses and key geographical locations developing still further the Groups community and people investment.
Wilmington plays an important role in supporting the charity community for example site a website which supports charities and raises awareness of their fundraising activities.
The online donation service coordinated donations during the year of 842000 for various charities.
Environmental policies The Board recognises that Wilmingtons business has an impact on the environment principally through the use of energy waste generation paper use and print and production technologies.
We are committed to reducing the impact wherever possible and to utilising sustainable materials and technology.
We seek to ensure that Wilmingtons divisions are compliant with relevant environmental legislation and require where possible our suppliers and contractors to meet the same objectives.
Furthermore our progress towards a digitally based business is reducing our environmental impact.
Accordingly whilst environmental issues are important we do not believe that they constitute a risk for the Group.
The Head of Facilities Management is responsible for managing and monitoring environmental issues across the Group.
Our policies are to z meet or exceed the requirements of current environmental legislation that relates to the Group z minimise energy and water usage in our buildings vehicles and processes and improve the efficient use of those resources z apply the principles of continuous improvement in respect of air water noise and light pollution from our premises and reduce any impacts from our operations on the environment and local community z minimise our waste and then reuse or recycle as much of it as possible z as far as possible purchase products and services that do the least damage to the environment and encourage others to do the same z ensure environmental and energy performance issues are considered in the acquisitions refurbishment design location and use of buildings z assess the environmental impact of any new processes of products we intend to introduce in advance z ensure understanding of our environmental policy internally and externally and communicate its performance on a regular basis and encourage feedback z set and monitor KPIs for our environmental performance at least annually and z update our environmental policy regularly.
Paper
Paper is sourced from a chain of custody certified suppliers to ensure only sustainable raw materials are used within its production.
The vast majority of paper is produced at mills with ISO 14001 accreditation and Environmental Management System EMAS registration.
Printers
All our major print suppliers are ISO14001 certified or encouraged to work towards a minimum of this standard.
Many now also utilise Forest Stewardship Council or Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification.
All our printers work in a digital environment with the resultant reduction in transport courier and energy utilising activities.
Packaging
For magazines we use recyclable polythene with a thickness of 25 microns.
Where possible we are also converting to exobiodegradable and potato starch forms of polythene.
Offices
The Groups activities are primarily based in office accommodation and wherever practicable the Group adopts energy saving policies.
Any new or replacement air conditioning units are being sourced from the energy efficient range and show a 70% saving in energy consumption.
With regard to the office environment the Group encourages the recycling of materials such as paper cardboard toners and cartridges wherever possible.
The
Group also ensures the correct disposal of electrical equipment and fluorescent tubes is compliant with the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive.
During the year the Group has performed a comprehensive review of its London property portfolio in order to maximise efficiency and reduce underutilised office space.
One of the key outcomes of the review is the relocation of the head office from Underwood Street to new premises during the financial year ended 30 June 2018 which will facilitate increased pooling of resources and subsequently reduce energy and material consumption.
Wilmington seeks to be socially responsible having a positive impact on the communities within which it operates.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Corporate Environment and Social Responsibility Making a positive impact 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
The introduction of video conferencing technology in the Groups offices has significantly reduced the requirements for travel particularly when dealing with overseas offices and clients.
The success of training webinars has also seen the additional benefit of reducing delegate travel to venues.
Wilmington is also continuing its cycle incentive incorporating the Cycle to Work scheme which is within the guidelines of the Governments green travel plan.
As part of the scheme Wilmington provides employees with a loan for cycle and safety equipment up to a maximum of 1000.
To further support the cycle scheme Wilmington has also arranged for free cycle parking facilities for employees based in its London offices.
Greenhouse gas emissions reporting The release of greenhouse gases GHG notably carbon dioxide CO2 generated by burning fossil fuels has an impact on climate change which either directly or indirectly presents considerable risks both to the business and the planet.
The Group is committed to monitoring and where practically possible reducing its GHG emissions.
Global CO2 emissions data 30 June 2017 Thousand Tonnes of CO 30 June 2016 Thousand Tonnes of CO Emissions from Scope 1  Direct CO2 emissions 79 72 Scope 2  Indirect CO2 emissions 553 605 Total emissions 632 677 CO2 ratio thousand tonnes of CO2 per employee 0.73 0.83
Wilmingtons GHG emissions were calculated with the assistance of a specialist third party provider using activity data from the Groups management accounting system verified by third party supplier invoicing and emission factors from Defras Conversion Factors for Company Reporting 2014 for converting energy usage to carbon dioxide equivalent CO e emissions.
The Group followed the methodology in the GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard revised edition.
The analysis has used an operational control approach  this means that certain sites which have a service agreement for utilities have not been included in the footprint.
This assessment takes into account of all of the emission sources required under the Companies Act 2006 Strategic Report and Directors Reports Regulations 2013.
Strategic Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 ANTHONY FOYE Chief Financial Officer Adjusting items measures and adjusted results Reference is made in this financial review to adjusted results as well as the equivalent statutory measures.
Adjusted results in the opinion of the Directors can provide additional relevant information on our future or past performance where equivalent information cannot be presented using financial measures under
Adjusted results exclude adjusting items profit on disposal of property plant and equipment to the extent it is material or significant in nature goodwill and intangible impairment and intangible amortisation excluding computer software.
Effective from 30 June 2017 Wilmington also includes share based payments costs within its definition of adjusted results.
Share based payment costs amounted to 0.6m in 201617 and 0.6m in 201516.
2017 2016 Movement m m m %
Margin % 19.4 20.8
For the twelve months ended 30 June 2017 revenue increased by 14% 14.6m to 120.3m 2016 105.7m.
On a constant currency basis revenue was up 9%.
Acquisitions and favourable exchange rates accounted for the reported revenue growth with organic revenue down 0.8% overall.
Operating expenses before adjusting items amortisation and impairment Operating expenses before amortisation and impairment excluding adjusting items were 97.0m 2016 83.7m up 16% reflecting inter alia significant investment in staff and new premises in the period as well as costs associated with operating acquired businesses.
For the first time share based payments of 0.6m 2016 0.6m are included within operating expenses before adjusting items amortisation and impairment.
Amortisation excluding computer software Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software was 6.0m compared to 5.5m in the previous year.
The increase reflects acquisitions made in the period.
Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets A noncash impairment of 2.4m has been made against the carrying values for goodwill and intangible assets in the Ark cash generating unit CGU following the failure to sell the business and the resultant decision to close operations.
Ark was acquired by Wilmington plc in October 2005 and the original investment was impaired in 201516 by 1.0m.
Further information is given in note 12.
The 2016 comparator figure of 15.7m relates to the impairment of CLT and the Ark CGU.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Financial Review 255704
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Adjusting items within operating expenses Adjusting items within operating expenses were 3.5m 2016 2.4m.
These items include 1.6m relating to acquisition costs 2016 1.7m 0.5m in respect of project Sixth Gear 0.3m in respect of the relocation of back office functions from London and 1.0m in respect of costs associated with the London move including the termination or disposal of property leases.
Other Income  gain on disposal of leasehold property The gain of 6.3m is in respect of the disposal of the Underwood Street lease for 7.3m in cash less associated costs of the sale and the net book values of assets associated with the leasehold property.
Operating profitloss
Operating profit was 17.8m compared to an operating loss of 1.5m in 2016.
The
2016 comparator loss was due inter alia to a noncash impairment of 15.7m.
Adjusted EBITA Adjusted EBITA was up 1.4m 6% to 23.4m 2016 22.0m.
Adjusted EBITA margins Adjusted EBITA expressed as a percentage of revenue were 19.4% 2016 20.8%.
Finance costs Finance costs before adjusting items which consist of interest payable and bank charges were up 16% to 2.0m from 1.7m reflecting an increase in net debt in the period.
Net debt which includes cash and cash equivalents bank loans excluding loan arrangement fees and bank overdrafts was 40.0m 30 June 2016 34.7m at the yearend an increase of 5.3m on last year.
The increase in debt reflects 20.3m including deferred consideration spent on acquisitions offset by the proceeds of 7.3m from the disposal of the Underwood Street offices.
Finance costs including adjusting items were up 2% 0.1m on 2016.
Adjusting items in 2016 relate to the previous loan facility written off.
Profitloss before taxation Profit before tax of 15.9m was up compared to a loss of 3.4m in 2016 principally due to the noncash impairment of 15.7m in 2016 compared to increased trading profits in 2017 and the gain on the disposal of the leasehold property.
Adjusted Profit before Tax increased by 5% 1.1m to 21.4m from 20.3m note 2.
Taxation
Taxation increased by 0.2m 5% to 3.0m from 2.8m.
The increase in the taxation charge is due to an increase in profits before tax adding back the impairment provisions of 2.4m  and 15.7m  offset by a reduction to UK corporation tax rates.
The effective tax rate is 16.4% 2016 23.2% which is calculated after adding back the impairment charge of 2.4m 2016 15.7m.
This charge is reduced compared to 201516 due to the relatively low effective tax rate associated with the leasehold property disposal.
The underlying tax rate which ignores the tax effects of adjusting items remained the same as 2016 at 22.4%.
The underlying tax rate is calculated as the product of one minus the adjusted profit after tax per note 9 of 16.6m 2016 15.8m divided by the adjusted profit before tax of 21.4m 2016 Earningsloss per share Adjusted Basic Earnings per Share increased by 5% to 19.05p 2016 18.17p.
Basic earnings per share was 14.72p compared to a basic loss per share of 7.39p in 2016.
Goodwill
Goodwill increased by 15.2m from 70.8m to 86.0m due to additions of 14.9m arising from businesses acquired in the period the reallocation of 1.3m of assets between goodwill and intangibles note 12 and exchange rate movements of 0.5m.
These were offset by an impairment of 1.5m.
Intangible assets Intangible assets increased by 2.9m from 29.0m to 31.9m due to acquisitions of 10.1m arising from businesses acquired in the period and exchange rate movements of 0.5m in the period and other additions of computer software of These were offset by amortisation of 7.2m the reallocation of 1.3m of assets between goodwill and intangibles note 13 and an impairment charge of Property plant and equipment Property plant and equipment decreased by 0.2m to 4.4m reflecting additions to tangible fixed assets of 1.3m 2016 0.6m additions from acquired businesses of 0.2m offset by depreciation of 1.1m and assets written off on disposal of the Underwood Street lease of 0.6m at net book value.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other receivables increased by 2.3m reflecting acquisitions which added 2.8m offset by more efficient cash collection from our new credit control processing following its relocation.
Strategic Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Trade and other payables Total balances increased from 43.9m to Trade and other payables increased by 3.8m to 25.4m 2016 21.6m reflecting inter alia acquisitions in the period which accounted for 1.1m.
Trade and other payables also include 1.8m in respect of various lease surrender costs following the London property consolidation reorganisation costs under project Sixth Gear and other London property professional costs and equipment.
Subscriptions and deferred revenue increased by 4.7m or 21% to 27.0m 2016 22.3m.
Acquisitions accounted for 3.9m of the increase foreign exchange was 0.2m.
Risk and Compliance division grew by 0.8m 8% Professional division grew by 13% 0.6m of which acquisitions accounted for all the increase.
Healthcare was up 43% 3.3m with acquisitions accounting for 3.2m of the overall increase.
Within Risk and Compliance ICA membership deferred revenue is up 118% and Axco was up 12%.
Current tax liabilities Current tax liabilities increased from 1.6m to 1.9m reflecting acquisitions in the period and higher tax associated with higher overall group profits.
Net debt Net debt which includes cash and cash equivalents bank loans excluding capitalised loan arrangement fees and bank overdrafts was 40.0m 30 June 2016 34.7m. an increase of 5.3m.
Acquisition costs including deferred consideration of 20.3m were offset by cash conversion of 114% 2016 108%.
Net debt at 30 June 2017 represented 47% of our debt and overdraft facility of 85m.
This facility was extended in January 2017 by a further 20m in support of the acquisition of HSJ from 65.0m and is repayable on 1 July 2020.
Deferred consideration cash settled Deferred consideration in total was 2.5m down on 2016 total liability of 2.6m.
Movements during the year included an increase of 1.1m from the acquisition of SWAT offset by payments of 1.3m in the year in respect of Evantage 0.3m and FRA 1.0m.
Derivative financial instruments The Group is exposed to foreign exchange risks liquidity and capital risks and credit risks.
The Group has policies that mitigate these risks.
Total estimated liabilities were 0.7m down 1.3m compared to 2.0m at 30 June 2016.
The main reason for the decrease was there were no forward foreign currency contracts obligations at the balance sheet date 2016 loss provision 0.9m.
On 3 July 2017 the Group entered into a number of foreign currency transactions to mitigate possible exchange rate fluctuations on its financial results.
US dollars were sold forward during 201718 at an average rate of 1.31 and 5.0m were sold at an average rate of Share capital During the year 0.3m new ordinary shares of 0.05 were issued in settlement of shares vesting under the Groups Performance Share Plan.
This resulted in an increase to share capital of 13112.
Dividend
It is the Boards intention to pay a progressive dividend whilst ensuring a cover of at least two times the Groups adjusted earnings per share over the dividend per share in respect of the year.
A final dividend of 4.6p per share 2016 4.3p will be paid on 17 November 2017 to shareholders on the register as at 20 October 2017 with an associated ex dividend date of 19 October 2017.
ANTHONY FOYE Chief Financial Officer 12 September 2017 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Financial Review 255704
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Identifying and managing our risks The Board is responsible for the Groups system of risk management and internal controls.
Risk identification assessment and management is one part of the Groups internal control environment and risk management is recognised as an integral part of the Groups activities.
The Board determines the Groups appetite for risk when considering strategic objectives and the acceptable level of risk that can be taken on by the Group and its individual operating entities Wilmington risk appetite.
Wilmingtons businesses worldwide are responsible for executing their activities in accordance with the local risk appetite set by the Board complemented by the Wilmington Code of Conduct Anti Bribery and Corruption ABC guidelines other Group policies and values within delegated authority limits.
The Risk Assessment covers a three year period consistent with the period of assessment used in the viability statement review.
Risk is assessed across the Group by the Wilmington Risk Committee comprising members of the Executive Committee and the Group Company Secretary that report directly to the Board using a combination of structured formal interviews monthly operational updates site visits bottom up reporting and registers the Risk
The Risk Assessment covers both external and internal factors and the potential impact and likelihood of those risks occurring.
Twice per annum the Audit Committee discusses the report received from the external auditors regarding their audit which includes comments on their findings on internal control and risks.
Risks once identified are reviewed and then incorporated into formal risk registers held at both a Group and at entity level which evolve to reflect any reduction increase in identified risks and the emergence of any new risks.
Where it is considered that a risk can be mitigated further to the benefit of the business responsibilities are assigned and action plans are agreed.
The Wilmington Risk Committee coordinates and facilitates the risk assessment process on behalf of the
Group policies and delegated authority levels which are set by the Board provide the means by which risks are reviewed and escalated to the appropriate level within the Group up to and including the Board for review and confirmation.
We have a clear framework for identifying and managing risk both at an operational and strategic level.
Our risk identification and mitigation processes have been designed to be appropriate to the ever changing environments in which we operate.
The following chart summarises our business risk management structure.
Business risk management structure PLC BOARD PLC AUDIT COMMITTEE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE RISK COMMITTEE HEADS OF GROUP FUNCTIONS Key risks Heads of Group functions identify the key risks and develop mitigation actions Key risks MDs of operating entities create a register of their top risks and mitigation actions MANAGING DIRECTORS MDS OF BUSINESSES REVIEW AND CONFIRMATION Review and conrmation by the Board with input from the Audit Committee
Risks and mitigation reviewed by the Audit Committee after validation and assessment by the Risk Committee ONGOING REVIEW AND CONTROL There is ongoing review of the risks and the controls in place to mitigate these risks REVIEW AND ASSESSMENT The Risk Committee consolidates the businesses functional and group risks to compile the Groups key risks.
Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Responsibilities
The Audit Committee supports the Board by monitoring risk and reviewing the effectiveness of Group internal controls including systems to identify assess manage and monitor risks.
Actions z Receive regular reports on internal and external audit and other assurance activities z Receive regular risk updates from the businesses z Determine the nature and extent of the principal Group risks and assess the effectiveness of mitigating actions z At least annually review the effectiveness of risk management and internal control systems z Review the adequacy of the Groups whistleblowing and ABC policy z Sets the internal audit plan and reviews internal audit reports management processes.
The Risk Committee and Board also considers the Groups overall risk appetite in the context of the negative impact that the Group can sustain before it risks the Groups continued ability to trade z Responsible for risk identification and management within their divisionsarea of business responsibility z Monitoring the discharge of their responsibilities by operating entities
Responsibilities z Maintain an effective system of risk management and internal control within their functionoperating company
1 BOARD AUDIT COMMITTEE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE AND RISK COMMITTEE HEADS OF THE GROUP FUNCTIONS AND MDS OF BUSINESSES Roles and responsibilities The Board regularly reviews the Groups key risks and is supported in the discharge of this responsibility by various committees specifically the Audit Committee.
The risk management roles and responsibilities of the Board its Committees and business management are set out below and all of these responsibilities have been met during the year.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington risk appetite The Groups approach is to minimise exposure to reputational financial and operational risk whilst accepting and recognising a riskreward trade off in the pursuit of its strategic and commercial objectives.
As an information education and networking provider to certain professional and regulated markets the integrity of the business and its brands is crucial and cannot be put at risk.
Consequently it has a zero tolerance for risks relating to nonadherence to laws and regulations unacceptable risk.
The business however operates in a challenging and highly competitive market place that is constantly changing not just in regulation and legislation but also for new technology and process innovation.
It is therefore part of day to day planning to make certain financial and operational investments in pursuit of growth objectives accepting the risk that the anticipated benefits from these investments may not always be fully realised.
Its acceptance of risk is subject to ensuring that potential benefits and risks are fully understood and sensible measures to mitigate risk are established.
Principal risks The PLC Directors have carried out an assessment of the principal risks facing the Group  including in the year to 30 June 2017 those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or reputation.
The eleven key risks and uncertainties relating to the Groups operations along with their potential impact and the mitigations in place are set out below.
There may be other risks and uncertainties besides those listed below which may also adversely affect the Group and its performance.
More detail can be found in the Audit Committee Report on pages 44 to 45.
In summary our principal risks in the context of the strategic goals and viability review are mapped over a three year period as follows 1 Lack of organic growth 2 Lack of changes to regulations and legislation 3 Recruitment and retention of highcalibre staff 4 Intellectual property rights infringement 5 Poorly evaluated and integrated acquisitions 6 Failure or significant interruption to IT systems causing disruption to client service 7 Competition across the business 8 Technology and speed of change Remoteness of operations and globalisation 10 Impact of General Data Protection
11 Disruption around the London Office move FINANCIAL IMPACT
1m
HIGH
2m
20%
2080%
80%
Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Summary of principal risk Risk description Trend Mitigation KEY RISK 1 Lack of organic growth Strategic objective 1 and 2 New products are critical to our organic growth and underpin our ability to maintain acceptable margins and best in class returns over the long term.
Failure to invest in our businesses or for investments to not deliver an acceptable rate of return jeopardises the ability for the Group to grow.
New product development best practice is shared between the entities in the Group and return on investment of past and future innovation projects is tracked.
This ensures that the collective experience and expertise of the Group can be utilised to maximum effect.
Large RandD projects especially those which are capitalised require Head Office approval ensuring that the Groups significant projects are aligned to overall strategy.
Such projects are overseen by the Chief Financial Officer and Chief Technology Officer.
Workforce quality and retention is a central objective.
This focus ensures that intangible resources stay and grow within the business.
Operating businesses are actively encouraged to develop and protect know how in local jurisdictions.
Innovation is encouraged and fostered throughout the Group via the Senior Leadership Team and the Wilmington Awards.
Wilmingtons emphasis on efficient internal controls high ethical standards the deployment of highquality management resources and the strong focus on quality control over products and processes in each operating business help protect us from product failure litigation and contractual issues.
Our strategy of diversifying our service offering focusing on our client communities and geographic spread mitigates the impact on the business of economic downturns and weak market conditions in specific geographies but these factors cannot entirely mitigate the overall risk to earnings.
To manage these risks we continually focus on our cost base and seek to improve operational efficiencies.
KEY RISK 2 Lack of changes to regulations and legislation Strategic objective 1 and 2 Wilmingtons clients and customers operations are subject to wideranging laws regulations and legislation increasing operational complexity and heightening risk.
Changes to the regulatory landscape i.
Brexit offer opportunities for Wilmington to leverage its knowledge and expertise to assist clients and customers with the change.
A lack of regulatory change would reduce new opportunities for growth and demand for existing products and services.
This risk impacts on key risk 1.
We actively monitor government regulatory bodies and relevant committees to ensure that we understand the future landscape.
This enables us to position both our existing and new products and services to help better deliver to our clients and customers.
Local plans are updated as part of the internal strateic planning process to enable us to respond quickly to market information and economic trends.
Continual monitoring of market conditions and market changes against our Group strategy supported by the reforecasting and reporting in all of our businesses are key to our ability to respond rapidly to changes in our operating environment.
The strength of Wilmingtons business and brands and the focus on client service.
Our businesses enable professionals and their organisations to perform better by providing quality relevant and reliable information education and networking.
Regulatory change following Brexit should increase demand for our product and service offerings in the short to medium term.
KEY RISK 3 Recruitment and retention of high calibre staff Strategic objective 1 2 and 3 As a people business we recognise that the future success of our business is dependent on attracting developing motivating improving and retaining talent.
The Group operates a competitive remuneration package that is enhanced by a share option plan for certain Senior Management.
Just as importantly the Group operates a meritocratic culture where everyone can maximise his or her potential.
Management Development Programmes enhance the skills of executives and managers needed in their current and future roles.
The Group appointed a Group HR Director in 2016 who is a member of the Executive Committee and will provide leadership on succession planning and talent management.
The continual development of the Senior Leadership Team to encourage motivation and engagement with the business.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Risk description Trend Mitigation KEY RISK 4 Intellectual property rights infringement Strategic objective 1 2 and 3 Protection of our intellectual property builds competitive advantage by strengthening barrierstoentry.
Our
Intellectual property rights are integral to the Groups success.
We take a zero tolerance approach to any intellectual property infringement and will take all necessary action to enforce our rights.
Wilmingtons policy is to litigate against any infringement of our intellectual property rights.
KEY RISK 5 Poorly evaluated and integrated acquisitions Strategic objective 1 and 2 The identification and purchase of businesses which meet our demanding financial and growth criteria are an important part of our strategy for developing the Group as is ensuring the new businesses are rapidly integrated into the Group.
We acquire businesses whose technology and markets we know well.
The Executive Committee together with individual Managing Directors are responsible for identifying acquisitions in their business sectors subject to Board approval.
We deploy detailed postacquisition integration plans.
Thorough due diligence is performed by a combination of inhouse and where needed external experts to ensure that a comprehensive appraisal of the commercial legal and financial position of every target is obtained.
Incentives are aligned to encourage acquisitions which are valueenhancing from day one.
The Chief Financial Officer Anthony Foye has concluded over 76 successful acquisitions in the UK and overseas.
The Board receives a full investment plan and a postacquisition integration plan well in advance of any transaction.
The recent appointment of Quin Thong Asia MD helps with international acquisitions in specific territories.
KEY RISK 6 Failure or significant interruption to IT systems causing disruption to client service Strategic objective 1 2 and 3 Major failures in our IT systems may result in client service being interrupted or data being lost corrupted causing damage to our reputation and consequential client andor revenue loss.
There is a risk that a cyber attack on our infrastructure by a malicious individual or group could be successful and impact the availability of critical systems.
This risk is heightened by the office moves described in risk 11.
Specific backup and resilience requirements are built into our systems and we are increasingly becoming more cloud based.
Our critical infrastructure is set up so far as is reasonably practical to prevent unauthorised access and reduce the likelihood and impact of a successful attack.
Business continuity and disaster recovery plans are in place and are assessed continually to ensure that they cover the residual risks that cannot be mitigated.
We are constantly reviewing our resilience to cyber security attacks due to the increasing threat.
During recent years the Group has outsourced the hosting of all websites improving resiliency efficiency and scalability.
We have a central team Wilmington Group Support to provide day to day IT and Systems support for users.
We provide and assist operating entities with strategic IT needs and to ensure adequate IT security policies are used across the Group.
We carry out regular IT audits and we have comprehensive IT systems monitoring in place.
We have a comprehensive IT induction for employees to ensure they are aware of security risks and how to combat them.
As part of the London office move we will be migrating our infrastructure to a third partys data centre rather than build our own in the new premises.
This gives us greater flexibility in support and use of our internal systems.
Testing will be carried out in advance of the migration to mitigate against disruption of business as usual activity.
KEY
Reduced risk Increased risk Same risk Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Summary of principal risk Risk description Trend Mitigation KEY RISK 7 Competition across the business Strategic objective 1 and 2 The markets in which we operate are highly competitive.
The competition constantly challenges the boundaries of technological advances regulation and legislation in seeking to gain an advantage.
Competition could lead to a reduction in market share andor a decline in revenue.
Our focus is on retaining existing clients as well as engaging with new clients.
Our service offering continuously evolves and improves to meet the changing needs of our clients.
To remain competitive in all markets we continue to promote and differentiate our strengths whilst focusing on providing the quality of service that our clients require.
We continue to invest in the development of client relationships globally and associated systems to support our client service offering.
By empowering and resourcing innovation in local operations to respond to changing market needs the potential adverse effects of competition can be mitigated and growth can be maintained.
The Group operates in specialised global niche markets offering high barriers to entry.
KEY RISK 8 Technology and speed of change Strategic objective 1 2 and 3 Digital and technological transformation is now moving at a fast pace across the globe disrupting value chains and transcending the traditional ways of conducting business.
Digitalisation is compelling our clients and customers to revisit their business models increasingly shaped by the digital world.
Although digital and technological transformation offers Wilmington boundless possibilities for growth and value creation it comes with its own set of challenges and risks.
The continued development of the digital hub has helped to bring together the services and products offered by Wilmington so that clients can increasingly access these in a onestopshop.
Development of new products is key to our growth and investment is given in areas that promote high growth i. compliance.
Combining our former Finance and Legal divisions into one new division Professional with common processes and controls.
This will bring greater clarity and refocus the offerings of the associated businesses.
The Professional division will be led by a newly appointed divisional director.
KEY RISK 9 Remoteness of operations and globalisation Strategic objective 2 and 3 A key operational risk emanates from remoteness of operations from Head Office and the increasing global spread of our businesses.
There is a currency risk from operating in a large number of countries.
Control is exercised locally in accordance with the Groups policy of autonomous management.
We seek to employ local high quality experts.
The Groups acquisition model ensures retention of management and staff in acquired businesses meaning that local expertise is maintained.
Divisional Directors ensure that overall Group strategy is fulfilled through an ongoing review of the businesses.
The right balance between autonomy and adherence to the overall objectives of the Group is a key function of the Divisional
We manage currency risk in local operations through natural hedging forward currency contracts and by matching revenue and costs in the same currency.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Risk description Trend Mitigation KEY RISK 10 Impact of General Data Protection Regulation Strategic objective 3 The General Data Protection Regulation GDPR is the most significant revision of data privacy legislation ever seen in Europe introducing fines of up to 20.0m or 5% of group revenue whichever is greater.
In an increasingly data driven world it places the individual at the heart of controlling their information and has a far reaching effect on how we manage and document our personal or contact data.
Wilmingtons Data Protection Officer DPO is running a GDPR compliance programme to ensure that all businesses are prepared.
There are six streams to the programme Data Audit Policies and Training Contracts HR Marketing and Technology.
We are engaging with legal and technology specialists on the relevant streams.
Wilmingtons Group Head of Marketing has been heavily involved with the DPO in an awareness and documentation project for our marketing teams.
Progress and development of the compliance programme is reported to the Board on a regular basis.
KEY RISK 11 Disruption around the London Office move Strategic objective 1 2 and 3 As announced on 4 May 2017 the head office will move from Underwood Street to a newly refurbished premises at The White Chapel Building near Aldgate.
The new head office space will accommodate Wilmingtons London based businesses.
The fit out of the new premises is underway and the new building is expected to be operational in December 2017.
There is a risk that the move will cause business disruption.
The Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer Chief Technology Officer Facilities Manager and Group Human Resource Director have formed a project team to manage the move.
The project team have engaged with appropriate third party specialists to ensure that sufficient plans are in place to achieve the objective of moving on time and to promote a more unified business that reflects a modern working environment encourages closer collaboration and emphasises our core values and culture.
The project team is liaising directly with local management in each business affected to ensure that disruption is kept to a minimum.
KEY
Reduced risk Increased risk Same risk Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Viability statement In accordance with C2.2.
Code the Directors have assessed the viability of the Group.
The Directors assessment was over a three year period to 30 June 2020 taking account of the Groups current position and the potential impact of the principal risks documented in the Strategic Report on pages 28 to 31.
Each risk and associated risks have been quantified in terms of their potential cost impact and evaluated against three year financial forecasts.
In all scenarios including an aggregation of scenarios the review indicates no breach of covenants or the need to refinance the existing revolving credit facility the facility is due for renewal on 1 July 2020 and it is assumed this renewal will be successfully completed.
The Directors have determined that the three year period is an appropriate period over which to provide its viability statement being consistent with the period covered by the Groups strategic planning process.
In making this statement the Directors have considered the resilience of the Group taking account of its current position the principal risks facing the business the potential financial impact on market conditions and the effectiveness of any mitigating actions.
The assessment considered the potential impacts of these identified principal risks on the business model future performance solvency and liquidity over the period.
The Boards assessment has been made with reference to the Groups current position and prospects the Groups strategic plan the Boards risk appetite and the Groups principal risks and how these are managed as detailed in the Strategic Report on pages 28 to 31.
The strategy and associated principal risks underpin the Groups threeyear plan which the Directors review at least annually.
The threeyear plan including financing projections is subject to sensitivity analysis which involves applying different assumptions to the underlying forecast both individually and in aggregate.
Based on this assessment the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company will be able to continue in operation and meet its liabilities as they fall due over the next three years.
The Directors also considered it appropriate to prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis.
Internal control The Board is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and risk management and for reviewing the effectiveness of these systems.
These systems are designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
In line with the Turnbull Report recommendations the Board regularly reviews the effectiveness of the Groups systems of internal control.
The Boards monitoring covers all controls including financial operational and compliance controls and risk management.
It is based principally on reviewing reports from management to consider whether significant risks are identified evaluated managed and controlled.
Further details of principal risks are given on pages 28 to 31 and details of financial risks such as interest rate risk liquidity risk and foreign currency risk are given in the financial statements in note 20.
The key features of the internal financial control system that operated throughout the period under review are as follows i Financial reporting The Board reviewed the Annual Report together with the annual and halfyear results announcements.
The Board also reviews and approves the Interim Management Statements.
The Board considered the appropriateness of the Groups accounting policies critical accounting estimates and key judgments.
It reviewed accounting papers prepared by management on areas of financial reporting judgment.
This included a consideration of the carrying value of goodwill based on executive managements expectations of future performance the acquisition accounting and the accounting treatment of the office move.
The Board considered and is satisfied that taken as a whole the Annual Report is fair balanced and understandable and that it provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Groups performance business model and strategy.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Risks and Uncertainties Facing the Business
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 ii Management information systems Effective planning annual budgeting and monthly forecasting systems are in place as well as a monthly review of actual results compared with budget and the prior year.
The annual budget and monthly forecasts are reviewed by the Board.
Risk assessment and evaluation takes place as an integral part of this process.
Monthly reports on performance are provided to the Board and the Group reports results to shareholders twice a year.
Insurance cover for the Group as well as individual operating companies has been procured where it is considered appropriate.
The Group continues to operate a limited internal audit process which performs relevant reviews as part of a programme approved by the Audit Committee.
The
Committee considers any issues or risks arising from internal audit in order that appropriate actions can be undertaken for their satisfactory resolution.
The Internal Audit Manager has a direct reporting line to the Chairman of the Audit Committee.
The Board also discusses in detail the projected financial impact of proposed acquisitions and disposals including their financing.
All such proposed investments are considered by all Directors.
The Board is also responsible for reviewing and approving the Groups treasury strategy including mitigation against changes in interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
Organisations
There are wellstructured financial and administrative functions at both the Group and at the operating company level staffed by appropriately qualified staff.
The key functions at Group level include Group accounting corporate planning Group treasury human resources Company secretarial internal audit and Group taxation.
Other matters The Group has no known issues relating to human rights matters.
The welfare of all the Groups stakeholders including the community is carefully considered to ensure that such parties are not adversely affected by the Groups actions in the course of its day to day business.
The information forming the strategic report on pages 02 to 33 was approved and authorised for issue by the Board and signed on their behalf on 12 September 2017.
ANTHONY FOYE Chief Financial Officer Strategic Report site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Board composition at 30 June 2017 Executive Nonexecutive 33% 67% Mark Asplin NonExecutive Chairman Appointment to the Board April 2005 Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee and Remuneration
Key areas of prior experience Mark Asplin is a Chartered Accountant and joined the Board in April 2005.
Mark was appointed Chairman in November 2011.
He was until 2002 a partner at
During his time at KPMG he helped build its Corporate Finance practice undertaking roles which included Head of MandA and Head of Valuations both for the central region of the UK.
He left KPMG to set up Jasper Corporate Finance an independent corporate finance practice.
Pedro Ros
Chief Executive Officer
Appointment to the Board July 2014 Committee membership Nomination Committee Key areas of prior experience Pedro Ros joined the Board of Wilmington on 14 July 2014 and assumed the role of Chief Executive Officer on 1 October 2014 succeeding Charles J Brady.
Pedro joined Wilmington from Creston plc where he was Head of Strategic Insight.
Until June 2012 he was Chief Executive Officer and then Chairman of TNS a world leader in market information and business analysis and a global subsidiary of WPP plc.
Pedro has a degree in Economics from the Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona and has completed Management Programmes at Michigan UniversityIESE and Stanford University.
Anthony Foye Chief Financial Officer Appointment to the Board September 2012 Committee membership
Key areas of prior experience Anthony Foye is a Chartered
Between 1987 and 2004 Anthony was Finance Director of Taylor and Francis Group plc.
On a merger in May 2004 with Informa plc Anthony became Group Finance Director of the enlarged Group a position he held until December 2007.
From January 2008 Anthony worked on a number of projects with various private equity
Between May 2009 and March 2011 Anthony was Chief Finance Officer and Chief Operating Officer of Critical Information Group plc.
He was also a NonExecutive Director of YouGov plc from March 2005 to June 2009.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Board of Directors Ensuring we remain a great place to work
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Paul Dollman NonExecutive Director Appointment to the Board September 2015 Committee membership Audit Committee Chairman Nomination Committee Remuneration Committee Key areas of prior experience Paul Dollman is a Chartered Accountant and enjoyed a successful career in finance as the Group Finance Director of John Menzies plc a FTSE 250 company.
Current roles include NonExecutive Director of Scottish Amicable part of Prudential plc Audit Committee Chairman of Verastar a Private Equity owned business which provides essential business services telecoms water and energy and insurance to the small business market and a Member of the Audit Committee of The National Library of Scotland.
Paul joined the Board on 16 September 2015 and was appointed Chairman of the Audit Committee on 5 November 2015.
Derek Carter NonExecutive Director Appointment to the Board December 2011 Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee Chairman and Remuneration Committee Key areas of prior experience Derek Carter was previously Chief Executive of Emap Communications for 11 years where he led Emaps growth into a market leading mixed media business built on powerful information events and magazine brands and its subsequent sale to ApaxGuardian Media Group in 2008.
Derek who was previously Chairman of DocuGroup a leading European information business serving the construction sector is the Senior Independent Director
Nathalie Schwarz NonExecutive Director Appointment to the Board December 2011 Committee membership Audit Committee Nomination Committee and Remuneration Committee
Key areas of prior experience Nathalie Schwarz was formally the Commercial and Corporate Development Director on the Board at Channel 4 Television and was Strategy and Development Director on the Board of Capital Radio plc.
Nathalie qualified as a solicitor with Clifford Chance.
Daniel Barton Company Secretary Appointment to the Board April 2016 Committee membership
Key areas of prior experience Daniel Barton qualified as a Chartered Accountant in 2010 having worked at PwC in Manchester and London since 2005.
He joined Wilmington in 2014 as Head of Corporate Reporting and was recently promoted to Deputy CFO.
Daniel was appointed as the Company Secretary on 29 April 2016.
Board Tenure at 30 June 2017 04 years 4 years 33% 67% site Stock Code WIL Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The Directors present their report together with the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2017.
The Directors report comprises pages 36 to 37 and the sections of the annual report incorporated by reference are set out below which taken together contain the information to be included in the annual report where applicable under Listing Rule 9.8.4.
Board membership pg 34 Dividends pg 08 Directors long term incentives pg 50 Share placing pg 43 Corporate governance report pg 38 Future developments of the business of the Group pg 09 Employee equality diversity and involvement pg 36 Post balance sheet events pg 114 Information on the independent auditor pg 44 Subsidiaries of the Group pg 99 Financial risk management pg 103 General information The Company is public limited and is incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The Company is premium listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The Companys registered address is 614 Underwood Street London N1 7JQ.
Branches outside the UK The Group operates one branch outside the UK in Singapore.
Future developments Future developments have been incorporated in the Strategic Report on pages 02 to 33.
Dividends
The Directors recommend that a final dividend for the year of 4.6p per ordinary share be paid on 17 November 2017 to Shareholders on the register on 20 October 2017 which together with the interim dividend of 3.9p per ordinary share already paid makes a total dividend for the year of 8.5p 2016 8.1p an overall increase of 4.9% per ordinary share.
Research and development activities The Group has designed and developed a range of information education and networking services to professionals and businesses.
The Group has successfully transitioned the vast majority of its traditional print business publications to feature rich online digital information and analysis services.
This transition has been facilitated through the novel use of technology.
The Group looks to continue to research and develop in technological areas that support the Groups strategy.
Initiatives included a cross divisional Massive Online Open Course system for a global client covering fundamental and advanced banking skills.
For 201718 the Group is expanding its use of digital technology in its product development and utilising next generation marketing solutions.
Political donations No political donations were made during the year 2016 nil.
Events after the reporting period In July 2017 the Group purchased the remaining 20% shareholding in Central Law Training Scotland Limited for 335000 making it a wholly owned subsidiary.
On 3 July 2017 the following forward contracts were entered into in order to provide certainty in Sterling terms of 80% of the Groups expected net US dollar and Euro income z The Group sold 5.0m at an average rate of 1.1358 z The Group sold 10.0m at an average rate of 1.3071 Directors and Directors interests The Directors who have served during the year and up to the date of this report are set out on pages 34 to 35 which include brief biographical details.
Their remuneration and interests in the share capital of the Company are set out in the Report on Directors Remuneration on pages 47 to 62.
Executive and NonExecutive Directors will offer themselves for reelection at each Annual General Meeting as a result of the Company deciding to adopt best practice guidelines and the 2012 UK Corporate Governance Code.
None of the Directors had any material interest in any contract other than an employment contract that was significant in relation to the Groups business at any time during the year.
Details of the Directors service contracts letters of appointment and interests in the shares of the company are shown in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 47 to 62.
Directors thirdparty indemnity provisions To preclude the possibility of the Company incurring expenses which might arise from the need to indemnify a Director or Officer from claims made against him or her or the cost associated with their defence the Group has effected Directors and Officers qualifying third party liability insurance as permitted by the Companies Act 2006 which has been in force throughout the financial year and up to the date of approval of these financial statements.
Wilmingtons people The Groups policy is to consider all job applications on a fair basis free from discrimination in relation to age sex race ethnicity religion sexual orientation or disability not related to job performance.
Every consideration is given to applications for employment from disabled persons where the requirements of the job may be adequately covered by a disabled person.
Where existing employees become disabled it is the Groups policy wherever practicable to provide continuing employment under normal terms and conditions and to provide training and career development wherever appropriate.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Directors Report Communicating our plans and objectives 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The Group places a great deal of importance on communicating its plans and objectives to its entire staff and where appropriate consulting with them.
Each of the Divisions is led by a Divisional Director some of who are shareholders in the Company and whose remuneration is linked to revenue and profit targets.
Financial instruments An explanation of the Groups treasury policies and existing financial instruments are set out in note 20 of the financial statements.
Purchase of own shares and sale of treasury shares The Group has in previous years purchased its own shares and holds such shares in treasury.
No shares have been purchased during the year to 30 June 2017.
If a purchase of own shares is proposed by the Directors the Company seeks authority from its shareholders at the Annual General Meeting to purchase its own shares.
On 19 October 2016 262243 ordinary shares were issued in respect of the vesting of the 2013 PSP Share Awards to employees including Executive Directors.
At 30 June 2017 46584 shares were held in Treasury 2016 46584 which represents 0.1% 2016 0.1% of the Called up Share Capital of the Company.
Contracts of significance with shareholders The Company and its subsidiary undertakings do not have any contractual or other arrangements with any continuing shareholders which are essential to the business of the Company.
Takeover directive disclosures As at 30 June 2017 the Company had only one authorised class of share namely ordinary shares of 5p each of which there were in issue 87247974 2016 86985731.
There are no special arrangements or restrictions relating to any of these shares whether in terms of transfers voting rights or relating to changes in control of the Company.
The Company does not have any special rules in place regarding the appointment and replacement of Directors or regarding amendments to the Companys articles of association.
Under the terms of the Companys banking arrangements in the event that a person or group of persons acting in concert gains control of the Company the lending banks may require by giving not less than 30 days notice the repayment and cancellation of the facilities.
Except for share awards and options there are no special conditions or agreements in place which would take effect alter or terminate in the event of a takeover.
Subject to various conditions if the Company is taken over all share awards and options will vest and may be exercised.
Apart from the interests of the Directors disclosed in the Report on Directors Remuneration and the substantial interests listed on page 43 there are no individuals or entities with significant holdings either direct or indirect in the Company.
Annual General Meeting A separate notice convening the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held at the offices of Canaccord Genuity 88 Wood Street London EC2V 7QR on 2 November 2017 will be sent out with this Annual Report and financial statements.
Corporate governance The Companys statement on corporate governance can be found in the Corporate Governance Report on pages 38 to 43 of these financial statements.
The Corporate Governance Report forms part of this Directors Report and is incorporated into it by crossreference.
Going concern As highlighted in note 20 to the financial statements the Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through an overdraft facility and a revolving credit facility which were extended on 1 July 2015 and are next due for renewal on 1 July 2020.
The current economic conditions create uncertainty in particular over z the level of demand for the Groups products and z the exchange rate between Sterling and the US Dollar and the Euro.
The Groups budgets and forecasts taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group will be able to operate within the level of its current facility and covenants.
After reviewing the Groups budget forecasts and three year plans for the next three years the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operation for the foreseeable future.
Therefore they have adopted the going concern basis in preparing these financial statements.
ANTHONY FOYE Chief Financial Officer 12 September 2017 site Stock Code WIL Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Chairmans introduction Responsibility for good governance lies with the Board.
As a Board we are committed to maintaining the highest standards of corporate governance and understand that an effective challenging and diverse Board is essential to enable the Group to deliver its strategy and longterm shareholder value.
Further information on our strategy and business model can be found on page 10.
The Board recognises the importance of setting the right tone at the top in order to guide our peoples behaviour and ensure that we live by and demonstrate the right values which in turn enable entrepreneurial and prudent management to deliver longterm success for the Group and its stakeholders.
During the year we have continued to promote a culture guided by four core values enabling enhancing collaborating and innovating.
We fully recognise that at the heart of every successful organisation is a strong and healthy culture supported by a robust governance structure.
As the custodian of Wilmingtons culture the Board demands openness and transparency to maintain an environment in which our core values are practised by our people every day.
Our Code of Conduct is readily accessible to all staff to support their day to day decision making.
We demand the highest professional standards from all of our people all of the time and we have a zero tolerance approach to breaches of the Code of
Compliance with the UK Corporate Governance Code In September 2014 the Financial Reporting Council FRC published the latest edition of the Corporate Governance Code the Code which included a number of changes relating to risk management internal controls and the longer term viability of companies.
A viability statement is therefore included in this Annual Report and can be found within the Strategic Report on page 32.
The Main Principles of the Code provide the framework for the reporting model which we have used for the last two years.
Our approach to Leadership is described on pages 39 to 40 Effectiveness is described on pages 41 to 42 Risk management and internal controls is described on page 42 Remuneration is described on page 43 and Relations with shareholders is described on page 43.
Wilmington Plc has complied with all relevant provisions of the Code for the year ended 30 June 2017 and from that date up to the date of publication of this Annual Report and Accounts.
Composition and independence The board reviews NonExecutive Director independence on an annual basis and takes into account the individuals professional characteristics their behaviour at board meetings and their contribution to unbiased and independent debate.
All of the nonexecutive Directors are considered by the board to be independent.
The board consisted of a majority of independent nonexecutive Directors throughout the year.
Biographical details of all the current Directors are set out on pages 34 and 35.
In accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code the Directors will stand for reelection at the AGM in November 2017.
Diversity
Wilmington believes that a diverse culture is a key factor in driving its success.
As at 30 June 2017 the Wilmington Board had one female Non Executive Director Nathalie Schwarz representing 17% of board membership.
The Senior Leadership Team which comprises of Executive Committee Members and Senior Management is split between 11 32% female and 23 68% male.
The Groups employees are split between 62% female and 38% male.
Board evaluation and reelection The Board undertakes a formal annual evaluation of its own performance and that of each individual Director.
As in previous years and in accordance with the recommendations of the Code the Directors will be offering themselves for reelection at the AGM in November 2017.
Shareholder engagement The Board regards it as important to maintain an active dialogue with our shareholders.
Further details regarding this engagement with our shareholders are set out on page 43.
The Directors and I see good governance as fundamental to effective management of the business and delivery of longterm shareholder value.
MARK ASPLIN
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Corporate Governance Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
The Board The company is controlled through the Board of Directors which at 30 June 2017 comprised two executive and four Non Executive Directors.
Short biographies of each Director are set out on pages 34 and 35.
The Board focuses on formulation of strategy management of effective business controls and review of business performance.
The Board may exercise all the powers of the company subject to the companys Articles of Association the Articles the Companies Act 2006 and any directions given by the shareholders by special resolution.
The Articles may be amended by a special resolution of the companys shareholders.
The Board meets as often as necessary to discharge its duties effectively.
In the financial year ended 30 June 2017 ten main Board meetings were scheduled and the Directors attendance record is set out on page 41.
The Board has three formally constituted Committees the Audit Committee the Remuneration Committee and the Nomination Committee each of which operates with defined terms of reference.
The terms of reference of the three Committees are available on the Companys website www. ilmingtonplc. com.
The Audit Committee met three times during the year the Remuneration Committee met three times during the year and the Nomination Committee met once during the year.
There is an Executive Committee that is responsible for the daytoday management of the Companys business within a framework of delegated responsibilities.
It is chaired by the Chief Executive Officer and includes the Chief Financial Officer Chief Technology Officer Group HR Director and three Divisional
Governance framework 30 June 2017
AUDIT
COMMITTEE
NOMINATION
COMMITTEE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE
REMUNERATION
COMMITTEE
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE Chief Executive Ofcer Chief Financial Ofcer Chief Technology Ofcer Group HR Director and the three Divisional Directors.
DIVISIONAL OPERATING BOARDS BOARD NonExecutive Chairman two Executive Directors and three NonExecutive Directors Each division has at least one divisional operating board site Stock Code WIL Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
The roles of the Chairman and that of the Chief Executive Officer are held by separate individuals and the Board has clearly defined their responsibilities.
The Chairman is primarily responsible for the effective working of the Board ensuring that each Director particularly the NonExecutive Directors is able to make an effective contribution and provide constructive comments on the business.
The Chief Executive Officer has responsibility for all operational matters which includes the implementation of Group strategy and policies approved by the Board.
NonExecutive Directors All the NonExecutive Directors are independent of the Companys executive management and free from any business or other relationship that could materially interfere with the exercise of their independent judgment.
The NonExecutive Directors are responsible for bringing independent and objective judgment and scrutiny of all matters before the Board and its Committees using their substantial and wideranging experience.
The terms and conditions of appointment of NonExecutive Directors are available for inspection at the Companys registered office during normal business hours and at the Annual General
Except as disclosed in note 26 in the financial statements no Director has or had at any time during the year any interest in any contract with any Group company except for their service arrangements.
All Directors are equally accountable for the proper stewardship of the Companys affairs and all Directors in accordance with the Articles of Association submit themselves for reelection at least once every three years.
At Wilmington Directors are submitted for reelection every year.
Senior Independent Director Derek Carter is the Senior Independent Director SID.
His role as SID includes z Being available to shareholders if they have concerns which contact through the Chairman Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer has failed to resolve no such requests were received from shareholders during the year and z Meeting with the other NonExecutive Directors on the Board once a year to assess the Chairmans performance as Chairman taking into account the views of the Executive
Length of tenure of Directors Number of complete years of service as a Director Balance of Directors The Directors As at the date of this report the Directors of the company are NonExecutive Chairman Mark Asplin Executive Directors Pedro Ros Anthony M Foye NonExecutive Directors Derek Carter Senior Independent Director Nathalie Schwarz Paul Dollman Paul Dollman Nathalie Schwarz Derek Carter Anthony M Foye Pedro Ros Mark Asplin
Female
83% 17%
Executive
33% 67% Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Corporate Governance Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Meetings
There were ten meetings of the Board in the year.
The Board has a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for decision which it reviews periodically.
This schedule includes approval of acquisitions and disposals and major capital expenditure.
The Board also reviews the Groups Risk Register wider Risk Assessment and Viability review.
At each Board meeting the Chief Executive Officer provided a review of the business and how it was performing together with strategic issues arising.
The NonExecutive Directors often meet separately from the Executive Directors usually either before or after Board meetings to discuss relevant matters.
In the year the range of subjects discussed by the Board included z The strategy of the Group in response to changing economic conditions z Key business areas including the combination of former Legal and Finance divisions into one new Professional division z The identification execution and integration of acquisitions z The review of the scope and progress of Project Sixth Gear z The London property portfolio review z The Groups debt and capital structure including the extension of the debt facility z The Groups financial results z Dividend policy z Regulatory and governance issues z The development of the Groups people z The Groups Risk Register and z Insurance Policy and Cover.
In addition to the ten meetings described above the Board has two off site strategy meetings each year at which the Groups strategic direction viability plan and significant projects are discussed.
Where meetings are required between Board meetings and a full complement of Directors cannot be achieved a Committee of Directors considers the necessary formalities.
Attendance table Main Board meetings attended Main Board meetings eligible to attend Mark Asplin NonExecutive Chairman 10 10 Pedro Ros Chief Executive Officer 10 10 Anthony Foye Chief Financial Officer 10 10 Derek Carter NonExecutive 10 10 Nathalie Schwarz NonExecutive 10 10 Paul Dollman NonExecutive 10 10 Information flow The Chairman together with the Company Secretary ensures that the Directors receive clear information on all relevant matters in a timely manner.
Board papers are circulated sufficiently in advance of meetings for them to be thoroughly digested to ensure clarity of informed debate.
The Board papers contain the Chief Executive Officers and the Chief Financial Officers written reports high level papers on each business area key metrics and specific papers relating to agenda items.
The Board papers are accompanied by a management information pack containing detailed financial and other supporting information.
The Board receives updates throughout the year and occasional ad hoc papers on matters of particular relevance or importance.
Time commitment The Board is satisfied that the Chairman and each of the Non Executive Directors committed sufficient time during the year to enable them to fulfil their duties as Directors of the Company.
None of the NonExecutive Directors has any conflict of interest.
Induction and professional development The Chairman is responsible for ensuring that induction and training are provided to each Director and for organising the induction process and regular updating and training of Board members.
Training and updating in relation to the business of the Group and the legal and regulatory responsibilities of Directors was provided throughout the year by a variety of means to Board members including presentations by executives visits to business operations and circulation of briefing material.
Individual Directors are also expected to take responsibility for identifying their training needs and to ensure they are adequately informed about the Group and their responsibilities as a Director.
The Board is confident that all its members have the knowledge ability and experience to perform the functions required of a Director of a listed company.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Access to independent advice All Directors have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary who ensures that Board processes are followed and good corporate governance standards are maintained.
Any Director who considers it necessary or appropriate may take independent professional advice at the companys expense.
None of the Directors sought such advice in the year.
Performance evaluation The Board undertakes a formal annual evaluation of its own performance and that of each individual Director.
As part of its evaluation a questionnaire was approved by the Board.
Directors are in the process of submitting their completed questionnaires to the Company Secretary who will review their responses.
These will subsequently be discussed in an open session.
The exercise which is undertaken on a regular basis is viewed positively by the Board.
No major areas are expected to be highlighted within this review process but the Board intend to continue to develop themes arising from previous reviews specifically on z strategic messaging z board information and z succession.
The Chairman has carried out a review of the performance of individual members of the Board.
In all cases the performance of the Directors was considered to have reached a high standard.
The Board and its Committees will monitor progress and continue their critical review of its effectiveness during the year ahead.
In accordance with the prevailing recommendations of the Code it is the current intention of the Board that an external facilitation of the Board evaluation will be carried out in 2018.
Reelection of Directors Notwithstanding that the Companys articles of association require the Directors to offer themselves for reelection at least once every three years in accordance with the recommendations of the Code the Directors will be offering themselves for reelection at the AGM in November 2017.
In light of the performance evaluations summarised above and the provisions of the Companys articles of association the Board recommends that all of the Directors be reelected.
Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee and the Board seek to maintain an appropriate balance between the Executive and NonExecutive
The Committee is chaired by Derek Carter as SID and comprises all the NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer.
It has full responsibility for reviewing the Board structure and for interviewing and nominating candidates to serve on the Board as well as reviewing senior executive development.
Suitable candidates once nominated meet with the Chairman and the Chief Executive
The candidates are then put forward for consideration and appointment by the Board as a whole.
The Committee has access to external professional advice at the Companys expense as and when required.
The Nomination Committee reviews on a continuing basis the composition of both the Board and the Executive Committee making recommendations where appropriate.
Further details of Nomination Committees activities can be found in the Nomination Committee Report on page 46.
The terms and conditions of the appointment of NonExecutive Directors is made available at the Companys registered office during normal business hours and at the Annual General Meeting.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee is composed of all the NonExecutive Directors including the Chairman.
The Audit Committee Chairman is Paul Dollman.
The main roles and responsibilities of the Audit Committee are set out in written terms of reference and are available on the Companys website siteinvestorscorporate governancerolesboard.
Details of the Audit Committees policies and activities can be found in the Audit Committee Report on pages 44 and 45.
Risk management and internal controls In line with the Turnbull Report recommendations the Board maintains an ongoing process for identifying evaluating and managing significant risks faced by the Group.
The Board regularly reviews this process which has been in operation from the start of the year to the date of approval of this report.
Further details on the key features of the risk management and internal controls can be found in the risks and uncertainties facing the business on pages 25 to 33.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Corporate Governance Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is chaired by Nathalie Schwarz and consists of all the NonExecutives and the Chairman.
It is responsible for recommending to the Board the framework and policy for Executive Directors remuneration.
Given the small size of the Board the Committee recognises the potential for conflicts of interest and has taken appropriate measures to minimise the risk.
The Committee meets not less than once a year and takes advice from the Chief Executive Officer as appropriate.
In carrying out its work the Board itself determines the remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee has the power to seek external advice and to appoint consultants as and when required in respect of the remuneration of Executive Directors.
Further details of the Groups policies on remuneration and service contracts can be found in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 47 to 62.
Relations with shareholders Dialogue with institutional shareholders The Directors seek to build on a mutual understanding of objectives between the Company and its institutional shareholders by means of a programme of meetings with major shareholders fund managers and analysts each year.
The company also makes presentations to analysts and fund managers following publication of its halfyear and fullyear results.
A copy of the presentation slide show is available on the Companys website siteinvestorsreports andpresentations.
As referred to earlier the SID is available to shareholders if they have concerns which other contacts have failed to resolve.
The Chairman or one of the other NonExecutive Directors is available on request to attend meetings with major shareholders.
In the past year the Chairman attended such meetings.
The
Board regularly receives copies of analysts and brokers briefings.
The Groups website includes a specific and comprehensive investor relations section containing all RNS announcements share price information annual documents available for download and similar materials.
Constructive use of the Annual General Meeting A separate notice convening the Annual General Meeting is being sent out with this Report and financial statements.
Separate votes are held for each proposed resolution.
At the Annual General Meeting after the formal business has been concluded the Chairman will welcome questions from shareholders.
All Directors attend the meeting at which they have the opportunity to meet with shareholders.
Details of resolutions to be proposed at the Annual General Meeting on 2 November 2017 and an explanation of the items of special business can be found in the circular that contains the notice convening the Annual General Meeting.
Substantial shareholdings As at 31 August 2017 the Company is aware of the following interests amounting to 3.0% or more in the Companys issued ordinary share capital
Aberdeen Standard Investments 9377898 10.75 Artemis Investment Management 6040792 6.93 GVQ Investment Management 4834179 5.54 Premier Asset Management 4780000 5.48 Columbia Threadneedle Investments 4711975 5.40 Schroder Investment Management 4375000 5.02 NFU Mutual 4182512 4.80 BlackRock 3005147 3.45 MandG Investment Management 3851950 4.42 Baillie Gifford 3340854 3.83 Herald Investment Management 3286501 3.77 Chelverton Asset Management 2900000 3.33 AXA Framlington Investment Managers 2815000 3.23 Mr Brian David Gilbert 2735000 3.14 Approved by order of the Board MARK ASPLIN
12 September 2017 site Stock Code WIL Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Committee meetings The Committee met three times during the year.
The meetings are attended by Committee members and by invitation the Chief Financial Officer Senior Management and representatives from the external auditors.
Once a year the Committee meets separately with the external auditors and with management without the other being present.
Roles and responsibilities z Monitoring the integrity of the annual and interim financial statements the accompanying reports to shareholders and corporate governance statements z Reporting to the Board on the appropriateness of our accounting policies and practices z In conjunction with the Board reviewing and monitoring the effectiveness of the Groups internal control and risk management systems including reviewing the process for identifying assessing and reporting all key risks see the risks and uncertainties facing the business on pages 25 to 33 z Managing the limited internal audit process and approving their forward audit plan z To make recommendations to the Board in relation to the appointment and removal of the external auditors and to approve their remuneration and terms of engagement z To review and monitor the external auditors independence objectivity and the effectiveness of the audit process taking into consideration relevant UK professional and regulatory requirements z To develop and implement policy on the engagement of the external auditor to supply nonaudit services taking into account relevant ethical guidance regarding the provision of nonaudit services by the external audit firm and to report to the Board identifying any matters in respect of which it considers that action or improvement is needed and making recommendations as the steps to be taken z To report to the Board on how it has discharged its responsibilities and z To oversee the whistle blowing provisions of the Group to ensure that they are operating effectively.
Activities of the Committee z Reviewed and discussed with the external auditors the key accounting considerations and judgments reflected in the Groups results for the six month period ended 31 December z Reviewed and agreed the external auditors audit plan in advance of their audit for the year ended 30 June 2017 z Discussed the report received from the external auditors regarding their audit in respect of the year ended 30 June 2017 which included comments on their findings on internal control and a statement on their independence and objectivity z Reviewed the Groups whistle blowing policy and satisfy themselves that this met FCA rules and good standards of corporate governance z Received reports from internal audit covering various aspects of the Groups operations controls and processes z Reviewed and approved the nonaudit assignments undertaken by the external auditors in the year ended 30 June z Reviewed together with the Board the Risk Assessment and Viability Review z Reviewed and approved managements responses to queries raised by the FRC in respect of the 2016 Annual Report.
Significant areas The significant areas considered by the Committee and discussed with the external auditors during the year were i Goodwill and intangible asset impairment The Committee received reports from management on the carrying value of the Groups businesses including goodwill.
The Committee reviewed managements recommendations which were also considered by the external auditors including evaluation of the appropriateness of the assumptions applied in determining asset carrying values and the appropriateness of the identification of cash generating units.
After review the Committee was satisfied with the assumptions and judgments applied by management and concluded that the impairment recorded for Ark was required.
The Committee was satisfied that no other impairment of carrying values was required.
Dear Shareholder It is my pleasure to present the Audit Committee report for the year ended 30 June 2017 .
PAUL DOLLMAN Chairman of the Audit Committee Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Audit Committee Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 ii Revenue recognition The Committee considered the inherent risk of fraud in revenue recognition as defined by auditing standards and was satisfied that there were no issues arising.
The committee reviewed the accounting regarding the acquisitions in the year and was satisfied there were no issues arising.
External audit The Groups external auditors are PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP .
The Audit Committee is responsible for reviewing the independence and objectivity of the external auditors and ensuring this is safeguarded notwithstanding any provision of any other services to the Group.
The Board recognises the importance of safeguarding auditor objectivity and has taken the following steps to ensure that auditor independence is not compromised z The Audit Committee carries out each year a full evaluation of the external auditor as to its complete independence from the Group and relevant officers of the Group in all material respects and that it is adequately resourced and technically capable to deliver an objective audit to shareholders.
Based on this review the Audit Committee recommends to the Board each year the continuation or removal and replacement of the external auditor z The external auditors provided audit related services such as regulatory and statutory reporting as well as formalities relating to shareholders and other circulars z The external auditors may undertake due diligence reviews for prospective acquisitions given its knowledge of the Groups businesses.
Such provision will however be assessed on a casebycase basis so that the best placed adviser is retained.
The Audit Committee monitors the application of policy in this regard and keeps the policy under review z The Audit Committee reviews on a regular basis all fees paid for audit and all consultancy fees with a view to assessing the reasonableness of fees value of delivery and any independence issues that may have arisen or may potentially arise in the future z The external auditors report to the Directors and the Audit Committee confirming their independence in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In addition to the steps taken by the Board to safeguard auditor objectivity the Audit Practice Board Ethical Standard 3 requires audit partner rotation every five years for listed companies and z Different teams are utilised on all other assignments undertaken by the auditors.
Before any such assignments can commence teams must obtain approval of the Audit
This approval confirms that sufficient and appropriate safeguards are put in place to ensure that auditor independence is retained.
The Audit Committee give careful consideration before appointing the auditors to provide other services.
The Group regularly use other providers to ensure that independence and full value for money are achieved.
Other services are generally limited to work that is closely related to the annual audit or where the work is of such a nature that a detailed understanding of the business is necessary.
Following the adoption by the UK Financial Reporting Council of certain parts of the EU Regulation and Directive on Audit Reform that govern permissible nonaudit services provided by the auditor the Audit Committee took the decision to discontinue using PwC to provide taxation advisory and compliance services for any work commencing after 1 July 2016 including the tax services for the year to 30 June 2016.
Following careful consideration by the Audit Committee it was agreed that these services shall be provided by Deloitte LLP .
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have remained in place as auditors for nine years following a tender process in 2009.
As part of its review the Committee notes that the Group Audit Partner was rotated in 2013 and the current audit partners five year term will end in 2018.
The Committee will continue to monitor the appropriateness of the need to tender for audit services currently provided by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP .
During this year 197000 was paid by the Group to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP for other assurance services.
Attendance table
Committee meetings eligible to attend Mark Asplin NonExecutive Chairman 3 3 Paul Dollman NonExecutive 3 3 Derek Carter NonExecutive 3 3 Nathalie Schwarz NonExecutive 3 3 Approved on behalf of the Board by PAUL DOLLMAN Chairman of the Audit Committee 12 September 2017 site Stock Code WIL Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Key responsibilities The key responsibilities of the Committee are to z Review the size balance and constitution of the Board including the diversity and balance of skills knowledge and experience of the NonExecutive Directors z Consider succession planning for Directors and other senior executives z Identify and nominate for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies z Review annually the time commitment required of Non Executive Directors and z Make recommendations for the Board in consultation with the respective Committee chairman regarding membership of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Main activities of the Committee during the year and subsequent to the year end The Committee met once during the year to 30 June 2017.
The key matters considered at these meetings were i Board composition The Committee reviewed the composition of the Board including the range of skills level of experience and balance between executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The Committee also reviewed the membership of the various Board Committees.
The
Committee concluded that the current membership of the Board and the Board Committees was appropriate for the needs of the business.
The Committee kept under review the succession plans for both the Executive and NonExecutive Directors and the level of Senior Management immediately below Board level.
Attendance table
Committee meetings eligible to attend Mark Asplin NonExecutive Chairman 1 1 Pedro Ros Chief Executive Officer 1 1 Paul Dollman NonExecutive 1 1 Derek Carter NonExecutive 1 1 Nathalie Schwarz NonExecutive 1 1 Approved on behalf of the Board by DEREK CARTER Chairman of the Nomination Committee 12 September 2017 Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board it is my pleasure to present the Nomination Committee report for the year ended 30 June 2017 .
DEREK CARTER Chairman of the Nomination Committee Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Nomination Committee Report 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 To reflect the requirements of the remuneration reporting regulations this report is presented in two sections the Annual Report on Remuneration and the Directors Remuneration Policy.
The Annual Report on Remuneration provides details on the amounts earned in respect of the year ended 30 June 2017 and how the Directors Remuneration Policy will be operated for the year commencing 1 July 2017.
The Annual Report on Remuneration is subject to an advisory vote at the next Annual General Meeting due to be held on 2 November 2017.
The Directors Remuneration Policy sets out the forwardlooking remuneration policy.
The Companys first Directors Remuneration Policy was approved at the 2014 AGM with over 99% of votes in favour of it and took effect following the close of that meeting.
In accordance with the applicable legislation the Company is required to seek shareholder approval for a new Directors Remuneration Policy at the 2017 AGM.
During the course of the 201617 financial year the Committee has reviewed the Policy approved in 2014 in the context of the Companys strategy developments in best practice and the forthcoming expiration of the Companys Performance Share Plan.
The Committee strongly believes that the Policy as approved at the 2014 AGM continues effectively to support the Companys strategy.
Accordingly a radical overhaul of the Policy is not proposed including that there are no changes to the overall structure of the remuneration package or the quantum of variable pay but minor changes are proposed as follows z we have formally incorporated within the Policy our shareholding guidelines in accordance with which Executive Directors must retain 50% of shares acquired on the vesting of PSP awards until a holding equal to 100% of base salary has been achieved z reflecting changes in corporate governance we have formally incorporated within the Policy malus provisions on both the annual bonus and PSP awards and z the Policy reflects the proposal to operate a new PSP for awards in respect of the 20182019 financial year and future financial years.
Other minor amendments have been made to the Policy to aid its administration and to reflect changes in practice since the Policy was first approved in 2014.
Review of 2017 As described in the Strategic Report section of this Annual Report Wilmington has performed well across all key financial and operational measures.
The Group has made progress and consequently an annual bonus to Executive Directors of 61.7% of base salary is due for performance against targets set by the Committee for the 2017 financial year.
Further information in relation to the assessment of the annual bonus performance measures is included on page 49.
In addition given the financial performance in the last three years 84.13% of the 2014 PSP has vested based on performance to 30 June 2017.
Outlook for 2018 For the current financial year z An increase of 2.0% in annual salary is being awarded to the Executive Directors for the new financial year in line with base salary increases for the wider employee population. dependent on key financial performance indicators.
There are clear financial targets based on the achievement of adjusted profit return on equity and return on sales.
The Committee is satisfied that these are challenging and for the maximum bonus to be earned will demonstrate significant further improvement in the profit performance of the business z The Committee will continue to monitor the performance conditions for any future PSP awards to ensure that the conditions continue to be appropriate for the Company and the prevailing market and reflect the application of a pay for performance philosophy in the best interests of the Company and shareholders.
Accordingly and following the intention of Anthony Foye to step down from his position as Chief Financial Officer the Committee has decided not to award Anthony Foye any future share awards.
75% consistent with discretion exercised previously by the Committee and following a review of the reward structure.
This change is well within the limit set out in the Directors Remuneration Policy of PSP awards not exceeding 150% of salary.
Approved on behalf of the Board by NATHALIE SCHWARZ Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 12 September 2017 Dear Shareholder On behalf of the Board I am pleased to present the Remuneration report for the period ended 30 June 2017 .
NATHALIE SCHWARZ Chairman of the Remuneration Committee site Stock Code WIL Our Governance
Directors Remuneration Report
Remuneration Committee Chairmans Annual Statement 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Certain details set out on pages 47 to 62 of this report have been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP .
Introduction unaudited information The Committee has an established policy on the remuneration of Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
The key principles are as follows z Remuneration is directly aligned with the performance of the Group and the interests of shareholders.
It is designed to reward motivate incentivise and retain Executives of the highest calibre without paying more than is necessary. performance targets which are reviewed annually.
Targets are calibrated appropriately to ensure that they cannot encourage excessive risk.
Single total figure of remuneration for each Director audited information The tables below report the total remuneration receivable in respect of qualifying services by each Director during the year.
Total salary and fees
Annual bonus
Pensions related benefits
Executive Directors Pedro Ros Anthony Foye  573 NonExecutive Directors Mark Asplin 113     113 Derek Carter 46     46 Nathalie Schwarz 46     46 Paul Dollman 46     46 Total salary and fees
Annual bonus
Pensions related benefits
Executive Directors Anthony M Foye  641 Charles J Brady 56 4  262  322 NonExecutive Directors Mark Asplin 110     110 Terence B Garthwaite 18     18 Derek Carter 45     45 Nathalie Schwarz 45     45 Paul Dollman 30     30 Total salary and fees  the amount of salaryfees received in the year.
Taxable benefits  the taxable value of benefits received in the year i. car allowance and private medical insurance.
Annual bonus  the cash value of the bonus earned in respect of the year.
A description of performance against the objectives which applied for the financial year is provided on page 49.
PSP  the value of performance related incentives vesting in respect of the financial year  further information as to the basis of the calculations is set out below.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Report on Remuneration 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 For the year ended 30 June 2017 z EPS growth in excess of RPI was 10.1% ROE for PSP was 32.3% and the Companys TSR was positioned 61 st out of 149 comparator companies for the three year performance period ending 30 June 2017 and 84.13% of maximum LTIP award will vest these amounts represent the Groups best estimates and are subject to final confirmation from the Committees adviser Aon Hewitt Limited due to be finalised shortly after the finalisation of these financial statements z The value shown for PSP includes the value of dividends that would have accrued on vested shares during the performance period that will subsequently be paid to the participants and z The PSP awards will vest on the third anniversary of the date of grant vesting date the estimated value of the vested shares shown above is based on the three month average share price to 30 June 2017 2.54.
For the year ended 30 June 2016 comparative figures z EPS growth in excess of RPI was 12.6% ROE for PSP was 29.1% and the Companys TSR was positioned 32 nd out of 128 comparator companies for the three year performance period ending 30 June 2016 and 100.0% of maximum LTIP award vested z The value shown for PSP includes the value of dividends that would have accrued on vested shares during the performance period that were subsequently paid to the participants and z The PSP awards vested on 19 September 2016 the third anniversary of the date of grant.
The value of the vested shares shown above is based on the share price on 19 September 2016 of 2.56.
In the 2016 directors remuneration report the value included was an estimated value based on the three month average share price to 30 June 2016 2.54.
Total salary and fees For the year ended 30 June 2017 audited information Total salary and fees are based on the need to retain the skills and knowledge that the Executive and NonExecutive Directors bring to the Company.
Executive Directors salaries increased by 2% in 201617 compared to 201516.
This increase was in line with base salary increases for the wider employee population.
For the year ended 30 June 2018 unaudited information It is intended that the Executive Director salaries will be increased by 2.0% for 201718.
This increase is in line with base salary increases for the wider employee population.
The fees for the NonExecutive Directors are expected to increase by 2500 per annum except for Mark Asplin the NonExecutive Chairman whose fees are expected to increase by 12500 per annum.
These increases reflect the increased workloads and align with those with similar roles across the market.
Annual bonus For the year ended 30 June 2017 audited information Annual bonus payments were based on the Companys performance against targets based on linear ranges of adjusted profit excluding share based payment expense ROE for Annual bonus and ROS set at the start of the year.
In relation to the bonuses payable these were based on the following level of achievement against each of the three metrics z Up to 60% of salary for the adjusted profit measure z Up to 20% of salary for the ROE for Annual bonus measure z Up to 20% of salary for the ROS measure z Linear scales of bonus for each metric were set at the start of the financial year z Adjusted profit is profit before adjusting items impairment of goodwill amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software provision for the Executives bonuses share based payments and after deducting the interest of noncontrolling shareholders in such profits z The profit element of ROE for Annual bonus is based on Adjusted Profit before Tax after adjusting items as described above and z The profit element of ROS is based on Adjusted EBITA excluding share based payment expense.
ROE for PSP  The three year average Adjusted EBITA less impairment divided by the average Equity attributable to the owners of the parent.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 In assessing the 2017 annual bonus outturn the Committee has assessed ROE excluding the oneoff gain of 6.33m relating to the property disposal referred to in note 4.
This is consistent with the decision taken in 2016 to exclude an impairment of CLT 14.6m and Ark 1.0m as a oneoff adjustment in respect of legacy businesses acquired more than 21 and 12 years ago respectively.
The Committee believes that the above approach ensures that the bonus outturn reflects the executive directors contribution to the underlying performance of the business.
The following provides the adjusted profit ROE for Annual Bonus assessed as referred to above and ROS target reference points together with the bonus payouts to the Executive Directors for 201617
Maximum target set
Resulting pay out as a % of base salary Adjusted profit for Annual bonus 20544000 23625000 21660000 21.7% ROE for Annual bonus 25.0% 27.0% 34.1% 20.0% ROS 17.5% 19.5% 19.9% 20.0% Total 61.7% For the year ended 30 June 2018 unaudited remuneration The Committee has agreed that the metrics used to determine the annual bonus for 201718 remain unchanged and the maximum bonus opportunity will remain at 100% of base salary.
The bonus will be subject to stretching targets.
The Committee believes that the targets for the financial measures for the forthcoming financial year are commercially sensitive and that to disclose them may damage the Companys competitive position.
Targets will be published retrospectively in next years Directors Remuneration Report or at such point that the Remuneration Committee considers that the performance targets are no longer commercially sensitive.
PSP
Awards vesting in respect of the year ended 30 June 2017 audited information The PSP awards granted on 19 September 2014 that are due to vest on 19 September 2017 were subject to EPS growth ROE for PSP and relative TSR performance against the FTSE SmallCap over a three year period to 30 June 2017.
The performance conditions for these awards were as shown in the table below Onethird of award  Average annual EPS growth in excess of RPI Percentage of Award Vesting Less than 3% per annum 0.0% 3% per annum 25.0% Between 3% per annum and 9% per annum On a straight line basis between 25.0% and 100.0% 9% per annum or more 100.0% Onethird of award  ROE for PSP Percentage of Award Vesting Less than 25.0% 0.0% 25.0% 25.0% Between 25.0% and 29.0% On a straight line basis between 25.0% and 100.0% 29.0% or above 100.0% Onethird of award  TSR versus FTSE SmallCap Percentage of Award Vesting Below median 0.0% Median 25.0% Between median and upper quartile On a straight line basis between 25.0% and 100.0% Upper quartile or above 100.0% The table below details the Companys performance against these objectives for the three year performance period Element Target Range
Shares vested as a % of maximum EPS Growth 3.0%  9.0% 10.1% 33.33% ROE for PSP 25.0%  29.0% 32.3% 33.33%
Median or above 61 out 149 17.47% Total 84.13% The performance outturn for the TSR is based on all companies data.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Report on Remuneration 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Awards granted during the year In respect of the year ended 30 June 2017 the following PSP awards were granted on 15 September 2016 Name Type of award Number of shares Face value at grant % of award vesting at minimum threshold Pedro Ros PSP 110355 270425 25.0% Anthony Foye PSP 50028 122594 25.0% The face value is based on a price of 245.05 pence being the average share price from the five business days immediately preceding the award being granted on 15 September 2016.
The performance conditions for these awards are the same as the performance conditions detailed in the table above.
The number of shares awarded represents 75% of Pedro Ros salary and 50% of Anthony Foyes salary.
The Committee determined that all participants including Executives will be required to hold no less than 50% of any vested shares net of taxes for a minimum of two years.
For the year ended 30 June 2018 unaudited remuneration The Committee will continue to monitor the performance conditions for any future PSP awards to ensure that the conditions continue to be appropriate for the Company and the prevailing market and reflect the application of a pay for performance philosophy in the best interests of the Company and shareholders.
Accordingly and following the intention of Anthony Foye to step down from his position as Chief Financial Officer the Committee has decided not to award Anthony Foye any future share awards.
PSP awards for Pedro Ros in 201718 will be made on a similar basis to the 201617 awards except that he will receive the equivalent of 100% of his salary 201617 75% consistent with discretion exercised previously by the Committee and following a review of the reward structure.
This change is well within the limit set out in the Directors Remuneration Policy of PSP awards not exceeding 150% of salary.
Shareholding guidelines and statement of Directors share awards audited information Shareholding guidelines for Executives have been adopted linked to the outturn from the PSP .
At the time Awards vest under the PSP or any other Executive plan established in the future Executives will be expected to retain no fewer than 50% of vested shares net of taxes until such time as a total personal shareholding equivalent to 100% of pretax base salary has been achieved.
This requirement will not apply to participants to the scheme other than the Executives.
It should be noted that at 30 June 2017 Anthony Foye held shares worth significantly more than the shareholding guideline level.
As at 30 June 2017 Pedro Ros held approximately the equivalent of 26.0% of his pretax base salary in shares which has been acquired since his appointment in July 2014.
In addition to his own acquisition of shares 50% of any vested PSP shares net of tax will be retained in line with the policy above.
The holdings of the Directors and their families as at 30 June 2017 are as follows
NonBeneficial
At 1 July or date of appointment
At 30 June At 30 June
Pedro Ros Beneficial 22425 17575 40000 0.05% Anthony M Foye Beneficial 697532 69273 766805 0.88% Mark Asplin Beneficial 41390  41390 0.05% Derek Carter Beneficial 10000  10000 0.01% Paul Dollman Beneficial  10000 10000 0.01% No changes have occurred between the shareholdings as described above and the date of sign off of this report.
As at 30 June 2017 the Companys share price was 235.00p and its highest and lowest share prices during the year ended 30 June 2017 were 287.75p and 230.25p respectively.
Interests are shown as a percentage of shares in issue at 30 June 2017.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Executive Directors interests under share schemes audited information Awards held under the PSP by each person who was a Director at 30 June 2017 are as follows Award date Number of shares at 1 July Granted during the year Lapsed during the year
Number of shares at 30 June Date which awards vest Pedro Ros 19 Sept 2014 79542    79542 19 Sept 2017 Pedro Ros 16 Sept 2015 100136    100136 16 Sept 2018 Pedro Ros 15 Sept 2016  110355   110355 15 Sept 2019 Anthony Foye 19 Sept 2013 63722   63722  19 Sept 2016 Anthony Foye 19 Sept 2014 54089    54089 19 Sept 2017 Anthony Foye 16 Sept 2015 45395    45395 16 Sept 2018 Anthony Foye 15 Sept 2016  50028   50028 15 Sept 2019 unvested and subject to performance conditions Dilution unaudited information Under the rules of the PSP  awards under the unvested Companys discretionary schemes which may be satisfied by a new issue of shares must not exceed 5.0% of the Companys issued share capital in any rolling ten year period and the total of all awards satisfied via new issue shares under all plans both discretionary and allemployee over a ten year period must not exceed 10.0% of the Companys issued share capital in any rolling ten year period.
At 30 June 2017 the headroom under the Companys 5.0% and 10.0% limits was 2906031 and 4000840 shares respectively out of an issued share capital of 87247974 shares.
Pensions related benefits For the year ended 30 June 2017 audited information The Company made pension contributions totalling 36005 2016 35299 on behalf of Pedro Ros reflective of 10% of his annual salary.
Anthony Foye did not participate in a contribution scheme.
For the year ending 30 June 2018 unaudited The Company expects to continue making pension contributions on behalf of Pedro Ros.
These contributions are expected to remain at 10% of his annual salary.
It is expected that the Anthony Foye will continue to not participate in a contribution scheme.
Performance graph and table unaudited information The following graph shows for the year ended 30 June 2017 and for each of the previous seven years the total shareholder return calculated in accordance with the Large and Mediumsized Company and Groups Accounts and Reports Regulations 2008 as amended on a holding of the Companys ordinary shares compared with a hypothetical holding of shares of the same kind and number as those by reference to which the FTSE All  Share Media Index and the FTSE Small Cap Index are calculated.
These indices have been chosen as the appropriate comparators because it is these indices within which the Companys shares are quoted.
5tel25telJun09 Dec09 Jun10 Dec10 Jun11 Dec11 Jun12 Dec12 Jun13 Dec13 Jun14 Dec14 Jun15 Dec15 Jun16 Dec16 Jun17 Total Shareholder Return Rebased
Group
FTSE
SmallCap
FTSE
All Share
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Report on Remuneration 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Chief Executive Officer single figure unaudited information
Annual Bonus as a % of maximum opportunity % PSP as a % of maximum number of shares % 201617 Pedro Ros 838 61.7% 84.13% 201516 Pedro Ros 677 73.1% 201415 Pedro Ros 671 78.5% 201314 Charles J Brady 943 88.6% 91.84% 201213 Charles J Brady 935 80.0% 55.00% 201112 Charles J Brady 580 55.2% 201011 Charles J Brady 535 46.3% 200910 Charles J Brady 393 2.8% Percentage change in remuneration of Chief Executive Officer and employees unaudited information The percentage change in salary taxable benefits and annual bonus between 201516 and 201617 for the Chief Executive Officer and for all employees in the Group was
Taxable benefits
Chief Executive Officer 2.0% 10.0% 13.9% Employee population 2.0% 0.0% 5.0% Relative importance of spend on pay unaudited information The difference in actual expenditure between 201516 and 201617 on remuneration for all employees in comparison to distributions to shareholders by way of dividend are set out in the table below
Expenditure on remuneration for all employees 38200 43779 12.7% Distributions to shareholders by way of a dividend 6782 7150 5.4% Details of the Remuneration Committee advisers to the Committee and their fees unaudited information Details of the Directors who were members of the Committee during the year are disclosed on pages 34 and 35.
The Committee has also received assistance from the Chief Executive Officer with respect to the remuneration of the other Executive Director and on the Companys remuneration policy more generally.
He is not in attendance when his own remuneration is discussed.
During the year the Committee received independent advice from the following external consultants Committees advisors Aon Hewitt Limited provided advice to the Committee on market practice governance and performance analysis.
Deloitte LLP provided advice to the Committee on executive remuneration including annual bonus performance measures and the drafting of the proposed new PSP for awards in respect of future years and the preparation of the
Directors Remuneration Report.
Deloitte LLP was appointed by the Committee in 2013 the Group also engages Deloitte LLP to provide tax advisory services.
Aon
Hewitt Limited was appointed by the Committee in previous years.
The Committee took into account the Remuneration Consultants Groups Code of Conduct when reviewing the appointment of Aon Hewitt Limited and Deloitte LLP .
The Committee is satisfied that all advice received was objective and independent.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Details of the attendance of the Committee are set out in the table below Committee member Member since
Meetings attended
Meetings eligible to attend Nathalie Schwarz Committee chairman December 2011 3 3 Derek Carter December 2011 3 3 Mark Asplin April 2005 3 3 Paul Dollman September 2015 3 3 Statement of voting at general meeting unaudited information At the AGM held on 3 November 2016 the Annual Report on Remuneration received the following votes from shareholders Annual Report on Remuneration Total number of votes % of votes cast For 66495872 99.09% Against 608215 0.91% Total votes cast for and against 67104087 Votes withheld Total votes including withheld votes 67104087 At the AGM held on 6 November 2014 the Directors Remuneration Policy received the following votes from shareholders Directors Remuneration Policy Total number of votes % of votes cast For 69286584 99.99% Against 5340 0.01% Total votes cast for and against 69291924 Votes withheld 2000 Total votes including withheld votes 69293924 Directors service agreements and letters of appointment The existing executive Directors contracts are on a rolling basis and may be terminated on 12 months notice by the Company or the
All NonExecutive Directors have initial fixed term agreements with the Company of no more than three years.
Details of the Directors service contracts and notice periods are set out below Executive Directors
Pedro Ros July 2014 12 months Anthony Foye Sept 2012 12 months NonExecutive Directors Date of initial appointment Notice period Mark Asplin Apr 2005 6 months Derek Carter Dec 2011 3 months Nathalie Schwarz Dec 2011 3 months Paul Dollman Sept 2015 3 months Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Annual Report on Remuneration 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The Committee strongly believes that the companys previous policy approved at the 2014 AGM continues effectively to support the Companys strategy.
Accordingly a radical overhaul of the policy is not proposed including that there are no changes to the overall structure of the remuneration package or the quantum of variable pay but minor changes are proposed as described in the Remuneration Committee Chairmans statement on page 47.
The table below sets out the Companys Directors remuneration policy which subject to shareholder approval at the 2017 Annual General Meeting shall take binding effect from the close of that meeting.
Base Salary Purpose and link to strategy Core element of fixed remuneration set at a market competitive level to reflect the individuals role experience and performance.
Operation The Committee ordinarily reviews base salaries annually taking into account z Performance of the Group and pay conditions elsewhere in the workforce z Performance of the individual z Changes in position or responsibility and z Market competitiveness.
The Committee periodically takes external advice to benchmark salaries by reference to Executives with similar positions in comparator organisations.
In considering relevant benchmarking the Committee is also aware of the risk of an upward pay ratchet through placing undue emphasis on comparator pay surveys.
Base salary is the only pensionable element of remuneration.
Opportunity While there is no maximum salary increases will normally be in line with the typical level of salary increase awarded in percentage of salary terms to other employees in the Group.
Salary increases above this level may be awarded in certain circumstances such as z where an Executive Director has been promoted or has had a change in scope or responsibility z a new Executive Director being moved to market positioning over time z where there has been a significant change in market practice z where there has been a significant change in the size andor complexity of the business.
Such increases may be implemented over such time period as the Committee deems appropriate.
Performance metric Although base salary is not subject to any formal performance condition the individuals performance in role and overall Group performance is taken into account in determining any salary increase.
Pension
Purpose and link to strategy Rewards sustained contribution and commitment to the Group.
Provides market competitive postemployment benefits.
Operation Executive Directors are eligible to participate in the defined contribution pension scheme.
The Committee has the discretion to pay cash supplements in lieu some or all pension contributions in appropriate circumstances.
Executive Directors are entitled to elect to sacrifice part of their salary and bonus into a personal pension scheme.
Opportunity The Company contributes an amount equal to 10% of salary to a pension scheme on behalf of the Executive Directors andor as a salary supplement in lieu of pension contributions where appropriate.
Performance metric Not applicable.
Our Governance
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Taxable benefits Purpose and link to strategy Fixed element of remuneration set at a market competitive level with the aim to recruit motivate and retain Directors of the calibre required.
Operation Executive Directors receive benefits in line with market practice and principally include a fully expensed car or car allowance and private medical cover for the Executive Directors and his or her family and health assessment and permanent health insurance.
Other benefits may be provided based on individual circumstances and response to market pressures.
Opportunity Whilst the Committee has not set an absolute maximum on the level of benefits Executive Directors may receive the value of the benefit is set at a level which the Committee considers to be appropriately positioned taking into account relevant market levels based on the nature and location of the role and individual circumstances.
Performance metric Not applicable.
Annual Bonus Purpose and link to strategy Rewards the achievement of financial and strategic targets aligned with the Group strategy.
Operation Targets are reviewed annually and any payout is determined by the Committee after the yearend based on targets set for the financial period.
The Committee has discretion to amend the bonus outturn if any formulaic output does not reflect its assessment of overall business performance.
Any bonus opportunity may be reduced or cancelled before payment i. or gross misconduct on the part of the Executive Director.
The bonus plan rules contain provisions such that appropriate means of redress may be sought i. later proves to have been materially misstated.
There is no scope to make discretionary bonus payments outside of the scope of the bonus plan.
Opportunity The maximum bonus is 100% of base salary.
Performance metric Stretching targets are set each year reflecting the business priorities which underpin Group strategy and align to key performance indicators.
The annual bonus is determined based on performance against a mix of targets.
The majority will be determined by financial measures which may include one or more of adjusted profit return on equity ROE and Return on Sale ROS targets.
Vesting of financial metrics will apply on a sliding scale up to 100% of maximum potential for this element of the bonus based on the satisfaction of performance conditions.
Vesting of nonfinancial or individual metrics where applicable will apply on a scale between 0% and 100% based on the Committees assessment of the extent to which non financial or individual performance metrics has been met.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Performance share plan PSP Purpose and link to strategy Incentivises Executive Directors to achieve returns for shareholders over a longer timeframe.
Operation Awards in respect of the 201718 financial year will be made under the PSP approved in 2007.
Awards in respect of future financial years are proposed to be made under the PSP for which approval will be sought at the 2017 AGM.
Executive Directors may receive awards in the form of conditional awards of shares options to acquire shares for nil or nominal cost or as cash settled equivalents.
Share awards may be settled in cash at the election of the Committee.
Vesting is dependent on the achievement of performance conditions normally over a period of three financial years.
The Committee will determine performance conditions prior to each award with no provision to retest.
At any time prior to its vesting an award may be reduced or cancelled in the event of a material misstatement of results serious reputational damage to the Company or gross misconduct on the part of the Executive Director.
The Committee may operate claw back if at any time before the later of i the second anniversary of the vesting of an award and ii the publication of the Companys second set of audited financial accounts following such vesting there has been a material misstatement of the Companys financial accounts an error occurred when assessing the number of shares over which a PSP award vests or the participant has been guilty of gross misconduct.
In these circumstances there may be a proportionate reduction of future bonuses andor share awards made under the PSP to reflect the overpayment of shares or the participant may be required to repay the overpaid amounts from personal funds.
An additional payment in the form of cash or shares may be made in respect of shares which vest under the PSP to reflect the value of dividends which would have been paid on those shares up to the date of vesting.
The Committee shall determine the basis on which the value of such dividends shall be calculated and may assume the reinvestment of dividends in the Companys shares on a cumulative basis.
Opportunity The maximum award limit under the PSP scheme will be 150% of base salary.
Performance metric The awards under the PSP will be based on a mix of key longer term metrics for the Group.
These will be metrics which the Committee considers to be the most appropriate measures of longer term performance and could include TSR EPS and ROE.
The threshold payout level under the PSP is 25% of the maximum award.
There will usually be straight line vesting between threshold and maximum performance.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Operation of the PSP The Committee may amend the terms of awards under the PSP in accordance with the PSP rules in the event of a variation of the Companys share capital demerger special dividend or other relevant event.
The Committee may operate the PSP including that it may amend the rules of the PSP and awards granted under the PSP in accordance with the PSPs rules as approved by shareholders.
Explanation of performance metrics chosen Performance measures for the annual bonus and PSP are reviewed annually to ensure they continue to reflect the business strategy and remain sufficiently stretching.
The Committee considers that adjusted profit Return on Equity ROE and Return on Sale ROS targets are closely aligned to the Groups key performance metrics and in application to the annual bonus alone provide a balanced measure of performance that encourages sustainable growth.
The application of TSR EPS and ROE targets to the PSP align managements objectives with those of shareholders for the following reasons z The EPS target will reward significant and sustained increase in earnings that would be expected to flow through into shareholder value.
For the participants this will also deliver a strong line of sight as it will be straightforward to evaluate and communicate z The ROE performance condition will reward Executives for delivery of returns to shareholders but adding a further discipline of ensuring the most efficient use of shareholders funds and z The TSR performance condition will provide a balance to the financial performance conditions by rewarding relative share price performance against the companies comprising the FTSE Small Cap Index and ensures that a share price based discipline in the package in the absence of options is retained.
This will ensure that management can be rewarded for delivering superior market returns.
The Committee considers that this blend of measures provides a link to the Companys strategy which is to create a sustained improvement in underlying performance and maximise returns to shareholders.
When setting the performance targets the Committee will take into account a number of different reference points which may include the Companys business plans and strategy and market environment.
Full vesting will only occur for what the Committee considers to be stretching performance.
The Committee may vary any performance measure if an event occurs which causes it to determine that it would be appropriate to vary the measure provided that any such variation is fair and reasonable and in the opinion of the Committee the altered performance measure would be not materially less difficult to satisfy than the unaltered performance measure would have been but for the event in question.
If the Committee were to make such a variation a full explanation would be given in the next Directors
Remuneration Report.
Shareholding guidelines To further align the interests of Executive Directors with those of shareholders we have adopted formal shareholding guidelines in accordance with which Executive Directors must retain 50% of the after tax shares they acquire on the vesting of PSP awards until such time as a total personal shareholding equal to 100% of base salary has been achieved.
Illustration of the application of the remuneration policy The following charts set out for each of the Executive Directors an illustration of the application for 201718 of the remuneration policy set out above.
The charts show the split of remuneration between fixed pay and variable pay in the Policy for minimum remuneration receivable  salary fees taxable benefits and pension the remuneration receivable if the Director was in respect of any performance measures or targets performing in line with the Companys expectation and maximum remuneration receivable not allowing for any share price appreciation.
Maximum performance In line with expectations
Fixed Pay Annual Bonus
Total remuneration 000 tel300
In line with expectations
Fixed Pay Annual Bonus Total remuneration 000 Pedro Ros Anthony M Foye Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The Committee believes an appropriate proportion of the Executive Directors remuneration links reward to corporate and individual performance and is aligned to the Groups strategic priorities.
In illustrating the potential reward the following assumptions have been made Basic Performance In line with expectations Maximum performance Fixed pay Based on fixed pay effective as at 1 July 2017 Annual bonus No bonus 50% of salary 100% of salary PSP  Pedro Ros No PSP vesting 33% of the PSP awards i.
100% of salary PSP  Anthony Foye NA as Anthony Foye will not receive any PSP awards in 201718 NonExecutive Directors Purpose and link to strategy Operation Opportunity Performance metrics
Director Fees Sole element of
Director remuneration set at a level that reflects market conditions and is sufficient to attract individuals with appropriate knowledge and experience.
Fees are reviewed periodically and amended to reflect any change in responsibilities and time commitments.
Where appropriate external advice is taken on setting market competitive fees.
The NonExecutive Directors do not participate in any of the Groups share incentive plans nor do they receive any benefits or pension contributions.
NonExecutive Directors may be eligible to receive benefits such as the use of secretarial support travel costs or other benefits that may be appropriate.
Fees are based on the time commitment and responsibilities of the role.
Fees are subject to an overall cap as set out in the Companys Articles of
Not applicable Differences in policy from the wider employee population The Company values its wider workforce and aims to provide a remuneration package that is market competitive complies with any statutory requirements and is applied fairly and equitably across the wider employee population.
Where remuneration is not determined by statutory regulation the Company operates the same core principles as it does for Executive Directors namely z We remunerate people in a manner that allows for stability of the business and the opportunity for sustainable long term growth and z We seek to remunerate fairly and consistently for each role with due regard to the market place internal consistency and the Companys ability to pay.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Recruitment remuneration policy The objective of this policy is to allow the Committee to offer remuneration packages which facilitate the recruitment of individuals of sufficient calibre to lead the business and effectively execute the strategy for shareholders.
When appointing a new Executive Director the Committee seeks to ensure that arrangements are in the best interests of the Company and not to pay more than is appropriate.
The Committee will take into consideration all relevant factors including the calibre of the individual the candidates existing remuneration package and the specific circumstances of the individual including the jurisdiction from which the candidate was recruited.
When hiring a new Executive Director the Committee will typically align the remuneration package with the above Policy.
The
Committee may include other elements of pay which it considers are appropriate however this discretion is capped and is subject to the principles and the limits referred to below. z Base salary will be set at a level appropriate to the role and the experience of the Director being appointed.
This may include agreement on future increases up to a market rate in line with increased experience andor responsibilities subject to good performance where it is considered appropriate. z The Committee will not offer nonperformance related incentive payments for example a guaranteed signon bonus. award for that year as there would not be sufficient time to assess performance.
Subject to the limit on variable remuneration set out below the quantum in respect of the months employed during the year may be transferred to the subsequent year so that reward is provided on a fair and appropriate basis and if the Director will be required to relocate in order to take up the position it is the Companys policy to allow reasonable relocation travel and subsistence payments.
Any such payments will be at the discretion of the Committee. subject to the rules of the PSP  if the Committee determines that the circumstances of the recruitment merit such alteration.
The rationale will be clearly explained in the Directors Remuneration Report. salary.
The Committee may make payments or awards in respect of hiring an employee to buy out remuneration arrangements forfeited on leaving a previous employer.
In doing so the Committee will take account of relevant factors including any performance conditions attached to the forfeited arrangements and the time over which they would have vested.
The Committee will generally seek to structure buy out awards or payments on a comparable basis to the remuneration arrangements forfeited.
Any such payments or awards are excluded from the maximum level of variable remuneration referred to above.
Where considered appropriate such special recruitment awards will be liable to forfeiture or claw back on early departure.
Any share awards referred to in this section will be granted as far as possible under the Companys existing share plans.
If necessary and subject to the limits referred to above recruitment awards may be granted outside of these plans as permitted under the Listing Rules which allow for the grant of awards to facilitate in unusual circumstances the recruitment of an Executive Director.
Where a position is filled internally any ongoing remuneration obligations or outstanding variable pay elements shall be allowed to continue in accordance with their terms.
Fees payable to a newly appointed Chairman or NonExecutive Director will be in line with the policy in place at the time of appointment.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Payments for loss of office The Company has adopted the following policy on Executives service contracts Notice period 12 months notice period or less shall apply.
Termination payments and mitigation Termination payments are limited to payment of 12 months salary contractual pension amounts and benefits.
The policy is that as is considered appropriate at the time the departing Director may work or be placed on garden leave for all or part of his notice period or receive a payment in lieu of notice in accordance with the service agreement.
The Committee will consider mitigation to reduce the termination payment to a leaving Director when appropriate to do so having regard to the circumstances.
Annual bonus The decision whether or not to award a bonus in full or in part will be dependent upon a number of factors including the circumstances of their departure and their contribution to the business during the bonus period in question.
Any bonus payment would typically be prorated for time in service to termination and paid at the usual time although the Committee retains discretion to pay the bonus earlier in appropriate circumstances.
PSP Unvested awards held by the Director under the companys PSP will lapse or vest in accordance with the rules of the plan which have been approved by shareholders.
In summary the plan rules provide that awards can vest if employment ends by reason of redundancy retirement ill health or disability death sale of the Directors employer out of the Group or any other reason determined by the Committee.
The Committee shall determine whether the award will vest at cessation or the normal vesting date.
In either case the extent of vesting will be determined by the Committee taking into account the satisfaction of the relevant performance conditions and unless the Committee determines otherwise applying a prorate reduction based on the period from the date of grant to the date of cessation relative to a three year period.
Change of control Awards under the PSP will generally vest early on a takeover or other relevant corporate event.
The
Committee will determine the level of vesting taking into account the satisfaction of the relevant performance conditions and unless the Committee determines otherwise a prorate reduction based on the period from the date of grant to the date of the relevant event relative to a three year period.
Other payments In appropriate circumstances payments may also be made in respect of accrued holiday outplacement and legal fees.
Where a buyout or other award is made outside the Companys PSP in connection with the recruitment of an Executive Director as permitted under the Listing Rules the leaver provisions would be determined at the time of the award.
The Committee reserves the right to make additional exit payments where such payments are made in good faith in discharge of an existing legal obligation or by way of damages for breach of such an obligation or by way of settlement or compromise of any claim arising in connection with the termination of a Directors office or employment.
Our Governance 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 NonExecutive Directors NonExecutive Directors have letters of appointment with the notice periods referred to below with compensation limited to fees for the duration of the notice period.
Legacy matters The Committee reserves the right to make any remuneration payment or payment for loss of office including exercising discretions in respect of any such payment notwithstanding that it is not in line with the Policy set out above where the terms of the payment were agreed z before the Policy came into effect provided that in the case of any payments agreed on or after 6 November 2014 they are in line with the Policy approved at the Companys 2014 AGM or z at a time when the relevant individual was not a director of the Company and in the opinion of the Committee the payment was not in consideration of the individual becoming a director of the Company.
For these purposes payment includes the satisfaction of any award of variable remuneration and in relation to an award over shares the terms of the payment are agreed when the award is granted.
Statement of consideration of employment conditions elsewhere in the Company The Committee generally considers pay and employment conditions elsewhere in the Company when considering the Executive Directors remuneration.
When considering base salary increases the Committee reviews overall levels of base pay increases offered to other employees.
Employees are not actively consulted on Directors remuneration.
Nonexecutive appointments at other companies The Committees policy is that Executive Directors may by agreement with the Board serve as Nonexecutives of other companies and retain any fees payable for their services.
Statement of consideration of shareholder views The Company is committed to open and transparent dialogue with shareholders and welcomes feedback on Executive and Non executive Directors remuneration.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Directors Remuneration Report
Directors Remuneration Policy 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 The directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the directors have prepared the group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and parent company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and parent company and of the profit or loss of the Group and parent company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are required to z select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently z state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the group financial statements and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements z make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and z prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and parent company will continue in business.
The directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and parent company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements and the Directors Remuneration Report comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
The directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and parent company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the parent companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The directors consider that the annual report and accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and parent companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the directors whose names and functions are listed on pages 34 and 35 confirm that to the best of their knowledge z the parent company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the company z the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and profit of the Group and z the Directors Report includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and parent company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
In the case of each director in office at the date the Directors Report is approved z so far as the director is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Group and parent companys auditors are unaware and z they have taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Group and parent companys auditors are aware of that information.
Approved on behalf of the board by ANTHONY FOYE Chief Financial Officer 12 September 2017 site Stock Code WIL Our Governance Statement of Directors Responsibilities 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Report on the financial statements
In our opinion Wilmington plcs group financial statements and parent company financial statements the financial statements z give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 30 June 2017 and of the groups profit and the groups and the parent companys cash flows for the year then ended z have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and z have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report and Financial Statements the Annual Report which comprise the group and parent company Balance Sheets as at 30 June 2017 the Consolidated Income Statement and Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income the group and parent company Cash Flow Statements and the group and parent company Statements of Changes in Equity for the year then ended and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Our opinion is consistent with our reporting to the Audit
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under ISAs UK are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed public interest entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
To the best of our knowledge and belief we declare that non audit services prohibited by the FRCs Ethical Standard were not provided to the group or the parent company.
Other than those disclosed in note 4 to the financial statements we have provided no nonaudit services to the group or the parent company in the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017.
Our audit approach  Overview z 1.1 million 2016 1.0 million  Group financial statements. z Based on 5% of Group adjusted profit before tax. statements. z Based on circa 1% of total assets.
Scope z Each business segment comprises a number of legal entities or components.
PwC UK performed audits of complete information for each of the Groups significant components with specified and analytical procedures being performed over remaining material and immaterial financial statement line items respectively.
Adjusted Profit before Tax and 80% of Group revenue.
Key audit matters z Goodwill and intangible assets impairment assessment z Revenue recognition Group.
Group.
The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Independent Auditors Report
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Goodwill and intangible assets impairment assessment Group Refer to pages 44 and 45 Audit Committee Report page 76 Critical accounting judgements estimates and assumptions and pages 94 to 96 notes 12 and 13.
The goodwill and intangible assets excluding computer software balance of 115 million allocated across multiple cashgenerating units CGUs are subject to an annual impairment review.
Directors used a Value in Use model to compute the present value of forecast future cash flows for each CGU which was then compared to the carrying value of the net assets of each CGU including Goodwill and Intangible assets to determine if there was an impairment.
These assessments involve significant judgement about the future results of the business as well as determining the discount and long term growth rates applied to future cash flow forecasts.
Market conditions have remained challenging in the Law for lawyers subdivision Ark and CLT CGUs resulting from reduced advertising revenue and demand for face to face training strong price competition and changes to the legal professions Continual Professional Development CPD rules.
As announced in the 31 December 2016 Interim statement and updates disclosed in this Annual Report Management are in the processes of exiting from substantial parts of the Ark business within this segment.
Managements impairment assessment showed a 2.3 million impairment of Goodwill in the Ark CGU which has been recognised in the financial statements.
Following a material impairment recorded in the 2016 Annual report in respect of the CLT CGU Management also determined that headroom in this business was sensitive to movements in the key assumptions.
Further as recorded in the 2015 and 2016 Annual report the Compliance Week CGU continues to remain sensitive to changes in key assumptions.
In light of the above we focused on the Ark CLT and the Compliance Week CGUs and the judgements applied by
We also focused on the related disclosures and checked that appropriate sensitivity analysis arising from reasonably possible changes to the models key assumptions was provided in the financial statements to draw attention to the significant areas of judgement.
We evaluated the Directors future cash flow projections for all relevant CGUs and the process by which they were drawn up including comparing them to the latest Board approved budgets and forecasts and tested the underlying calculations in the model.
We found no material misstatements in the model calculations and found the cashflow projections to be consistent with the approved budgets.
For the Directors key assumptions z we compared the growth rates in the forecasts to historical results and economic forecasts and z we assessed the discount rate by comparing the cost of capital for the Group with comparable organisations as well as using our own experts.
We found the Directors assumptions to be in line with our expectations.
We performed sensitivity analysis around the key drivers of the cash flow projections including assumed profits short and longer term growth rates and discount rates.
In performing these sensitivities we considered the level of historical budgeting inaccuracies and how the assumptions compared to the actual values achieved in prior years.
Having ascertained the extent of change in those assumptions that would be required for the goodwill or intangible assets to be impaired we considered the likelihood of such a movement in those key assumptions arising.
We determined that the sensitivities highlighted by Management in note 12 regarding the related assumptions in relation to the CLT and Compliance Week CGUs appropriately draw attention to the significant areas of judgement.
As the carrying value of the Ark CGUs intangible assets was fully impaired down there are no further sensitivities to be disclosed.
Financial Statements 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Revenue recognition Group Refer to pages 44 and 45 Audit Committee Report pages 76 to 83 note 1 Statement of accounting policies and page 86 note 3.
We focused on this area because the timing of revenue recognition and its presentation in the Income Statement has inherent complexities for Wilmington some of which are industry related in particular z Significant or oneoff contracts entered into near the year end which could contain multiple elements such as the sale of publications accompanied by training or for which revenue should be spread over the term of the contract rather than recognised immediately and z Subscription revenues are partly managed in electronic worksheets andor other legacy customer management systems meaning that there is a higher risk of error or manipulation of the calculation of deferred revenue.
For revenue transactions close to the year end we tested that the revenue was recognised in the appropriate period.
We selected a sample of transactions including larger transactions near the year end and agreed the details of these transactions to underlying contractual information or other supporting documents which demonstrated when obligations had been fulfilled by the parties to the transaction.
No material exceptions were noted from our testing.
We also tested a sample of deferred revenue worksheets and revenue transactions to check that the amount of deferred revenue was accurately calculated and appropriately recognised.
This involved agreeing revenue to contractual information as well as supporting calculations.
No material exceptions were noted from our testing.
Further as part of our other evidence obtained over the revenue recognised during the year we also tested journal entries posted to revenue accounts to identify unusual or irregular items.
In order to identify unexpected transaction flows we also used computer assisted auditing techniques on the accounting records held within the Groups principal accounting system.
Our work did not identify any items that could not be substantiated.
Acquisition Accounting for Health Services Journal HSJ Group Refer to pages 44 and 45 Audit Committee Report and page 93 note 11.
During the year the Group acquired the trade and certain of assets and liabilities of HSJ for a consideration of 16.9 million.
Accounting for the HSJ acquisition required Management to separately identify and fair value the acquired assets and liabilities including intangible assets and goodwill.
Management identified 7.7 million of intangible assets in respect of HSJs customer relationships and brand.
The valuation of intangibles can be a particularly subjective and judgemental process as it requires Management assumptions including acquisition specific risk adjusted discount rates customer attrition and growth rates as well as notional royalty rates used to value brands.
We also focused on the related disclosures made by Management for consistency with applicable accounting standards.
We assessed the completeness and value of intangible assets identified by Management against our own expectations formed from review of the reports prepared by Management during the acquisition and disclosures surrounding the rationale for the transaction.
Further we assessed the analysis prepared by Management from these reports utilising our inhouse expertise in order to evaluate the purchase price allocation.
In doing so we performed the following z we compared assumptions made on renewal rates with historical patterns in the business to verify that assumptions were reasonable and we also tested these historical patterns z we compared the ratio of goodwill to other separately identified intangibles arising in the acquisition against information publicly available from transactions in related markets z we challenged Management on the completeness of separately identified intangibles and whether these existed in other areas of the business not included in the determined fair value and z we sensitised the key inputs and assumptions used by Management to ascertain the extent of change that would be required for the fair value to be materially misstated.
We discussed the results of this analysis with Management and the Audit Committee and ensured appropriate disclosure was included within the annual report which describes the nature of the arising goodwill.
Based on the work performed in this area we have determined that the relevant material intangible assets and goodwill had been identified and valued appropriately.
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Independent Auditors Report
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the group and the parent company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which they operate.
The Group is structured into three business segments being Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare.
The Group financial statements are a consolidation of reporting units that make up the three business segments spread across four geographic regions being the United Kingdom Europe excluding the UK North America and the Rest of the World and the centralised functions.
In establishing the overall approach to the Group audit we determined the type of work that needed to be performed at the reporting units by us as the Group engagement team.
Each business segment comprises a number of legal entities or components.
PwC UK performed audits of complete information for each of the Groups significant components with specified and analytical procedures being performed over remaining material and immaterial financial statement line items respectively.
The full scope reporting units and group functions we conducted our work at accounted for 87% of the Group Adjusted Profit before Tax and 80% of Group revenue.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Group financial statements Parent company financial statements Overall materiality 1.1 million 2016 1.0 million.
0.9 million 2016 0.9 million.
How we determined it 5% of Group adjusted profit before tax.
Circa 1% of total gross assets reduced to a level that is below to our group materiality.
Rationale for benchmark applied In arriving at this judgement we have had regard to the adjusted profit before tax because in our view this represents the most appropriate measure of underlying performance.
As the parent company does not have trading activities in our view a balance sheet benchmark represents the most appropriate measure.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 0.1 million and 0.9 million.
Certain components were audited to a local statutory audit materiality that was also less than our overall group materiality.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 50000 Group audit 2016 50000 and 45000 Parent company audit 2016 45000 as well as misstatements below those amounts that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Going concern In accordance with ISAs UK we report as follows Reporting obligation Outcome We are required to report if we have anything material to add or draw attention to in respect of the directors statement in the financial statements about whether the directors considered it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements and the directors identification of any material uncertainties to the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern over a period of at least twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
We have nothing material to add or to draw attention to.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups and parent companys ability to continue as a going concern.
We are required to report if the directors statement relating to Going Concern in accordance with Listing Rule 9.8.6R3 is materially inconsistent with our knowledge obtained in the audit.
We have nothing to report.
Financial Statements 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report and Financial Statements other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit the Companies Act 2006 CA06 ISAs UK and the Listing Rules of the Financial Conduct Authority FCA require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below required by ISAs UK unless otherwise stated.
Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 June 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
CA06
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
CA06
The directors assessment of the prospects of the group and of the principal risks that would threaten the solvency or liquidity of the group We have nothing material to add or draw attention to regarding z The directors confirmation on pages 25 to 33 of the Annual Report that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group including those that would threaten its business model future performance solvency or liquidity. and explain how they are being managed or mitigated. or assumptions.
We have nothing to report having performed a review of the directors statement that they have carried out a robust assessment of the principal risks facing the group and statement in relation to the longerterm viability of the group.
Our review was substantially less in scope than an audit and only consisted of making inquiries and considering the directors process supporting their statements checking that the statements are in alignment with the relevant provisions of the UK Corporate Governance Code the Code and considering whether the statements are consistent with the knowledge and understanding of the group and parent company and their environment obtained in the course of the audit.
Listing Rules Other Code Provisions We have nothing to report in respect of our responsibility to report when z The statement given by the directors on page 63 that they consider the Annual Report taken as a whole to be fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for the members to assess the groups and parent companys position and performance business model and strategy is materially inconsistent with our knowledge of the group and parent company obtained in the course of performing our audit. address matters communicated by us to the Audit Committee. under the Listing Rules for review by the auditors.
Directors Remuneration In our opinion the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited has been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006.
CA06
Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
Independent Auditors Report
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors Responsibilities set out on page 63 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the parent companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the parent company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the parent companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion z we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or z adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or z certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or z the parent company financial statements and the part of the Directors Remuneration Report to be audited are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Appointment
Following the recommendation of the audit committee we were appointed by the members on 30 June 2009 to audit the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2009 and subsequent financial periods.
The period of total uninterrupted engagement is 9 years covering the years ended 30 June 2009 to 30 June 2017.
DAVID SNELL Senior Statutory Auditor 12 September 2017 For and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors London site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended 30 June 2017
June 2017 June 2016 Continuing operations Revenue 3 120329 105724 Operating expenses before amortisation of intangibles excluding computer software impairment of goodwill and intangible assets and adjusting items 96977 83682 Amortisation of intangibles excluding computer software 4b 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 4b 2366 15659 Adjusting items 4b 3468 Operating expenses 5 108839 107238 Other income  gain on sale of leasehold property 4c 6333 Operating profitloss 17823 1514 Finance costs before adjusting items 1961 1695 Adjusting items Finance costs 6 1961 1920 Profitloss before tax 15862 3434 Taxation 7 2988 2841 Profitloss for the year 12874 6275 Attributable to Owners of the parent 12836 6418 Noncontrolling interests 24 38 143 12874 6275 Earningsloss per share attributable to the owners of the parent Basic p 9 14.72p 7.39p Diluted p 9 14.62p 7.39p Adjusted earnings per share attributable to the owners of the parent Basic p 9 19.05p 18.17p Diluted p 9 18.91p 18.01p The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Profitloss for the year 12874 6275 Other comprehensive incomeexpense Items that may be reclassified subsequently to the income statement Fair value movements on interest rate swaps net of tax 431 622 Currency translation differences 939 2966 Net investment hedges net of tax 395 Other comprehensive income for the year net of tax 975 870 Total comprehensive incomeexpense for the year 13849 5405 Attributable to Owners of the parent 13811 5548 Noncontrolling interests 38 143 13849 5405 Items in the statement above are disclosed net of tax.
The income tax relating to each component of other comprehensive income is disclosed in note 7.
The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these financial statements.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Balance Sheets as at 30 June 2017 Group Company
Noncurrent assets Goodwill 12 86028 70763 Intangible assets 13 31911 29038 Property plant and equipment 14 4444 4628  674 Investments in subsidiaries 15   49420 49420 Deferred tax assets 2tel384 123203 105371 49705 50478 Current assets Trade and other receivables 16 28444 26121 84863 65972 Cash and cash equivalents 10687 14642 70 1603 39131 40763 84933 67575 Total assets 162334 146134 134638 118053 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 18 52330 43896 28337 18422 Current tax liabilities 1932 1553 Deferred consideration  cash settled 177 1272 Derivative financial instruments 17  1013  1013 Borrowings 19 925 2204 4761 583 55364 49938 33098 20018 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 19 49353 46697 14572 12399 Deferred consideration  cash settled 2305 1370 Derivative financial instruments 17 662 1037 662 1037 Deferred tax liabilities 21 4585 3989 Provisions for future purchase of noncontrolling interests 100 100 57005 53193 15234 13436 Total liabilities 112369 103131 48332 33454 Net assets 49965 43003 86306 84599
Share capital 22 4362 4349 4362 4349 Share premium 22 45225 45225 45225 45225 Treasury shares 22 96 96 96 96 Share based payments reserve 89telTranslation reserve 3541 2602 Retained lossesearnings 4051 10116 35917 34235 Equity attributable to owners of the parent 49879 42850 86306 84599 Noncontrolling interests 24 86 153 Total equity 49965 43003 86306 84599 The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The financial statements on pages 70 to 114 were approved and authorised for issue by the Board and signed on their behalf on 12 September 2017.
ANTHONY FOYE PEDRO ROS Chief Financial Officer
Chief Executive Officer
Registered numbertel04
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Statements of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 June 2017 Share capital share premium and treasury shares note 22 Share based payments reserve
Accumulated lossesretained earnings
Noncontrolling interests note 24 Total equity
At 30 June 2015 49454 1052 364 4780 54922 277 55199 Lossprofit for the year    6418 6418 143 6275 Other comprehensive income for the year   2966 2096 870  870 49454 1052 2602 3734 49374 420 49794 Dividends    6782 6782 141 6923 Issue of share capital 24 636  612 Share based payments  470   470  470 Tax on share based payments    4 4  4 Movements in noncontrolling interests    208 208 126 334 At 30 June 2016 49478 886 2602 10116 42850 153 43003 Profit for the year    12836 12836 38 12874 Other comprehensive income for 49478 886 3541 2756 56661 191 56852 Dividends    7150 7150 105 7255 Issue of share capital 13 466  453 Share based payments  478   478  478 Tax on share based payments    110 110  110 At 30 June 2017 49491 898 3541 4051 49879 86 49965 The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Statements of Changes in Equity for the year ended 30 June 2017 Share capital share premium and treasury shares note 22 Share based payments reserve
Total
Company
At 1 July 2015 49454 1052 31593 82099 Profit for the year   9438 9438 Other comprehensive income for the year   622 622 49454 1052 40409 90915 Dividends to shareholders   6782 6782 Issue of share capital 24 636 612 Share based payments  470  470 Tax on share based payments   4 4 At 30 June 2016 49478 886 34235 84599 Profit for the year   8058 8058 Other comprehensive income for the year   431 431 49478 886 42724 93088 Dividends to shareholders   7150 7150 Issue of share capital 13 466 453 Share based payments  478  478 Tax on share based payments   110 110 At 30 June 2017 49491 898 35917 86306 The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Cash Flow Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Group Company
Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations before adjusting items 28 26653 23872 2610 20454 Cash flows for adjusting items  operating activities 1510 186 1253 130 Cash flows from share based payments 87 180 87 180 Cash generatedused from operations 25056 23506 3950 20144 Interest paid 1656 1502 914 853 Tax paid 3905 3197 2034 2180 Net cash generatedused from operating activities 19495 18807 6898 17111 Cash flows from investing activities Purchase of businesses net of cash acquired 19005 13912 Proceeds from disposal group held for sale  343 Deferred consideration paid 1295 330  330 Purchase of noncontrolling interests  334 Cash flows for adjusting items  investing activities 1327 540 942 274 Purchase of property plant and equipment 1300 641 Cash flows from sale of leasehold property 7300  7300 Proceeds from disposal of property plant and equipment 43 11 Purchase of intangible assets 1599 870 Net cash usedgenerated in investing activities 17183 16273 6358 604 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid to owners of the parent 7150 6782 7150 6782 Dividends paid to noncontrolling interests 105 141 Share issuance costs 5 5 5 5 Fees relating to new and extended loan facility 146 631 146 631 Increase in bank loans 27702 18002 27984 9205 Decrease in bank loans 25593 10306 25854 10484 Net cash used ingenerated from financing activities 5297 137 5171 8697 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents net of bank overdrafts 2985 2671 5711 7810 Cash and cash equivalents net of bank overdrafts at beginning of the year 12438 8698 1020 6790 Exchange gains on cash and cash equivalents 309 1069 Cash and cash equivalents net of bank overdrafts at end of the year 9762 12438 4691 1020 Reconciliation of net debt Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the year 14642 9194 1603 62 Bank overdrafts at beginning of the year 2204 496 583 6852 Bank loans at beginning of the year 19 47126 37306 12828 Net debt at beginning of the year 34688 28608 11808 20790 Net decreaseincrease in cash and cash equivalents net of bank overdrafts 2676 3740 5711 7810 Net drawdownrepayment in bank loans 2109 7696 2130 1279 Exchange loss on bank loans 546 2124 42 107 Cash and cash equivalents at end of the year 10687 14642 70 1603 Bank overdrafts at end of the year 925 2204 4761 583 Bank loans at end of the year 19 49781 47126 15000 Net debt at end of the year 40019 34688 19691 11808 The notes on pages 76 to 114 are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements General information The Company is a public company limited by shares incorporated and domiciled in the UK.
The address of its registered office is 614 Underwood Street London N1 7JQ.
The Company is listed on the main market on the London Stock Exchange.
The company is the provider of information education and networking to the professional markets.
Statement of accounting policies The significant accounting policies applied in preparing the financial statements are outlined below.
These policies have been consistently applied for all the years presented unless otherwise stated.
The Consolidated and Company financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS including International Accounting Standards IAS and interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee IFRS IC applicable to companies reporting under IFRS and as adopted in the EU and in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 as applicable to Companies using IFRS.
The Consolidated financial statements have been prepared under the historic cost convention except for certain financial instruments that have been measured at fair value.
The Consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling the functional currency of Wilmington plc the Parent Company.
All values are rounded to the nearest thousand pounds 000s except where otherwise indicated.
The Group meets its daytoday working capital requirements through its bank facilities.
The current economic conditions continue to create uncertainty particularly over the level of demand for the Groups products.
The Groups forecasts and projections taking account of reasonably possible changes in trading performance show that the Group should be able to operate within the level of its current facilities.
After making enquiries the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group has adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
The Group therefore continues to adopt the going concern basis in preparing its consolidated financial statements.
Further information on the Groups borrowings is given in note 19.
Pursuant to Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the companys own income statement and statement of other comprehensive income are not presented separately in the Company financial statements but they have been approved by the Board.
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgments estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported for income and expenses during the year and that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities at the reporting date.
Business combinations Management make judgments estimates and assumptions in assessing the fair value of the net assets acquired on a business combination in identifying and measuring intangible assets arising on a business combination and in determining the fair value of the consideration.
If the consideration includes an element of contingent consideration the final amount of which is dependent on the future performance of the business management assess the fair value of that contingent consideration based on their reasonable expectations of future performance.
The sensitivity of the carrying amounts to the judgments estimates and assumptions will vary depending on the nature and size of the acquisition.
Goodwill
Management make judgments estimates and assumptions in measuring the carrying amount of goodwill.
In considering whether goodwill has been impaired the recoverable amount of cash generating units has been determined based on value in use calculations.
These calculations require management to estimate future cash flows a longterm growth rate and an appropriate discount rate.
The sensitivity of the carrying amount of goodwill to these variables is considered in note 12.
The Groups consolidated financial statements incorporate the results and net assets of Wilmington plc and all its subsidiary undertakings made up to 30 June each year.
Subsidiaries are all entities over which the Group has control.
The Group controls an entity when the Group is exposed to or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the entity and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the entity.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Where necessary adjustments are made to the financial statements of subsidiaries to bring the accounting policies used into line with those used by the Group.
All intergroup transactions balances income and expenses are eliminated on consolidation however for the purposes of segmental reporting internal arms length recharges are included within the appropriate segments.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued d Business combinations The acquisition method of accounting is applied in accounting for the acquisition of subsidiaries.
The acquirees identifiable assets and liabilities are recognised at their fair value at the acquisition date.
Goodwill arising on acquisition is recognised as an asset and measured at cost representing the excess of the aggregate of the consideration the amount of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree and the fair value of the acquirers previously held equity interest in the acquiree if any over the net of the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities at the date of acquisition.
The consideration is measured at fair value which is the aggregate of the fair values of the assets transferred liabilities incurred or assumed and the equity instruments issued in exchange for control of the acquiree.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred within adjusted items  investing activities.
Where a business combination agreement provides for an adjustment to the cost of a business acquired contingent on future events the Group accrues the fair value of the additional consideration payable as a liability at acquisition date.
This amount is reassessed at each subsequent reporting date with any adjustments recognised in the Income Statement.
Intangible assets with finite useful lives and property plant and equipment are tested for impairment if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
When an impairment test is performed the recoverable amount of the asset is assessed and its carrying amount is reduced to that amount if lower and any impairment losses are recognised in the Income Statement.
The recoverable amount is the higher of the value in use and of the fair value less costs to sell where the value in use is the present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from the asset.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases due to a change in the estimates used to determine the assets recoverable amount since the last impairment loss was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined net of amortisation or depreciation had no impairment loss been recognised for the asset in prior years.
The reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in the Income Statement.
Goodwill is not amortised but it is reviewed for impairment at least annually.
Goodwill is allocated to cash generating units CGUs for the purpose of impairment testing so that the value in use is determined by reference to the discounted cash flows of the CGU.
The cash flows considered are the expected pretax cash flows of the CGU for projections over a three year period extrapolated using estimated longterm growth rates.
The recoverable amount of the CGU as for any asset is the higher of the value in use and the fair value less costs to sell.
If a CGU is impaired the impairment losses are allocated firstly against goodwill and then on a prorata basis against intangible and other assets.
An impairment of goodwill cannot be reversed.
Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The Consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling which is the Companys functional and the Groups presentation currency.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the date of the transaction.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of transactions and the translation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at period end exchange rates are recognised in the Income Statement.
On consolidation assets and liabilities of foreign undertakings are translated into Sterling at year end exchange rates.
The results of foreign undertakings are translated into Sterling at average rates of exchange for the year unless this average is not a reasonable approximation of the cumulative effects of the rates prevailing on the transaction dates in which case income and expenses are translated at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange differences arising on retranslation are recognised directly in a separate component of equity the translation reserve.
In the event of the disposal of an undertaking with assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency the cumulative translation difference in the translation reserve that is associated with the undertaking is charged or credited to the gain or loss on disposal recognised in the Income Statement.
Further information is provided in the financial instruments accounting policy in relation to loans and borrowings in foreign currencies that are designated as a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued g Revenue Revenue represents the fair value of the consideration received or receivable for the sale of goods or services net of discounts and sales taxes.
Revenue is recognised when it is probable that the economic benefits associated with a transaction will flow to the Group and the amount of revenue and associated costs can be measured reliably.
Subscription revenue is allocated to the relevant accounting periods covered by the subscription on a straight line basis or weighted in accordance with the timing of the service provided.
Event revenue is recognised in the month that the event takes place training revenue is recognised over the period in which the training is delivered hard copy advertising revenue is recognised on publication and online Directory advertising revenue is recognised over the period that the advertisement remains online.
Subscriptions and fees in advance are carried forward in trade and other payables as subscriptions and deferred revenue and are recognised over the period the service is provided.
Sales of goods are recognised when the Group has despatched the goods to the customer the customer has accepted the goods and collectability of the related receivables is reasonably assured.
In accordance with IAS 1 paragraph 103 expenses are presented in the accounts based on their nature.
Operating expenses comprise of cost of sales and administrative costs.
Distribution costs are not separately identified due to the digital nature of our products as they are considered immaterial.
Cost of sales are all direct costs including thirdparty costs and staff costs associated directly with the production of a product event or service and are charged to the income statement as incurred.
At each reporting date a prepayment is recognised for any thirdparty costs which are paid for in advance of the relevant event being run except in relation to marketing costs.
Administrative costs are additional operational costs that are not directly associated with the production of a product event or service.
This includes expenses relating to central administrative and management functions and are expensed to the income statement as incurred.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the Companys Board of Directors The Board which is considered as the Groups chief operating decision maker and is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments.
The Board considers the business from both a geographic and product perspective.
Geographically management considers the performance of the Group between the UK Europe excluding the UK North America and the Rest of the World.
Following a strategic review in the year the Group now reports its results in three segments as this more accurately reflects the way the Group is now managed.
The Groups Income Statement separately identifies adjusting items.
Such items are those that in the Directors judgment are oneoff in nature and need to be disclosed separately by virtue of their size and incidence.
In determining whether an item or transaction should be classified as an adjusting item the Directors consider quantitative as well as qualitative factors such as the frequency predictability of occurrence and significance.
This focus on quantitative and qualitative factors may result in the classification of an item as adjusting where one of apparently similar nature is not.
The Group distinguishes between restructuring costs that are recurring and those that relate to oneoff or transformational group programmes that impact many operations.
Recurring restructuring costs that are incurred in the normal course of business are recorded as part of the Groups underlying trading results within profit before tax.
Restructuring costs that are oneoff and individually material or relate to programmes linked to the Groups wider transformation and require approval at executive level are disclosed separately in the consolidated income statement.
When these adjusting items relate to a transformational programme to the business the cost may apply to multiple years.
This is consistent with the way that financial performance is measured by management and reported to the Board.
Adjusting items may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Disclosing adjusted items separately provides additional understanding of the performance of the Group.
Current and deferred income tax is recognised as income or an expense and included in the income statement for the period except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income or directly in equity in which case it is recognised in other comprehensive income or equity respectively.
The tax effect of adjusting items is calculated by applying the relevant prevailing rate of taxation to the adjusting expense or income to the extent it is taxable or tax deductible.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued The current income tax charge is calculated on the basis of the tax laws enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date in the countries where the Companys subsidiaries operate and generate taxable income.
Management periodically evaluate positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulation is subject to interpretation.
It establishes provisions where appropriate on the basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities.
Deferred income tax is recognised using the liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
However the deferred income tax is not accounted for if it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction other than a business combination that at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting nor taxable profit nor loss.
Deferred income tax is determined using tax rates and law that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the balance sheet date and are expected to apply when the related deferred income tax asset is realised or the deferred income tax liability is settled.
Deferred income tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax liabilities and when the deferred income taxes assets and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable entities where there is an intention to settle the balances on a net basis.
Dividend distributions are recognised in the consolidated financial statements when the shareholders right to receive payment is established.
Final dividend distributions are recognised in the period in which they are approved by the shareholders whilst interim dividend distributions are recognised in the period in which they are declared and paid.
Intangible assets are stated at historical cost less accumulated amortisation.
Intangible assets are recorded at cost and are amortised through the income statement on a straight line basis over their estimated useful lives.
Their estimated useful lives depend on the classification of the assets as follows Computer software 2033 per cent per annum Databases 520 per cent per annum Customer relationships 1033 per cent per annum Brands 520 per cent per annum Publishing rights and titles 510 per cent per annum Computer software that is integral to a related item of hardware is classified as computer equipment within property plant and equipment.
All other computer software and also the cost of internally developed software and databases are classified as intangible assets.
Computer software licences purchased from third parties are initially recorded at cost.
Costs associated with the production of internally developed software are capitalised once it is probable that they will generate future economic benefits and satisfy the other criteria set out in IAS 38.
Computer software intangible assets including the cost of internally developed software and databases are amortised through the Income Statement on a straight line basis over their estimated useful lives up to five years.
Assets that are not in use at the reporting date assets under construction are recognised at cost and amortisation commences when those assets begin to generate economic benefit.
Property plant and equipment is stated at historical cost less accumulated depreciation.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset plus any costs of bringing the asset to its working condition for its intended use.
Depreciation is not provided on freehold land.
On other assets it is provided at the following annual rates on a straightline basis in order to write down each asset to its residual value over its estimated useful life.
The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at the end of each reporting period.
Land freehold and leasehold buildings excluding freehold land 210 per cent per annum Fixtures and fittings 1033 per cent per annum Computer equipment 2533 per cent per annum Motor vehicles 25 per cent per annum 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued Leasehold improvements are included in Land freehold and leasehold buildings.
Gains and losses arising on disposal are determined by comparing the proceeds with the carrying amount and are recognised within the Income Statement.
When the gain or loss arising on disposal is significant or material it is disclosed separately on the income statement within other income or expenses.
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less provision for any impairment in value.
Financial assets The Group classifies its nonderivative financial assets as loans and receivables for the purposes of IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
Management determines the classification at initial recognition and reevaluates this designation at each reporting date.
Loans and receivables Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Loans and receivables are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs.
They are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method with changes in carrying value recognised in the Income Statement.
Loans and receivables are classified as current assets if they mature within 12 months of the reporting date but are otherwise classified as noncurrent assets.
The Groups loans and receivables comprise trade and other receivables and cash and cash equivalents for which further information is provided below.
Trade and other receivables Financial assets within trade and other receivables are initially recognised at fair value which is usually the invoiced amount.
They are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method if the time value of money is significant less provisions made for doubtful receivables.
Provisions are made specifically where there is evidence of a risk of nonpayment taking into account ageing previous losses experienced and general economic conditions.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash in hand current balances with banks and similar institutions and other shortterm highly liquid investments which are subject to insignificant risk of changes in value and have original maturities of three months or less.
Cash and cash equivalents are offset against bank overdrafts and the net amount is reported in the Balance Sheet when there is a legally enforceable right to offset the recognised amounts.
Bank overdrafts are otherwise shown as borrowings within current liabilities on the Balance Sheet.
Impairment of financial assets The Group assesses at each balance sheet date whether a financial asset or Group of financial assets is impaired.
Where there is objective evidence that an impairment loss has arisen on an asset carried at amortised cost the carrying amount is reduced and the impairment loss is recognised in the Income Statement.
The impairment loss is measured as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the financial assets original effective interest rate.
If in a subsequent period the amount of the impairment loss decreases and the decrease can be related objectively to an event occurring after the impairment was recognised the previously recognised impairment loss is reversed to the extent that the carrying amount of the financial asset does not exceed what the amortised cost would have been had the impairment not been recognised at the date the impairment is reversed.
A reversal of an impairment loss is recognised in the Income Statement.
Financial liabilities Trade and other payables Financial liabilities within trade and other payables are initially recognised at fair value which is usually the invoiced amount.
They are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method if the time value of money is significant.
If due within 12 months or less the trade or other payable is classified as a current liability.
It is otherwise classified as a noncurrent liability.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued Loans and other borrowings Loans and other borrowings are initially recognised at the fair value of the amounts received net of transaction costs.
They are subsequently carried at amortised cost using the effective interest method with changes in carrying value recognised in the Income
Further information is provided below in relation to loans and borrowings in foreign currencies that are designated as a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation.
Loans and other borrowings are classified as current liabilities if they mature within 12 months of the balance sheet date but are otherwise classified as noncurrent liabilities.
Financial instruments and hedge accounting The Group uses derivative financial instruments to reduce its exposure to interest rate risk and foreign currency risk and it also has loans and borrowings in foreign currencies that correspond to investments in foreign operations.
Financial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting The Group does not hold or issue derivative financial instruments for financial trading purposes.
However derivative financial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting e. subsequently measured at fair value.
The gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value is recognised in the Income Statement.
Financial instruments that do qualify for hedge accounting To qualify for hedge accounting a financial instrument must be designated as a hedging instrument at inception hedge documentation must be prepared and the hedge must be expected to be highly effective.
The effectiveness of the hedge is then tested at each reporting date both prospectively and retrospectively and hedge accounting may be continued only if the hedge remains highly effective.
Hedge accounting is discontinued when the hedging instrument expires or is sold terminated or no longer qualifies for hedge accounting or if the Group chooses to end the hedge relationship.
A financial instrument designated for hedge accounting is initially recognised at fair value.
For cash flow hedges e. in equity those that correspond to the ineffective part if any are recognised in the Income Statement.
For net investment hedges loans and borrowings in foreign currencies that are designated as a hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation the translation differences that correspond to the effective part of the hedge are recognised directly in equity those that correspond to the ineffective part if any are recognised in the Income Statement.
On the acquisition of less than 100% of certain subsidiary undertakings the Group may enter into put and call options with the holders of the shares not owned by the Group to purchase their interests at a later date.
These written put options are grosssettled i. are recognised as a financial liability.
The liability recognised may be subject to a cap based on the individual agreements with the counterparties.
Where the put option is ultimately exercised the amount recognised as the financial liability at that date will be extinguished by the payment of the exercise price.
Where the put option expires unexercised the liability is reversed.
The Group does not operate a defined benefit pension scheme.
The Group contributes to defined contribution pension schemes for a number of employees.
Contributions to these arrangements are charged in the Income Statement in the period in which they are incurred.
The Group has no further payment obligation once the contributions have been paid.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued s Share based payments The Group operates an equitysettled share based compensation plan under which the entity receives services from employees as consideration for equity instruments share awards and options of the Group.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of share awards and options is recognised as an expense.
The total amount to be expensed is determined by reference to the fair value of the share awards and options granted excluding the impact of any nonmarket service and performance vesting conditions for example profitability and remaining as an employee of the entity over a specified time period.
Nonmarket vesting conditions are included in assumptions about the number of share awards and options that are expected to vest.
The total amount expensed is recognised over the vesting period which is the period over which all of the specified existing conditions are to be satisfied.
At each balance sheet date the entity revises its estimates of the number of share awards and options that are expected to vest based on the nonmarket vesting conditions.
It recognises the impact of the revision to original estimates if any in the Income Statement with a corresponding adjustment to the share based payments reserve within equity.
The social security contributions and payment in lieu of dividend payable in connection with the grant of the share awards is considered an integral part of the grant itself and the charge will be treated as an equitysettled transaction.
The cumulative share based payment charge held in reserves is recycled into retained earnings when the share awards or options lapse or are exercised.
Leases in which a significant portion of the risks and rewards of ownership are retained by the lessor are classified as operating leases.
Rentals incurred in respect of operating leases net of any incentives received from the lessor are charged to the Income Statement on a straightline basis over the period of the lease.
Ordinary shares are classified as equity.
Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of new shares or options are shown in equity as a deduction net of tax from the proceeds.
Where any Group company purchases the Companys equity share capital Treasury Shares the consideration paid including any directly attributable incremental costs net of income taxes is deducted from equity attributable to the Companys equity holders until the shares are cancelled or reissued.
Noncurrent assets or disposal groups are classified as assets held for sale when their carrying amount is to be recovered principally through a sale transaction and a sale is considered highly probable.
They are stated at the lower of carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.
The following new standards amendments and interpretations have been adopted in the current year International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSIAS Effective for accounting periods starting after IFRS 5 7 IAS 19 34 Annual improvements 20122014 cycle 1 January 2016 IFRS 10 12 IAS 28 Investment Entities Applying the Consolidation Exception 1 January 2016 IAS 1 Disclosure initiative Amendments to IAS 1 1 January 2016 IAS 16 38 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation 1 January 2016 The adoption of these new standards amendments and interpretations has not led to any changes to the Groups accounting policies or had any other material impact on the financial position or performance of the Group.
Other amendments to IFRSs effective for the year starting 1 July 2016 have no impact on the Group.
The International Accounting Standards Board IASB and International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee IFRIC have issued new standards and interpretations with an effective date after the year starting 1 July 2016.
Those marked  have not been endorsed by the EU.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Statement of accounting policies continued International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSIAS Effective for accounting periods starting after IAS 7  Disclosure initiative  Amendments to IAS 7 1 January 2017 IAS 12  Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses  Amendments to IAS 12 1 January 2017 IFRS 12  Annual improvements 20142016 cycle 1 January 2017 IFRS 2  Classification and Measurement of Share Based Payment Transactions  Amendments to IFRS 2 1 January 2018 IFRS 9 Financial Instruments 1 January 2018 IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers 1 January 2018 IFRS 16  Leases 1 January 2019 IAS 28  Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures Management is currently assessing the impact of the above new standards.
During the year to 30 June 2018 the Group will put in place necessary processes to capture all of the adjustments and additional disclosures required for those standards taking effect before this date.
There are no other IFRSs or IFRIC interpretations that are not yet effective that would be expected to have a material impact on the Group.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers replaces IAS 18 Revenue and related interpretations introducing a single principles based approach to the recognition and measurement of revenue from all contracts with customers.
The new approach requires identification of performance obligations in a contract and revenue to be recognised when or as those performance obligations are satisfied as well as additional disclosure.
The Group is currently in the process of completing its review of the potential impact of adopting IFRS 15.
The necessary processes to capture all of the adjustments and any additional disclosures required under IFRS 15 will be put into place during 201718.
In the year the 2016 Annual Report was subject to review by the FRC in accordance with their routine statutory responsibilities.
In response to the queries raised in this review management liaised with the FRC to discuss and impartially evaluate the Annual Report and its compliance with IFRS and ESMA guidelines.
As a result of the review and subsequent discussions the 2017 Annual Report includes some enhanced disclosures which improve the quality of information presented.
The main areas of enhanced disclosure are in the Strategic Review in the definitions of Adjusting Items a revised format for the Income Statement and a more detailed analysis of intangible assets together with a reallocation of the presentation between goodwill and intangible assets.
It was also decided to include share based payment charges in our definition of adjusted measures.
On 14 June 2017 the FRC confirmed that their review into the 2016 Annual Report were closed and that all matters raised had been satisfactorily concluded.
The FRC notes that their review provides no assurance that the 2016 report and accounts are correct in all material respects and that the FRCs role is not to verify the information provided but to consider compliance with reporting requirements.
The FRC noted that their review is based on our report and accounts and does not benefit from detailed knowledge of our business or an understanding of the underlying transactions entered into.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Measures of profit a Reconciliation to profit on continuing activities before tax To provide shareholders with additional understanding of the trading performance of the Group Adjusted EBITA has been calculated as Profit before Tax after adding back z amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software z impairment of goodwill and intangible assets z adjusting items included in operating expenses z other income  gain on sale of leasehold property and z finance costs.
Adjusted EBITA and Adjusted EBITDA reconcile to profit on continuing activities before tax as follows Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Profitloss before tax 15862 3434 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangibles 2366 15659 Adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Other income  gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Finance costs 1961 1920 Adjusted operating profit Adjusted EBITA 23352 22042 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1071 911 Amortisation of intangible assets  computer software 1165 1050 Adjusted EBITA before depreciation Adjusted EBITDA 25588 24003 Adjusted profit before tax reconciles to profit on continuing activities before tax as follows Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Profitloss before tax 15862 3434 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangibles 2366 15659 Adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Other income  gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Adjusting items included in finance costs  225 Adjusted profit before tax 21391 20347 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Measures of profit continued b Reconciliation to adjusted profit before tax Adjusted results June 2017 Adjusting items June 2017 Statutory results June 2017 Adjusted results June 2016 Adjusting items June 2016 Statutory results June 2016 Revenue 120329  120329 105724  105724 Operating expenses before share based payments amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software and impairment 96425 3468 99893 83119 2352 85471 Share based payments 552  552 563  563 Operating expenses before amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software and impairment 96977 3468 100445 83682 2352 86034 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software  6028 6028  5545 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets  2366 2366  15659 15659 Gain on sale of leasehold property  6333 6333 Operating profitloss 23352 5529 17823 22042 23556 1514 Finance costs 1961  1961 1695 225 1920 Profitloss before tax 21391 5529 15862 20347 23781 3434 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Segmental information In accordance with IFRS 8 the Groups operating segments are based on the operating results reviewed by the Board which represents the chief operating decision maker.
Following a strategic review in the year the Group now reports its results in three previously 4 segments as this more accurately reflects the way the Group is managed.
The comparatives have been restated to provide information on a consistent basis.
The Groups organisational structure reflects the main communities to which it provides information education and networking.
The three divisions Risk and Compliance Professional and Healthcare are the Groups segments and generate all of the Groups revenue.
The Board considers the business from both a geographic and product perspective.
Geographically management considers the performance of the Group between the UK North America Europe excluding the UK and the Rest of the World.
Revenue
Year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June
Year ended 30 June Risk and Compliance 42272 12265 38802 12678 Professional 39472 5864 36743 6159 Healthcare 38585 9705 30179 7316 Group contribution 120329 27834 105724 26153 Unallocated central overheads  3930  3548 Share based payments  552  563 120329 23352 105724 22042 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangibles 2366 15659 Adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Other income  gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Finance costs 1961 1920 Profitloss before tax 15862 3434 Taxation 2988 2841 Profitloss for the financial year 12874 6275 There are no intrasegmental revenues which are material for disclosure.
Unallocated central overheads represent head office costs that are not specifically allocated to segments.
Total assets and liabilities for each reportable segment are not presented as such information is not provided to the Board.
The UK is the Groups country of domicile and the Group generates the majority of its revenue from external customers in the UK.
The geographical analysis of revenue is on the basis of the country of origin in which the customer is invoiced Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June UK 68588 61321 Europe excluding the UK 18049 15859 North America 22863 19030 Rest of the World 10829 9514 Total revenue 120329 105724 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Profit from continuing operations a Profit for the year from continuing operations is stated after chargingcrediting Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1071 911 Amortisation of intangible assets  computer software 1165 1050 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 20 4 Rentals under operating leases 1568 1110 Share based payments including social security costs 552 563 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangibles 2366 15659 Adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Foreign exchange loss including forward currency contracts 50 202 Fees payable to the Auditors for the audit of the Company and consolidated financial statements 110 110 Fees payable to the Auditors and its associates for other services The audit of the Companys subsidiaries pursuant to legislation 173 280 Auditrelated and other assurance services 142 41 Tax compliance services 8 54 Other services 47 100 b Adjusting items The following items have been chargedcredited to the Income Statement during the year but are considered to be adjusting so are shown separately Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Costs written off relating to both successful and aborted acquisitions 1569 585 Increase in liability for deferred consideration 54 1082 1623 1667 Adjusting items relating to property portfolio review 1027 Restructuring and rationalisation costs 818 612 Legal claim costs net of settlement received  73 Other adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 2366 15659 Costs relating to the extension of the loan facility  225 Total adjusting items classified in profit before tax 11862 23781 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Profit from continuing operations continued Successful and aborted acquisitions relate to the acquisition of SWAT Group Limited SWAT Health Service Journal HSJ and other aborted acquisitions.
The increase in the liability for deferred consideration relates to the purchase of SWAT Group Limited SWAT.
Restructuring and rationalisation costs comprise primarily of 500000 of costs relating to the implementation of project Sixth Gear and 300000 of redundancy and property costs following the Groups decision to relocate part of the back office functions from its head offices in central London to our existing freehold premises in Basildon Essex.
Included within operating expenses before depreciation amortisation and impairment are 224000 2016 122000 of minor restructuring costs not considered to be adjusting items.
Costs associated with property portfolio review relate to a review of the London property portfolio see note 4c for further details.
In the year Wilmington plc performed a review of its London property portfolio on the back of this it sold the leasehold interest in its current Underwood Street London head office premises for a 7.3m cash consideration.
At the same time as disposing of its leasehold interest Wilmington entered into a new tenyear market rate lease for a London head office premises near Aldgate.
The new head office space will accommodate Wilmingtons London based businesses whilst retaining the training facility recently acquired with the acquisition of SWAT Group Limited.
The new London premises will consolidate staff from a number of our current properties therefore in the year we have also accounted for the surrender of the leasehold of our London Old Broad Street property and the onerous lease of a leasehold property in Kent.
The items which have been creditedcharged to profit or loss during the year in relation to this review are as follows Gain on sale of Underwood Street Leasehold property Year ended 30 June Proceeds of sale of Underwood Street Leasehold property 7300 Disposal of leasehold improvements 579 Legal and professional fees relating to the sale of Underwood Street Leasehold property 293 Agent fees relating to the sale of Underwood Street Leasehold property 95 Gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Operating expenses  Adjusting items relating to the property portfolio review Year ended 30 June Rent rates and legal and professional fees relating to new Aldgate lease 514 Cost to surrender Old Broad Street lease 231 Onerous lease on property in Kent 197 Accelerated depreciation of computer hardware on sale of Underwood Street Leasehold property 85 Total adjusting items relating to property portfolio review 1027 Note 25 Commitments includes the minimum lease commitments associated with the London property portfolio review.
The net tax charge on the property transaction included in corporation tax expense is 230488.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Operating expenses Year ended 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June 2016 Cost of sales
Total
Cost of sales
Total
Operating expenses before depreciation amortisation and impairment 90906 3835 94741 78275 3446 81721 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 976 95 107telAmortisation of intangible assets computer software 1165  1165 1050  1050 Operating expenses before amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software and impairment 93047 3930 96977 80134 3548 83682 Amortisation of intangible assets databases 1897  1897 1643  1643 Amortisation of intangible assets customer relationships 1947  1947 1647  1647 Amortisation of intangible assets Amortisation of intangible assets publishing rights and titles 1291  1291 1500  1500 Goodwill and intangibles impairment charge 830 1536 2366  15659 15659 Other adjusting items note 4  3468 3468  2352 2352 Operating expenses 99905 8934 108839 85679 21559 107238 Finance costs Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Finance costs comprise Interest payable on bank loans and overdrafts 1814 1564 Amortisation of capitalised loan arrangement fees 147 131 1961 1695 Adjusting items  extension of loan facility costs  225 1961 1920 The extension of loan facility costs of 225000 in the year ended 30 June 2016 comprises 147000 of old capitalised loan arrangement fees written off and 78000 of legal and professional costs connected to the extension.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements
Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Current tax UK corporation tax at current rates on UK profits for the year 3225 2520 Adjustments in respect of previous years 103 125 3328 2645 Foreign tax 1067 1272 Adjustment in respect of previous years 43 73 Total current tax 4352 3990 Deferred tax credit 1247 971 Effect on deferred tax of change in corporation tax rate 117 178 Total deferred tax 1364 1149 Taxation 2988 2841 Factors affecting the tax charge for the year The effective tax rate is lower 2016 higher than the average rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.75% 2016 20.00%.
The differences are explained below Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Profitloss before tax 15862 3434 Profitloss multiplied by the average rate of corporation tax in the year of 19.75% 2016 20.00% 3133 687 Tax effects of Impairment of goodwill not deductible for tax purposes 303 3132 Foreign tax rate differences 312 233 Adjustment in respect of previous years 59 198 Reduced effective rate on gain on sale of leasehold property 817 Other items not subject to tax 115 143 Effect on deferred tax of change of corporation tax rate 117 178 Taxation 2988 2841 On 26 October 2015 the UK corporation tax rate was reduced from 20% to 19% from 1 April 2017 and a further change was announced on 23 November 2016 to reduce the rate from 19% to 17% from 1 April 2020.
These changes have been substantively enacted at the balance sheet date and therefore are included in these financial statements.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the rates that are expected to apply in the periods of the reversal deferred tax balances at 30 June 2017 have been calculated using the above rates giving rise to a reduction in the net deferred tax liability of 117000 2016 178000.
The Companys profits for this accounting year are taxed at an effective rate of 19.75%.
Included in other comprehensive income are a tax charge of 106000 and a tax credit of 97000 relating to the interest rate swaps and net investment hedges respectively.
The tax effect of adjusting items as disclosed in note 9 is a credit of 1757000 2016 1579000.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements
Amounts recognised as distributions to owners of the parent in the year Year ended 30 June pence per share Year ended 30 June pence per share Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Final dividends recognised as distributions in the year 4.3 4.0 3749 3478 Interim dividends recognised as distributions in the year 3.9 3.8 3401 3304 Total dividends paid 7150 6782 Final dividend proposed 4.6 4.3 4011 3738 Earnings per share Adjusted earnings per share has been calculated using adjusted earnings calculated as profitloss after taxation and noncontrolling interests but before z amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software z impairment of goodwill and intangible assets z adjusting items included in operating expenses z other income  gain on sale of leasehold property and z adjusting items included in finance costs.
The calculation of the basic and diluted earnings per share is based on the following data Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Earningsloss from continuing operations for the purpose of basic earnings per share 12836 6418
Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6028 5545 Impairment of goodwill and intangibles 2366 15659 Adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 Other income  gain on sale of leasehold property 6333 Adjusting items included in finance costs  225 Tax effect of adjustments above 1757 1579 Adjusted earnings for the purposes of adjusted earnings per share 16608 15784 Number Number Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of basic and adjusted earnings per share 87193340 86846236 Effect of dilutive potential ordinary shares Future exercise of share awards and options 611052 772980 Weighted average number of ordinary shares for the purposes of diluted and adjusted diluted earnings per share 87804393 87619216 Basic earningsloss per share 14.72p 7.39p Diluted earningsloss per share 14.62p 7.39p Adjusted basic earnings per share Adjusted Earnings Per Share 19.05p 18.17p Adjusted diluted earnings per share 18.91p 18.01p Results of Wilmington plc Wilmington plc the parent company recorded a profit of 8058000 2016 9438000 during the year.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Acquisitions and disposals All below acquisitions have been financed out of the extended 85.0m multicurrency revolving credit facility.
On 19 July 2016 Mercia Group Limited a subsidiary acquired the entire issued share capital of SWAT Group Limited SWAT a provider of training and technical compliance support to accountancy firms in London and the South West of England.
SWAT was acquired for initial consideration of 2870000 of which 500000 was withheld in relation to the Net Asset adjustment.
Subsequently this initial consideration was reduced by 387538 in relation to the final Net Asset adjustment.
Deferred consideration of up to 3000000 is payable contingent on SWATs future performance for the years ended 30 June 2017 and 2018 and will be paid in cash in one instalment.
Management has estimated the expected value of these future payments to be 1082000 which has been recognised in the total consideration.
Any future movements of this contingent consideration will be charged to the income statement as an adjusting item.
Acquisition related costs of 278000 have been expensed as an adjusting item in the income statement see note 4b.
Details of the fair value of the purchase consideration the net assets acquired and goodwill for the acquisition are as follows Purchase consideration Initial consideration 2870 Net asset adjustment 388 Deferred consideration  to be cash settled 1082 Total consideration 3564 The provisional fair values of assets and liabilities recognised as a result of this acquisition are as follows Intangible assets  Customer relationships 2337 Total intangible assets 2337 Property plant and equipment 183 Computer software 13 Trade and other receivables net of allowances 365 Cash and cash equivalents 360 Trade and other payables 598 Subscriptions and deferred revenue 579 Current tax liabilities 137 Deferred tax liabilities 444 Net identifiable assets acquired 1500 Goodwill 2064 Net assets acquired 3564 The estimated useful economic life of the intangibles is as follows Intangible assets  Customer RelationshipsSubscribers 10 years The acquired business contributed revenues of 4659359 and contribution of 658559 to the Group for the period from the date of acquisition to 30 June 2017.
Had SWAT been consolidated from 1 July 2016 the Group consolidated Income Statement would include pro forma revenue of 5016454 and contribution of 677811.
At the year the deferred consideration due in respect of the SWAT acquisition was 1136000.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Acquisitions and disposals continued b Acquisitions  Health Service Journal  January 2017 On 31 January 2017 Wilmington Healthcare Limited a subsidiary acquired the trading assets and liabilities of Health Service Journal HSJ the UKs leading health information insight and networking business from EMAP Publishing Limited the Seller.
HSJ was acquired for initial consideration of 17000000 in cash with a subsequent adjustment in respect of final working capital of 250000 which was due to Wilmington Healthcare Limited.
There is no deferred or contingent consideration in relation to the HSJ acquisition.
Acquisition related costs of 1106000 have been expensed as an adjusting item in the income statement see note 4b.
The acquisition adds further strength to the existing Wilmington Healthcare businesses and will enable the combined group to provide unparalleled services into the NHS and private vendor space through subscription information and analytics products events awards education and marketing solutions.
Details of the fair value of the purchase consideration the net assets acquired and goodwill for the acquisition are as follows Purchase consideration Initial cash paid 17000 Final working capital adjustment 250 Settlement of liability on behalf of acquiree 133 Total consideration 16883 The provisional fair values of assets and liabilities recognised as a result of this acquisition are as follows Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Subscribers 2894 Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Sponsors 164 Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Delegates 78 Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Other 366 Intangible assets  Brand 4240 Total intangible assets 7742 Trade and other receivables net of allowances 814 Trade and other payables 428 Subscriptions and deferred revenue 2723 Deferred tax liabilities 1389 Net identifiable assets acquired 4016 Goodwill 12867 Net assets acquired 16883 The goodwill is attributable to the unique HSJ content established customer base and the solid customer relationships held by the experienced and stable workforce.
As well as the synergies that will arise with the existing Wilmington Healthcare businesses and the ability to be able to provide a wider breadth of services and products across both providerpayer and the private sector in Pharma and MedTech industries.
The estimated useful economic life of the intangibles is as follows Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Subscribers 8 years Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Sponsors 3 years Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Delegates 3 years Intangible assets  Customer relationships  Other 3 years Intangible assets  Brand 10 years The acquired business contributed revenues of 3695000 and contribution of 794000 to the Group for the period from the date of acquisition to 30 June 2017 which equates to a five months revenue and contribution.
Had HSJ been consolidated from 1 July 2016 the group consolidated Income Statement would include pro forma revenue of 8868000 and contribution of 1906000.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements
Cost
At 1 July 2015 84028 Additions 7958 Exchange translation differences 1401 At 30 June 2016 93387 Additions 14931 Reallocation 1281 Exchange translation differences 589 At 30 June 2017 110188 Accumulated impairment At 1 July 2015 6965 Impairment 15659 At 30 June 2016 22624 Impairment 1536 At 30 June 2017 24160 Net book amount At 30 June 2017 86028 At 30 June 2016 70763 At 30 June 2015 77063 A review by management in the year concluded that the tax amortisation benefit acquired with FRA in 2016 should be reallocated across Goodwill and Intangibles.
This resulted in a reallocation of 1281000 from Intangible Assets to Goodwill with a nil net impact on noncurrent assets.
The Group tests goodwill annually for impairment.
The recoverable amount of the goodwill is determined as the higher of the value in use calculation or fair value less cost of disposal for each cash generating unit CGU.
The value in use calculations use pretax cash flow projections based on financial budgets and forecasts approved by the Board covering a three year period.
These pretax cash flows beyond the three year period are extrapolated using estimated longterm growth rates.
Key assumptions for the value in use calculations are those regarding discount rates cash flow forecasts and longterm growth rates.
Management has used a pretax discount rate of 12.3% 2016 12.3% across all CGUs in the UK except for the CLT CGU which had a pretax discount rate of 13.3% 2016 13.3% to reflect the greater market challenges and risks.
A pretax discount rate of 13.5% 2016 13.5% has been used for Compliance Week and FRA that both operate in North America.
These pretax discount rates reflect current market assessments for the time value of money and the risks associated with the CGUs as the Group manages its treasury function on a Groupwide basis.
The same discount rate has been used for all CGUs except CLT Compliance Week and FRA as the Directors believe that the risks are the same for each other CGU.
The longterm growth rates used are based on managements expectations of future changes in the markets for each CGU and are 2.0% 2016 2.0%.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Goodwill continued Managements impairment calculations based upon the above assumptions show ample headroom with the exception of CLT and Compliance Week.
Goodwill is allocated to significant CGUs as follows.
A CGU is considered to be significant if the goodwill allocated to it is greater than 10% of the total goodwill net book value.
CGU
30 June 2017 30 June 2016 HSJ 12867 Axco and Pendragon 11150 11150 CLT 8563 8563 ICT 7972 7972 Others 45476 43078 86028 70763
For CLT the value in use exceeds the carrying value by 63% 2016 0%.
The impairment review of CLT is sensitive to a reasonably possible change in the key assumptions used most notably the projected cash flows and the pretax discount rate.
The value in use exceeds the carrying value unless any of the assumptions are changed as follows A decrease in the projected operating cash flows of 38.6% in each of the next three years or An increase in the pretax discount from 12.4% to 18.8%.
Compliance week For Compliance Week the value in use exceeds the carrying value by 27% 2016 15%.
The impairment review of Compliance Week is sensitive to a reasonably possible change in the key assumptions used most notably the projected cash flows and the pretax discount rate.
The value in use exceeds the carrying value unless any of the assumptions are changed as follows A decrease in the projected operating cash flows of 27.4% in each of the next three years or An increase in the pretax discount from 13.5% to 19.0%.
Impairment of Ark A noncash impairment of 1.54m has been made against the carrying value for goodwill in Ark following the failure to sell the business and the Boards decision to close all but the events and reports businesses.
This impairment further reflects the impact of structural changes in the legal information and training market.
Ark was acquired by Wilmington plc in October 2005 and the original investment was impaired last year by 1.03m.
It was also decided that the remaining assets held in the business should be written down to their recoverable value resulting in an impairment of 0.83m against the intangible assets held in the business see note 13.
All remaining items on the balance sheet are held at their realisable value and are considered recoverable.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Notes to the Financial Statements Intangible assets
Computer software
Customer relationships
Publishing rights and titles
Cost
At 1 July 2015 7063 14261 15224 4000 30223 70771 Additions 870     870 Acquisitions 191 1695 2001 6086  9973 Disposals     304 304 Exchange translation differences 7tel 1665 At 30 June 2016 8202 16116 18023 10715 29919 82975 Additions 1599     1599 Acquisitions 128  5839 4240  10207 Reallocation   391 1672  1281 Disposals 15     15 Exchange translation differences At 30 June 2017 9946 16143 24355 13341 30289 94074 Accumulated amortisation At 1 July 2015 4381 6512 11220 2315 22707 47135 Charge for year 1050 1643 1647 755 1500 6595 Acquisitions 167     167 Disposals     304 304 Exchange translation differences At 30 June 2016 5636 8197 12935 3142 24027 53937 Charge for year 1165 1897 1947 893 1291 7193 Acquisitions 115     115 Impairment 86    744 830 Disposals 14     14 Exchange translation differences 188 102 At 30 June 2017 7004 10110 14987 4188 25874 62163 Net book amount At 30 June 2017 2942 6033 9368 9153 4415 31911 At 30 June 2016 2566 7919 5088 7573 5892 29038 At 1 July 2015 2682 7749 4004 1685 7516 23636 Included within computer software are assets under construction that have not yet been amortised with a net book amount of 142000 2016 44000.
A review by management in the year concluded that the tax amortisation benefit acquired with FRA in 2016 should be reallocated across Goodwill and Intangibles.
This resulted in a reallocation of 1281000 from Intangible Assets to Goodwill with a nil net impact on noncurrent assets.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Property plant and equipment
Land freehold and leasehold buildings Fixtures and fittings
Motor
Vehicles
Total
Cost 000 At 1 July 2015 5950 3909 3743 495 14097 Additions  Acquisitions  40 28  68 Disposals  189 42 107 338 Exchange translation differences  45 73  118 At 30 June 2016 5950 4117 4032 487 14586 Additions  775 416 109 1300 Acquisitions  Disposals 2789 10 520 149 3468 Exchange translation differences  16 24  40 At 30 June 2017 3161 5239 4292 534 13226 Accumulated depreciation At 1 July 2015 2721 2922 3394 219 9256 Charge for the year Disposals  189 42 91 322 Acquisitions  26   26 Exchange translation differences  34 53  87 At 30 June 2016 2879 3187 3675 217 9958 Charge for the year 15tel1071 Disposals 2210 10 520 126 2866 Acquisitions  Exchange translation differences  12 22  34 At 30 June 2017 820 3956 3767 239 8782 Net book amount At 30 June 2017 2341 1283 525 295 4444 At 30 June 2016 307tel4628 At 30 June 2015 322tel4841 Included in land freehold and leasehold buildings is 970000 2016 970000 of nondepreciated land.
Depreciation of property plant and equipment is charged to operating expenses within the Income Statement.
The disposal of land freehold and leasehold buildings is the sale of a leasehold property from which a gain on sale of 6333000 arose note 4c.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Property plant and equipment continued
Leasehold buildings
At 1 July 2014 1 July 2015 and 1 July 2016 2789 Disposals 2789 At 30 June 2017 Accumulated depreciation At 30 June 2015 2013 Charge for the year 102 At 30 June 2016 2115 Charge for the year 95 Disposals 2210 At 30 June 2017 Net book amount At 30 June 2017 At 30 June 2016 674 At 30 June 2015 776 The disposal of land freehold and leasehold buildings is the sale of a leasehold property.
Investments in subsidiaries
Shares in subsidiary undertakings Cost less provision at 1 July 2015 49193 Share based payments made on behalf of subsidiaries 227 Cost less provision at 1 July 2016 and 30 June 2017 49420 The following table gives brief details of the entities controlled and included in the consolidated financial statements of the Group at 30 June 2017.
Except where indicated all of the entities are incorporated in and principally operated in the UK.
Subsidiaries marked are directly owned by Wilmington plc all other subsidiaries are indirectly owned.
Subsidiaries marked  are companies limited by guarantee have no ordinary shares and are controlled indirectly by Wilmington plc.
Subsidiaries marked  have claimed audit exemptions for the year to 30 June 2017 under section 479A of the Companies Act 2006.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Investments in subsidiaries continued Name of company UK company number
Percentage owned Adkins Matchett and Toy Hong Kong Limited incorporated and operates in Hong Kong na HAL Provision of professional training 100 Adkins and Matchett UK Limited  UWS Provision of professional training 100 Adkins Matchett and Toy Limited incorporated and operates in the US na WES Provision of professional training 100 APM International SAS incorporated and operates in France na AVE News information services to the healthcare industry APM Media SARL incorporated and operates in
Ark Conferences Limited  UWS Provision of information and events for professional practice management Ark Group Inc.
Ark Group Limited  UWS Holding company 100 Applied Research and Knowledge ARK PTE Limited incorporated and operates in Singapore na ROB Provision of information and events for professional practice management Axco Insurance Information Services Limited  UWS Provision of international compliance and regulatory information for the global insurance industry Bond Solon Training Limited  UWS Witness training and conferences 100 CLT International Limited  UWS Certified professional training 100 Central Law Training Limited  UWS Professional education post qualification training and legal conferences Evantage Consulting Limited  UWS Consultancy to the pharmaceutical industry International Company Profile FZ LLC Middle East incorporated and operates in Dubai na ATT Provision of financial information 100 International Compliance Training Limited  UWS Training courses in international compliance and money laundering International Compliance Training Academy PTE Limited incorporated and operates in Singapore na ROB Training courses in international compliance and money laundering JMH Publishing Limited  UWS Provider of specialist and accredited online education for the healthcare industry International Compliance Training Middle East LLC incorporated and operates in UAE na IND Training courses in international compliance and money laundering La Touche Bond Solon Training Limited incorporated and operates in Ireland na CAP Witness and post qualification legal training Mercia Group Limited  UWS Training and support services to the accountancy profession Mercia Ireland Limited incorporated and operates in
Mercia NI Limited NI CLO Training and support services to the accountancy profession NHIS Limited  UWS Provision of business intelligence data analysis workflow tools and other services to the healthcare industry Practice Track Limited  UWS Marketing support services for the accountancy profession 100 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Name of company UK company number
Percentage owned Smee and Ford Limited  UWS Provision of legacy information 100 The Matchett Group Limited  UWS Holding Company 100 SWAT Group Limited  UWS Holding Company 100 SWAT Holdings Limited  UWS Holding Company 100 SWAT UK Limited  UWS Training and support services to the accountancy profession Wilmington Finance Limited  UWS Holding company 100 Wilmington FRA Inc.
Wilmington Insight Limited  UWS Holding company 100 Wilmington Compliance Week Inc.
Wilmington Healthcare Limited  UWS Provision of reference information to the healthcare industry Wilmington Holdings US Inc.
Wilmington Holdings No 1 Limited  UWS Holding company 100 Wilmington Inese SL incorporated and operates in
Wilmington Millennium Limited  UWS Provision of legacy information 91.25 Wilmington Publishing and Information Limited  UWS Provision of information and events for professional markets Wilmington Shared Services Limited  UWS Provision of shared services 100 Wilmington Legal Limited  UWS Holding company 100 International Compliance Association  UWS Professional association a not for profit organisation WCLTS SC UWS Professional association a not for profit organisation Central Law Management Limited  UWS Dormant 100 HCP Consulting Limited Dormant 100 Pendragon Professional Information Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Quorum Courses Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Quorum International Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Quorum Training Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Waterlow Information Services Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Wilmington Risk and Compliance Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Wilmington plc Employee Share Ownership Trust na UWS Trust na Aspire Publications Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Ark Publishing Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Caritas Data Limited  UWS Dormant 100 CLT Legal Link Limited SC UWS Dormant 100 CLT Professional Training Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Hollis Directories Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Hollis Publishing Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Incisive Training Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Medical Practice Management Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Production and Casting Report Limited  UWS Dormant 100 The Central Law Training Paralegal Centre Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Investments in subsidiaries continued 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Name of company UK company number
Percentage owned Wilmington Business Information Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Wilmington Group Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Wilmington Training and Events Limited  UWS Dormant 100 Wilmington Publishing and Information Limited owns 91.25% of Wilmington Millennium Limited.
At 30 June 2017 Wilmington Legal owned 80% of Central Law Training Scotland Limited.
The remaining 20% shareholding in Central Law Training Scotland Limited was purchased after the year end note 29.
The Wilmington plc Employee Share Option Trust is controlled by Wilmington plc.
The registered company addresses for each subsidiary undertaking are abbreviated as shown below.
Registered address Abbreviation 6  14 Underwood Street London N1 7JQ UWS 1209 Orange Street Delaware 19801 ORA Haleson Building 1 Jubilee Street Central Hong Kong HAL 33 Avenue de la republique 75011 Paris AVE 146 Robinson Road 0801 Singapore  ROB Al Thuraya Tower 2 Shekh Zayed Road Dubai ATT Indigo Tower Jumeirah Lakes Towers PO Box 75873 Dubai IND The Capel Building Marys Abbey Dublin 7 Ireland CAP Cloughoge Business Park Newry Countydown Northern Ireland CLO 147 West 35th Street Suite 1802 New York WES 333 West North Avenue Suite 373 Chicago WNA
Trade and other receivables Group Company 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June
Trade receivables 23207 21993 Prepayments and other receivables 5237 4128 49 45 Amounts due from subsidiaries   84814 65927 28444 26121 84863 65972 Amounts due from all subsidiaries are interest free unsecured and are repayable on demand.
Derivative financial investments Group and Company 30 June 30 June Current liabilities Interest rate swap  maturing in November 2016  162 Forward currency contracts  851 Noncurrent liabilities Interest rate swaps  maturing in November 2020 662 1037 Details of these derivative financial assets and liabilities are set out in note 20.
Investments in subsidiaries continued 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Trade and other payables Group Company 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June Trade and other payables 25357 21591 2395 2060 Subscriptions and deferred revenue 26973 22305 Amounts due to subsidiaries   25942 16362 52330 43896 28337 18422 Amounts due to subsidiaries are interest free unsecured and repayable on demand.
Borrowings
Group Company 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June Current liability Bank overdrafts 925 2204 4761 583 925 2204 4761 583 Noncurrent liability Bank loans 49781 47126 15000 12828 Capitalised loan arrangement fees 428 429 428 429 Bank loans net of loan arrangement fees 49353 46697 14572 12399 Bank overdrafts comprise of the net of gross overdraft balances of 13.2m 2016 10.3m and cash positions of 12.3m 2016 8.1m held at Barclays Bank PLC in certain UK companies included in the offsetting agreement.
The 1000 decrease in capitalised loan arrangement fees reflects the net impact of a 146000 payment of fees relating to the extension of the Groups 85m revolving multicurrency credit facility and an amortisation charge of 147000.
Financial instruments and risk management The Groups financial instruments arise from its operations for example trade receivables and trade payables from the financing of its operations for example loans and borrowings and equity and from its risk management activities for example interest rate swaps and forward currency contracts.
The risks to which the Group is exposed include interest rate risk foreign currency risk liquidity and capital risk and credit risk.
Interest rate risk
The Group financing arrangements include external debt that is subject to a variable interest rate.
The Group is consequently exposed to cash flow volatility arising from fluctuations in market interest rates applicable to that external finance.
In particular interest is charged on the 50m 2016 47m amount drawn down on the revolving credit facility at a rate of between 1.50 and 2.25 per cent above LIBOR depending upon leverage.
Cash flow volatility therefore arises from movements in the LIBOR interest rates.
Any undrawn amounts are charged a commitment fee at a rate of 0.9% 2016 0.9%.
Group policy The Group policy is to enter into interest rate swap contracts to maintain the ratio of fixed to variable rate debt at a level that achieves a reasonable cost of debt whilst reducing the exposure to cash flow volatility arising from fluctuations in market interest rates.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Financial instruments and risk management continued Risk management arrangements The Groups interest rate swap contracts offset part of its variable interest payments and replace them with fixed payments.
In particular the Group has hedged its exposure to the LIBOR part of the interest rate for a 21m 2016 21m portion of the loan facility via an interest rate swap as follows z A 7.5m interest rate swap commencing on 13 July 2015 and ending on 1 July 2020 whereby the Group receives interest on 7.5m based on the USD LIBOR rate and pays interest on 7.5m at a fixed rate of 1.79%. on 15m based on LIBOR rate and pays interest on 15m at a fixed rate of 2.00%.
These derivatives have been designated as a cash flow hedge for accounting purposes.
The net settlement of interest on the interest rate swap which comprises a variable rate interest receipt and a fixed rate interest payment is recorded in finance costs in the income statement and so is matched against the corresponding variable rate interest payment on the revolving credit facility.
The derivatives are remeasured at fair value at each reporting date.
This gives rise to a gain or loss the entire amount of which is recognised in Other Comprehensive Income OCI following the Directors assessment of hedge effectiveness.
Sensitivity analysis The Group has performed a sensitivity analysis that measures the estimated charge to the Income Statement and Other Comprehensive Income arising from a 100 basis points bps increase in market interest rates applicable at 30 June 2017 with all other variables remaining constant.
The sensitivity analysis makes the following assumptions z Changes in market interest rates only affect interest income or expense of variable financial instruments z Changes in market interest rates only affect interest income or expense in relation to financial instruments with fixed interest rates if they are recognised at fair value and z Changes in market interest rates do not affect the fair value of derivative financial instruments designated as hedging instruments and all interest rate hedges are expected to be highly effective.
Income Statement 100 bps
OCI
100 bps
Variable rate debt 303 Interest rate swap  209 Foreign currency risk
The currency of the primary economic environment in which the Group operates is Sterling and this is also the currency in which the Group presents its financial statements.
However the Group has significant Euro and US dollar linked cash flows arising from international trading and overseas operations.
The Group is consequently exposed to cash flow volatility arising from fluctuations in the applicable exchange rates for converting Euros and US dollars to Sterling.
Group policy The Group policy is to fix the exchange rate in relation to a periodically reassessed set percentage of expected Euro and US dollar net cash inflows arising from international trading by entering into foreign currency contracts to sell a specified amount of Euros or US dollars on a specified future date at a specified exchange rate.
This set percentage is approved by the Board as part of the budgeting process and upon the acquisition of foreign operations.
The Group policy is to finance investment in overseas operations from borrowings in the local currency of the relevant operation so as to achieve a natural hedge of the foreign currency translation risk.
This natural hedge is designated as a net investment hedge for accounting purposes.
Debt of 18.2m 2016 18.2m has been designated as a net investment hedge relating to the Groups interest in Compliance Week and FRA.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Financial instruments and risk management continued Risk management arrangements The following forward contracts were entered into in order to provide certainty in Sterling terms of 80% of the Groups expected net US dollar and Euro income z On 13 May 2016 the Group sold 1.2m to 24 February 2017 at a rate of 1.2609 z On 13 May 2016 the Group sold 1.2m to 3 March 2017 at a rate of 1.2606 z On 13 May 2016 the Group sold 1.1m to 10 March 2017 at a rate of 1.2601 z On 20 May 2016 the Group sold 3.5m to 27 February 2017 at a rate of 1.4622 z On 20 May 2016 the Group sold 3.5m to 27 February 2017 at a rate of 1.4637 z On 20 May 2016 the Group sold 3.0m to 27 February 2017 at a rate of 1.4657 The above derivatives are remeasured at fair value at each reporting date.
This gives rise to a gain or loss the entire amount of which is recognised in the Income Statement.
The Group has performed a sensitivity analysis that measures the estimated creditcharge to the Income Statement and Other Comprehensive Income arising from a 10% difference in the US Dollar to Sterling and Euro to Sterling exchange rates applicable at 30 June 2017 with all other variables remaining constant.
The sensitivity analysis makes the assumption that changes in foreign currency rates only affect income expense assets and liabilities that are denominated in the relevant currencies.
Income statement OCI 10% 10% 10% 10% Cash and cash equivalents 203 249 Trade receivables including the effect of forward currency contracts 24 29 Currency translation differences   322 393 Net investment hedges   1276 1560 Profit before tax arising overseas 67 17 10% represents Sterling value appreciating compared with other currencies 10% represents Sterling value depreciating compared with other currencies.
Liquidity and capital risk
The Group has historically expanded its operations both organically and via acquisition financed partly by retained profits but also via external finance.
As well as financing cash outflows the Groups activities give rise to working capital obligations and other operational cash outflows.
The Group is consequently exposed to the risk that it cannot meet its obligations as they fall due or can only meet them at an uneconomic price.
Group policy The Group policy is to preserve a strong capital base in order to maintain investor creditor and market confidence and to safeguard the future development of the business but also to balance these objectives with the efficient use of capital by using medium and short term debt.
The Group has in previous years made purchases of its own shares whilst taking into account the availability of credit.
Risk management arrangements The Group ensures its liquidity is maintained by entering into short medium and longterm financial instruments to support operational and other funding requirements.
The Group determines its liquidity requirements by the use of short and longterm cash forecasts.
On 1 July 2015 the Group extended its 65m revolving credit facility with Barclays Bank PLC HSBC Bank plc and The Royal Bank of Scotland plc through to 1 July 2020.
On 17 January 2017 20m of the accordion facility was triggered increasing the total unsecured bank facility to 85m.
This extension was made to fund the acquisition of HSJ note 11.
The extended facility comprised of a revolving credit facility of 80.0m and an overdraft facility across the Group of 5.0m.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Financial instruments and risk management continued The Group had available an undrawn revolving credit facility as follows 30 June 30 June Expiring within one year Expiring after more than one year 30219 12874 The following tables provide a maturity analysis of the remaining contractually agreed cash flows for the Groups nonderivative financial liabilities on an undiscounted basis which therefore differ from the carrying value and fair value
At 30 June 2017 Within 1 Year 1  2 Years 2  5 Years More than 5 Years
Bank overdrafts 925  14  939 Bank loans including interest   51941  51941 Trade payables and accruals 27289    27289 Provisions for future purchase of noncontrolling interests 100    100 28214 100 51955  80269 At 30 June 2016 Within 1 Year 1  2 Years 2  5 Years More than 5 Years
Bank overdrafts 2204  18  2222 Bank loans including interest   49286  49286 Trade payables and accruals 23141    23141 Provisions for future purchase of noncontrolling interests  100   100 25345 100 49304  74749
At 30 June 2017 Within 1 Year 1  2 Years 2  5 Years More than 5 Years
Bank overdrafts 4761    4761 Bank loans including interest   16732  16732 Trade payables accruals and amounts due to subsidiary undertakings 28337    28337 33098  16732  49830 At 30 June 2016 Within 1 Year 1  2 Years 2  5 Years More than 5 Years
Bank overdrafts 583    583 Bank loans including interest   15006  15006 Trade payables accruals and amounts due to subsidiary undertakings 18422    18422 19005  15006  34011 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Financial instruments and risk management continued The Company has entered into an unlimited cross guarantee with the Groups credit facility providers.
Credit Risk
The Groups principal financial assets are receivables and bank balances.
The Group is consequently exposed to the risk that its customers or the credit facility providers cannot meet their obligations as they fall due.
Group policy The Group policy is that the lines of business assess the creditworthiness and financial strength of customers at inception and on an ongoing basis.
The Group also reviews the credit rating of the bank.
Cash is held in banks with a credit rating between AA and BB per Fitch at 12 September 2017.
Risk management arrangements The Groups credit risk is primarily attributable to its trade receivables.
However the Group has no significant exposure to credit risk because its trading is spread over a large number of customers.
The payment terms offered to customers take into account the assessment of their creditworthiness and financial strength and they are set in accordance with industry standards.
The creditworthiness of customers is considered before trading commences.
Most of the Groups customers are large and well established institutions that pay on time and in accordance with the Groups standard terms of business.
The amounts presented in the Balance Sheet are net of allowances for bad and doubtful receivables estimated by management based on prior experience and their assessment of the current economic value.
Set out below is an analysis of the Groups trade receivables by due date prior to any impairment.
Not due 0  30 days 30  60 days Over 60 days
Allowances
Net
At 30 June 2017 14617 3316 1640 4157 23730 522 23208 At 30 June 2016 12889 3844 2261 3619 22613 620 21993 Receivables within the 030 days category or above are past due but the Group considers them to be collectable and not impaired except where specifically provided for.
Set out below is the movement for the year in the allowance for bad and doubtful debts relating to trade receivables.
30 June 30 June Allowances at 1 July telAdditions charged to income statement 385 527 Allowances used 162 47 Allowances reversed 321 596 Allowances at 30 June telFair value of financial assets and financial liabilities The table below sets out the accounting classification and the carrying and fair values of all of the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities.
The carrying value and fair value are equal in all cases.
None of the financial instruments have been reclassified during the year.
All items classified as fair value through profit and loss are held for trading.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Financial instruments and risk management continued
At 30 June 2017 Fair value through profit and loss Loans and receivables
Amortised cost
Total
Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents  10687    10687 Trade and other receivables  26350    26350 37037    37037 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables    27289  27289 Bank overdrafts    925  925 Bank loans    49781  49781 Interest rate swaps   662   662 Forward currency contracts Put options for noncontrolling interests     100 100 662 77995 100 78757 At 30 June 2016 Fair value through profit and loss Loans and receivables
Amortised cost
Total
Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents  14642    14642 Trade and other receivables  24234    24234 38876    38876 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables    23141  23141 Bank overdrafts    2204  2204 Bank loans    47126  47126 Interest rate swaps   1199   1199 Forward currency contracts 851     851 Put options for noncontrolling interests     100 100 851  1199 72471 100 74621
At 30 June 2017 Fair value through profit and loss Loans and receivables
Amortised cost
Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents  70   70 Trade and other receivables  84863   84863 Forward currency contracts 84933   84933 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables    28337 28337 Bank overdrafts    4761 4761 Bank loans    14572 14572 Interest rate swaps   662  662 662 47670 48332 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Financial instruments and risk management continued At 30 June 2016 Fair value through profit and loss Loans and receivables
Amortised cost
Financial assets Cash and cash equivalents  1603   1603 Trade and other receivables  65927   65927 67530   67530 Financial liabilities Trade and other payables    18422 18422 Bank overdrafts    583 583 Bank loans    12828 12828 Interest rate swaps   1199  1199 Forward currency contracts 851    851 851  1199 31833 33883 Fair value measurement The methods and assumptions used to estimate the fair values of financial assets and liabilities are as follows z The carrying amount of trade receivables and payables approximates to fair value due to the short maturity of the amounts receivable and payable z The fair value of the Groups borrowings are estimated on the basis of the discounted value of future cash flows using approximate discount rates in effect at the balance sheet date and z The fair value of the Groups outstanding interest rate swaps foreign exchange contracts and put options for noncontrolling interest are estimated using discounted cash flow models and market rates of interest and foreign exchange at the balance sheet date.
The table below analyses financial instruments measured at fair value via a valuation method.
The different levels have been defined as Level 1 Quoted prices unadjusted in active markets for identical assets or liabilities Level 2 Inputs other than quoted prices included within level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability either directly that is as prices or indirectly that is derived from prices and Level 3 Inputs for the asset or liability that are not based on observable market data that is unobservable inputs.
Group and Company At 30 June 2017 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Liabilities
Financial liabilities at fair value through income or expense Trading derivatives at fair value through the income statement Financial liabilities at fair value through equity Derivative financial instruments designated for hedging  662  662 Total liabilities  662  662 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Financial instruments and risk management continued At 30 June 2016 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Liabilities
Financial liabilities at fair value through income or expense Trading derivatives at fair value through the income statement  851  851 Financial liabilities at fair value through equity Derivative financial instruments designated for hedging  1199  1199 Total liabilities  2050  2050 Deferred tax Movements on deferred tax assets are as follows
Company
Noncurrent assets Asset at 30 June telDeferred tax creditcharge in the income statement for the year 363 33 Deferred tax credit in other comprehensive income for the year 155 155 Deferred tax charge included directly in equity for the year 138 138 Asset at 30 June telDeferred tax creditcharge in the income statement for the year 134 165 Deferred tax charge in other comprehensive income for the year 106 106 Deferred tax charge included directly in equity for the year 151 151 Effect on deferred tax of change in corporation tax 7 7 Exchange translation difference 8 Asset at 30 June telThe Group deferred tax asset arises as a result of tax on share based payments 154000 2016 306000 future deductions available on US deferred consideration 375000 2016 396000 fair value interest rate swap losses 131000 2016 240000 and future deductions available on US losses carried forward 160000 2016 nil.
It is anticipated that the Group and Company will make sufficient taxable profit to allow the benefit of the deferred tax asset to be utilised.
Movements on deferred tax liabilities are as follows
Company
Noncurrent liabilities Liability at 30 June 2015 3762 Deferred tax credit in the income statement for the year 607 Acquisition of subsidiaries 1012 Effect on deferred tax of change in corporation tax rate 178 Liability at 30 June 2016 3989 Deferred tax credit in the income statement for the year 1113 Acquisition of subsidiaries 1833 Effect on deferred tax of change in corporation tax rate 124 Liability at 30 June 2017 4585 The deferred tax liability arises as a result of accelerated tax on amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software and on the depreciation of property plant and equipment.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Share capital Number of ordinary shares of 5p each Ordinary shares Share premium account Treasury shares
Authorised
At 1 July 2016 and 30 June 2017 110000000 5500 Issued and fully paid ordinary shares At 1 July 2015 86507461 4325 45225 96 49454 Shares issued 478270 24   24 At 30 June 2016 86985731 4349 45225 96 49478 Shares issued 262243 13   13 At 30 June 2017 87247974 4362 45225 96 49491 On 19 September 2016 262243 ordinary shares were issued in respect of the vesting of the 2013 PSP Share Awards to employees including Directors.
At 30 June 2017 46584 shares 2016 46584 were held in Treasury which represents 0.1% 2016 0.1% of the called up share capital of the Company.
Share based payments a Share Awards Details of Directors share awards are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report.
In addition to the Directors a limited number of the senior management team are also granted share awards.
Under the Wilmington Group plc 2007 Performance Share Plan Year of grant
Award Date of vesting Number of shares for which awards outstanding at 1 July 2016 Awards granted during year Awards vested during year Awards lapsed during year Number of shares for which awards outstanding at 30 June 2017 2013 Nil Sep 2016 241226  241226 2014 Nil Sep 2017 178308    178308 2015 Nil Sep 2018 188337    188337 2016 Nil Sep 2019  233092   233092 241226 awards vested on 19 September 2016 at a share price of 2.50.
The fair value of the awards granted during the year was 2.47 per award.
Details of the Performance Share Plan are set out in the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 50 to 52.
These awards were valued using the Black Scholes method with the following assumptions z Expected volatility % 20.77 z Expected life years 3 z Expected dividends % Nil Expected volatility was determined by reference to the historical volatility of the Groups share price.
The expected life used in the model is the midpoint of the exercise period.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Share based payments continued b Company Share Option Plan CSOP On 15 September 2016 the company awarded share options to selected key management under a CSOP .
This is a discretionary scheme consisting of an HMRC approved schedule and an unapproved schedule which enables a company to grant share options to selected employees over shares with a maximum cumulative value per individual of 30000 at the date of the grant.
The exercise price of the granted options is equal to the market price of the shares on the date of the grant.
Options are conditional on the employee completing three years service the vesting period so act as a lockin incentive the options have a contractual option term of ten years.
The options are exercisable starting three years from the grant date subject to the Group achieving its target growth in earnings per share over the period of inflation plus 3%.
The Group has no legal or constructive obligation to repurchase or settle the options in cash.
Movements in the number of share options outstanding and their related weighted average exercise price are as follows Year of grant
Award Date of vesting Number of shares for which awards outstanding at 1 July 2016 Awards granted during year Awards vested during year Awards lapsed during year Number of shares for which awards outstanding at 30 June 2017 2015 2.625 Sep 2018 235461   19796 215665 2016 2.455 Sep 2019  362756  37982 324774 The fair value of the options granted during the year was 0.38 per option.
These awards were valued using the Black Scholes method with the following assumptions z Expected volatility % 25.46 z Expected life years 6.5 z Expected dividends % 3.28 Expected volatility was determined by reference to the historical volatility of the Groups share price.
The expected life used in the model is the midpoint of the exercise period.
An expense of 552000 2016 563000 was recognised in the income statement of the group for share based payments.
Of this expense 552000 2016 563000 was recognised in the parent company income statement.
Noncontrolling interests Net Non controlling interests At 30 June 2015 277 Profit for the year 143 Dividends paid 141 Movements in noncontrolling interests 126 At 30 June 2016 153 Profit for the year 38 Dividends paid 105 At 30 June 2017 86 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017
The Group had in relation to property plant and equipment capital commitments contracted but not provided for at 30 June 2017 of nil 2016 nil.
Group Company 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June Not later than one year 2297 1388 575 111 Later than one year and not later than five years 9418 3003 5939 445 Later than five years 8357 3975 8327 3838 20072 8366 14841 4394 In the year the Group conducted a review of its London property portfolio.
All related commitments in relation to this review have been considered in the summary above for further details of costs incurred in the year see note 4c.
Related party transactions The Company and its wholly owned subsidiary undertakings offer certain Groupwide purchasing facilities to the Companys other subsidiary undertakings whereby the actual costs are recharged.
The Company has made recharges totalling 1405927 2016 1686228 to its fellow group undertakings in respect of management services.
Amounts due from and to subsidiary undertakings by the Company are set out in notes 16 and 18 respectively.
During the year the Company received dividends of 8758300 from subsidiaries 2016 14522323.
The Chief Executive Officer Pedro Ros owns a minority shareholding in SMARP OY a company incorporated in Finland which provides social media services to the Group.
During the year the Group paid 17856 2016 29016 to SMARP UK Limited a subsidiary of SMARP OY .
Close family members of key management personnel provided services for the Group during the year for lecturing writing production exam marking services and photography.
The total invoiced for these services was 63171 2016 100310.
Staff and their pay and benefits a Employee costs including Directors were as follows Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Wages and salaries 43779 38200 Social security costs 4882 4466 Other pension costs 940 709 Share based payments including social security costs 552 563 50153 43938 Excluded from wages and salaries are redundancy costs in the year of 625000 2016 243000.
AR2017
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Staff and their pay and benefits continued b Remuneration of key management personnel that held office for part or all of the year 2017 11 people 2016 16 people which includes the Directors and other key management personnel is shown in the table below Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Shortterm employee benefits 3166 3515 Compensation for loss of office Postemployment benefits 86 76 Share based payments 424 514 3676 4105 More detailed information concerning Directors remuneration shareholdings pension entitlement share options and other long term incentive plans is shown in the audited part of the Directors Remuneration Report on pages 47 to 62 which forms part of the consolidated financial statements.
Year ended 30 June
Year ended 30 June
Cost of Sales 547 517 Administration 44telTotal full time equivalents at 30 June 2017 were 856 2016 774.
The Group contributes to defined contribution pension schemes.
Total contributions to the schemes during the year were 940000 2016 709000.
Cash generated from operations Group Company 30 June 30 June 30 June 30 June Profitloss from continuing operations before income tax 15862 3434 9131 8769 Other adjusting items included in operating expenses 3468 2352 1943 887 Gain on sale of leasehold property 6333  6333 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1Amortisation of intangible assets 7193 6595 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 2366 15659 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 20 4 Share based payments including social security costs 55telFinance costs 1961 1920 1102 1186 Operating cash flows before movements in working capital 26120 24562 6490 11507 Increasedecrease in trade and other receivables 1997 2434 18048 1102 Increase in trade and other payables 2530 1744 8948 7845 Cash generatedused from operations before adjusting items 26653 23872 2610 20454 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Notes to the Financial Statements Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 Cash generated from operations continued Cash conversion is calculated as a percentage of cash generated by operations to Adjusted EBITA as follows Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Funds from operations before adjusting items Adjusted EBITA 23352 22042 Share based payments including social security costs 552 563 Amortisation of intangible assets  computer software 1165 1050 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1071 911 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 20 4 Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 26120 24562 Net working capital movement 533 690 Funds from operations before adjusting items 26653 23872 Cash conversion 114% 108% Free cash flows Operating cash flows before movement in working capital 26120 24562 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment 43 4 Net working capital movement 533 690 Interest paid 1656 1502 Tax paid 3905 3197 Purchase of property plant and equipment 1300 641 Purchase of intangible assets 1599 870 Free cash flows 18236 17658 Events after the reporting period Purchase of minority interest In July 2017 the Group purchased the remaining 20% shareholding in Central Law Training Scotland Limited for 335000 making it a wholly owned subsidiary.
Forward contracts On 3 July 2017 the following forward contracts were entered into in order to provide certainty in Sterling terms of 80% of the Groups expected net US dollar and Euro income z The Group sold 5.0m at an average rate of 1.1358 z The Group sold 10.0m at an average rate of 1.3071 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 site Stock Code WIL Financial Statements Pro Forma Five Year Financial Summary
Operating expenses before adjusting items 68.1 71.3 74.7 83.1 97.0 Adjusted EBITA 16.0 17.8 19.5 22.0 23.4 Other adjusting items 1.3 0.8 1.1 2.4 3.5 Gain on disposal of property 3.3    6.3 Amortisation of intangible assets excluding computer software 6.1 6.3 6.1 5.4 6.0 Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets 4.5   15.7 2.4 Operating profitloss 7.4 10.7 12.3 1.5 17.8 Finance costs 2.3 2.1 2.0 1.9 2.0 Lossprofit on ordinary activities before tax 5.1 8.6 10.3 3.4 15.9 Taxation 1.5 2.0 2.4 2.9 3.0 Lossprofit on ordinary activities after tax 3.6 6.6 7.9 6.3 12.9 Adjusted Profit before Tax 13.8 15.7 17.5 20.3 21.4 Cash generated from operations before adjusting items 19.4 20.2 21.9 23.9 26.7 Basic earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations pence 4.17 7.59 8.96 7.39 14.72 Diluted earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations pence 4.07 7.39 8.83 7.39 14.62 Adjusted earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations pence 12.26 13.95 15.57 18.17 19.05 Interim and proposed final dividend per share pence 7.0 7.3 7.7 8.1 8.5 Dividend cover Return on equity % Return on equity excluding impairment Return on sales % Following managements decision to include share based payment costs within adjusted results all measures affected by adjusted profit in the table below have been recalculated to reflect this change and to allow comparability to the current year performance.
Dividend cover  Adjusted earnings per ordinary share from continuing operations divided by the interim and proposed final dividend per share Return on equity  Adjusted Profit Before Tax divided by the average equity attributable to owners of the parent Return on equity  Adjusted Profit Before Tax divided by the average equity attributable to owners of the parent excluding the effects of the following impairments on equity 4.5m year ended 30 June 2013 15.7m year ended 30 June 2016 2.4m year ended 30 June 2017 Return on sales  Adjusted EBITA divided by Revenue 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc Annual Report and Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2017 New operating segments Unaudited Reconciliation June 2017
Risk and
Professional
Healthcare
Risk and Compliance 42272 42272 Finance 24859 24859 Legal 14613 14613 Insight 38585 38585 Revenue 120329 42272 39472 38585 As % of revenue 35% 33% 32%
EBITA
Risk and
Professional
Healthcare
Risk and Compliance 12265 12265 Finance 4071 4071 Legal 1793 1793 Insight 9705 9705 Contribution 27834 12265 5864 9705 As % of Contribution 44% 21% 35% Unallocated central overheads 3930 Share based payments 552 Adjusted EBITA 23352 Reconciliation June 2016
Risk and
Professional
Healthcare
Risk and Compliance 38802 38802 Finance 21219 21219 Legal 15524 15524 Insight 30179 Revenue 105724 38802 36743 30179 As % of revenue 37% 35% 29%
EBITA
Risk and
Professional
Healthcare
Risk and Compliance 12678 12678 Finance 4473 4473 Legal 1686 1686 Insight 7316 Contribution 26153 12678 6159 7316 As % of Contribution 48% 24% 28% Unallocated central overheads 3548 Share based payments 563 Adjusted EBITA 22042 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Financial Statements Advisers and Corporate Calendar Financial advisers and joint stockbrokers Numis Securities Limited 10 Paternoster Square
EC4M 7LT Canaccord Genuity Limited 88 Wood Street
EC2V 9QR Independent auditor PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 1 Embankment Place
WC2N 6RH
Gowling WLG 4 More London Riverside
SE1 2AU Principal bankers Barclays Bank PLC 1 Churchill Place Canary Wharf
E14 5HP
Equiniti Limited Aspect House Spencer Road
BN99 6DA Shareholder helpline 44 0tel UK 44tel Overseas Corporate calendar Annual General Meeting 2 November 2017 Announcement of Final Results 13 September 2017 Announcement of Interim Results February 2018 Registered address 6  14 Underwood Street
N1 7JQ Wilmington plc 6  14 Underwood Street
N1 7JQ telsite site Stock Code WIL 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 255704
27 September 2017 1058 AM Proof 4 Wilmington plc 614 Underwood Street
