genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 genedrive plc Annual Report
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 genedrive plc is focused on decentralising molecular diagnostics concentrating on applications where our technology will provide sustainable growth.
Strategic Report Highlights 1 Our Focus 2
Chairmans Statement 4
Chief Executives Review 6
Market Opportunity 8
Financial Review 12
Key Performance Indicators 13 Principal Risks And Uncertainties 15
Board of Directors 16 Directors Report 18
Directors Remuneration Report 21
Corporate Governance Report 25 Financial Statements Independent Auditors Report Group 27 Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Comprehensive Income 32 Consolidated Balance Sheet 33 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 34 Consolidated Cash Flow Statement 35 Notes to the Financial Statements 36 Independent Auditors Report Company 61 Company Balance Sheet 65 Company Statement of Changes in Equity 66 Company Statement of Cash Flows 67 Notes to the Company Financial Statements 68 Directors Secretary and Advisers 71 WHAT WE DO Introduction and highlights Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
Operational Highlights
Proprietary Genedrive Hepatitis C HCV test submitted for CE marking Continued positive progress with the US DoD biohazard identifier programme including extension of programme into next phase Successful field trials of Genedrive aquaculture testing programme performed in collaboration with the Centre for Environment Fisheries and Aquaculture Science Cefas Disappointing uptake of MTBRIF assay in India in part owing to sample preparation problems specific to MTB and commercial issues Name change from Epistem Holdings Plc to genedrive plc and 6m raised from July 2016 placing  strategic focus on molecular diagnostics business opportunities
Financial Highlights
Post Year End CE marking obtained for Genedrive HCV ID kit Entered into a distribution agreement with Sysmex Europe for Genedrive HCV ID kit in the EMEA region with an initial focus on Africa Entered into the next stage of the US DoD biohazard programme worth approximately 1.4m in development income and a further 0.5m in product sales all expected to be recognised in the current financial year 0.6m conditional grant offer from Innovate UK to fund centrifuge free plasma separation device 13.7% Revenue and other income 2016 5.1m 3.2% Service Income 2016 3.1m Turnover of 5.8m up 13.7% 2016 5.1m Strong growth in Genedrive development income to 2.6m 2016 2.0m principally driven by the US Department of Defense DoD biohazard programme Moderate increase in Service income to 3.2m 2016 3.1m Trading loss improvement to 4.9m 2016 5.4m despite increased Research and Development and Administrative costs Cash at 30 June 2017 of 5.1m 2016 1.1m post 6.0m equity fund raising in July 2016 30 September 2017 cash of 4.2 unaudited Loss for the year 6.4m up 8.5% from 5.9m in the prior year reflecting an impairment charge and tax credit 30.0%
Income
2016 2.0m 363.6%
2016 1.1m Page Title at start Content Section at start
Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Easy to use single button operation with simple software.
SIMPLE
VERSATILE
FAST
OUR FOCUS Changing the way molecular diagnostics and personalised medicine are delivered to decentralised laboratories.
Overview
Genedrive is a patented small polymerase chain reaction PCR platform which enables rapid nucleic acid amplification and detection from various sample types including plasma sputum and buccal swabs.
With minimal hands on time and single button operation it provides diagnostic results without the need for specialist knowledge or data interpretation.
With no manual calibration or maintenance required Genedrive is ideal for low throughput decentralised laboratories.
Results available in as little as 50 minutes.
Various sample types including plasma sputum or buccal swab.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Our Focus Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
COST
PORTABLE
Decentralised testing supported by mains power or UPS battery pack.
Affordable platform facilitates testing in low throughput settings.
How Genedrive works Genedrive utilises proprietary technology to rapidly amplify and detect target nucleic acid sequences without the requirement for nucleic acid isolation.
Genedrive provides rapid nucleic acid amplification and detection from various sample types including plasma sputum or buccal swab assay dependent.
Following PCR amplification melting curve analysis is used to establish the presence of the target sequence in the sample and the results are automatically interpreted by Genedrive.
An internal control IPC is included for each assay.
Depending on assay results are available in as little as 50 minutes.
50 minutes minimal amount of time before results are available Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
CHAIRMANS STATEMENT
Ian Gilham Ph.
Chairman genedrive plc is well positioned for growth in the rapidly growing point of need molecular testing market.
Dear Shareholder I am pleased to report that 201617 has seen us make further progress on our journey to refocus the Company on the highly attractive opportunities which the Genedrive diagnostics platform offers in the rapidly growing market for decentralised near patient diagnostic tests.
Key Achievements A major focus for the year was the development of our Genedrive HCV ID Kit.
With the advent of new curative direct acting antiviral treatments for Hepatitis C HCV there is a major opportunity to tackle the global burden of the disease if accurate decentralised diagnostics can be used to identify those living with HCV and give them access to therapy.
Our Genedrive HCV ID Kit was submitted for CE registration in April 2017 based on excellent performance data from clinical validation studies.
Post year end I am delighted that we obtained CE marking a vital first step to commercialization.
We are also delighted to have entered into a distribution agreement with Sysmex Europe to target the commercial HCV opportunity in Africa.
The agreement covers the EMEA region with an initial focus on multiple countries in Africa.
Working together the two companies will focus on securing the required regulatory approvals and we anticipate commercial traction during the 201718 financial year.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Chairmans Statement Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Other Activities The pathogen detection programme with the US DoD contributed significantly to the current year revenues and included shipments of Genedrive units and assays for field use testing.
Post year end we also received confirmation that following successful evaluations the programme will be entering its next phase worth 1.4m in development income and 0.5m in product sales to be recognised in the year to 30 June 2018.
As previously announced we encountered a specific sample preparation problem relating to a supplier component in the MTBRIF test.
An alternative solution had been successfully tested in Indian laboratories however we have had difficulty assessing the impact of this through our commercial partner.
In the light of these challenges we are considering how best to address the Indian MTBRIF market and the broader potential of Genedrive in this area.
As stated in the trading statement of 13 July 2017 no additional short term revenues were expected from MTBRIF in India.
However the TB market is large and there is significant potential for Genedrive.
Away from our core human healthcare focus we enjoyed success with funded field trials of Genedrive for whitespot disease detection in farmed shrimp.
The results validated Genedrives potential as a rapid cost effective system for disease detection in animals.
The Company however remains focused on the human health market and will only pursue this opportunity further if a commercial partner can be identified.
With modest investment the Services division continued to contribute to the Group.
Revenues and operating margin were up on the same period last year.
The Board wishes to see the division divested and discussions are ongoing in order to pursue that as a strategic aim and thereby secure additional investment capital for Genedrive.
While we remain optimistic that an appropriate divestment can be secured we believe the division can continue to contribute to the Group should a sale not be secured.
Governance and People Strong governance and values are vitally important to the success of the Company and the Board remains focused on ensuring its own effectiveness and that of the governance processes throughout the Company.
The Board has recently gone through some changes.
John Rylands stepped down from the Board in November 2016 and we thank him for his excellent contribution to the Company and wish him well for the future.
Matthew Fowler joined the Board on 13 December 2016 in his role as Chief Financial Officer.
Matthew brings to the role strong business skills and extensive experience in listed businesses which are already proving of great benefit to the Company.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank our staff and extend this thanks to our investors and customers for their commitment and support.
We look forward to updating investors during the year on further progress and delivery against our strategic objectives.
Dr Ian Gilham
17 October 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
CHIEF EXECUTIVES REVIEW
Overview
Our transition to a commercial stage diagnostics business is well underway. business built around the Genedrive platform.
I am pleased with the progress made in the year but we are aware there are still challenges ahead of us for the Company to fully realise the considerable potential of Genedrive.
David Budd
Chief Executive Officer
We continue to make strong progress with a disciplined approach to executing our strategy.
Our Performance Revenue for the period was 5.8m up 13.7% from the 5.1m on the prior period.
This yearoveryear growth in revenue was driven by the Diagnostics division that saw revenue growth of 36.8% to 2.6m 2016 1.9m.
Our pathogen detection programme with the DoD was central to this growth with revenue of 2.2m up 0.5m from 2016.
Services revenue was 3.2m 2016 3.1m up 3.2%.
We closed the year with 5.1m of cash 2016 1.1m.
Targeted investment of our cash resources remains vital as we assess and prioritise the various commercial and development opportunities before us.
The Genedrive Platform  Strategic Progress During the year we announced the successful studies on our HCV ID kit conducted at the Institut Pasteur Paris and Queens University Nottingham.
Following these successful studies that showed overall sensitivity of greater than 99% and specificity of 100% the product was submitted for CE marking in April 2017.
I am pleased that in September 2017 the product obtained its CE registration.
With the HCV ID kit now CE registered we are in a position to begin commercialisation efforts.
We have signed a distribution agreement with Sysmex Europe a world leader in clinical laboratory systemization and solutions for the EMEA with an initial focus on Africa.
Working together the companies will now focus on securing the required regulatory approvals in individual territories of Africa and we anticipate commercial traction during the 20172018 financial year.
This agreement is an important step to providing access to Genedrive across target countries in Africa and we are delighted to be working with Sysmex Europe who have the experience and networks needed to market and commercialise the product.
Our Genedrive HCV ID kit will initially be launched and sold into decentralised laboratories being facilities outside of large hospitals.
Our test is performed from plasma which is currently isolated from whole blood using a centrifuge.
As direct acting antiviral use increases in the future we anticipate an increased demand for diagnostics in even smaller pointofneed facilities.
To support future positioning in this user segment the Company has secured a 0.6m conditional offer of development funding from Innovate UK.
When confirmed the grant will be used to further our Centrifuge Free Plasma Separation device concept so that Page Title at start Content Section at start Chief Executives Review Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 smaller facilities without centrifuges can also use Genedrive HCV ID.
We also intend to refine improve and simplify other aspects of the HCV test to make it even more suitable for point of need testing to maximize its commercial potential.
Commercialisation of our MTB test in India has continued to be challenging in the past year primarily owing to a component issue in the sample preparation process specific to that test but also compounded by commercial issues.
We believe we have resolved the problem but until validated in the field revenues are not expected in the short term.
The market dynamics of MTB have not changed since genedrive plc identified the opportunity the market is large and well defined and there is significant potential in smaller laboratories.
However with the benefit of experience acquired in the field we are considering how best to address the Indian market and the broader potential of Genedrive MTBRIF in this area.
It is possible that to fully exploit the potential of MTB we may need to more fully refine our sample preparation processes before re engaging the market.
The programme with the DoD has seen continued success.
This work involves collaboration with the DoD to develop biohazard tests for Genedrive in the context of a small portable diagnostics device capable of deployment in the field.
The work not only validates Genedrive as a flexible and accurate diagnostics device it has helped to fund important developments such as Bluetooth connectivity and uninterruptible power supply that will benefit customer adoption.
The DoD has not indicated the intended future sustained use of Genedrive and as such it is not possible for us to predict future commercial revenues.
However post year end an additional funding award was made to support the continuation of the project and an award was made to support ongoing validation work.
This additional funding is expected to generate approximately 1.4m in development and commercial income of 0.5m for the financial year to 30 June 2018.
Services Operations As previously stated we have been seeking strategic alternatives for our Services business including considering divestment.
We have yet to secure a disposal although discussions are ongoing but should a divestment on acceptable terms not be possible we remain flexible to the division being retained within the Company.
We do believe that focusing our efforts on Genedrive should remain a core strategic priority.
Revenues from our larger US based programmes were slightly down in the year 8.8% but the decline is owing to the lifecycle of the projects as opposed to underlying trends in the market.
Conversely European business enjoyed a good period of growth 17.8% year over year.
The growth was delivered from a growing number of programmes with smaller customers and was aided by improvements to our marketing contacts and relationship management.
Outlook
We are now entering a defining period for genedrive plc.
The CE marked Genedrive HCV ID kit positions the Company as first to market with an affordable and cost effective HCV test.
In the current financial year we will be working with our distribution partners to begin commercialisation efforts and secure requisite regulatory approvals.
While we have challenges with MTB our experience in the market and successes with the DoD and CEFAS projects underline the potential of the Genedrive as a flexible portable and cost effective platform for decentralised molecular diagnostics.
To more fully realise that potential particularly outside decentralised laboratories at point of care we intend to focus some development work on refining improving and simplifying product workflow.
This will maximise the commercial potential in HCV and in other infectious diseases including MTB.
The Board is encouraged by the growing momentum in the business and the outlook for genedrive plc.
David Budd
Chief Executive Officer
17 October 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Prevalence of HCV in Top 20 countries millions China 29.8 India 18.2 Egypt 11.8 Pakistan 9.4 Indonesia 9.4 Russia 5.8 USA 5.4
Congo 4 Nigeria 3.3 Japan 3.1 Cameroon 2.8 Brazil 2.6 Uganda 2.2 Ukraine 1.9 Philippines 1.9 Italy 1.9 Uzbekistan 1.8 Turkey 1.5 Thailand 1.5 Ethiopia 1.5 Genedrive Application for Hepatitis C Genedrive is affordable and cost effective avoiding the high costs and commitments of central laboratory solutions.
Portable and highly accurate results made available to smaller laboratories or clinics to support accelerated treatment decisions and initiation.
MARKET OPPORTUNITY
Hepatitis C
It is estimated that 71 million people are living with chronic HCV infection and that 80% of those people are undiagnosed. decentralised point of need HCV qualitative test.
Partners
Distribution agreement signed with Sysmex to target commercial opportunities in EMEA with initial focus on Africa.
DECENTRALISED
TESTING
COST
EFFECTIVE
MOLECULAR
SOLUTION
Early diagnosis of hepatitis infection is critical for effective treatment and care.
Yet globally less than 5% of persons with chronic viral hepatitis are aware of their status.
Awareness is lacking reliable diagnostics that are appropriate for the setting of intended use and testing services are not sufficiently available and laboratory capacity is weak.
World Health Organisation Page Title at start Content Section at start Market Opportunity Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Clinical validation performed by Institute Pasteur Paris and Queens Medical Centre
CE marking obtained September 2017 Availability of new treatments at sustainable developing world prices is driving the need for decentralised diagnostics.
Significant global players could offer future opportunity for partnership development and distribution opportunities.
Commercialisation Strategy Launch Target Locations HCV Launch Prioritised list of countries based on HCV dynamics Positive engagement with global and regional NGOs to support rollout Commercial partner for EMEA region secured Company in active discussions for further geographies
OPPORTUNITIES
NEW TREATMENT
SUCCESSFUL
VALIDATION
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 MARKET OPPORTUNITY
Genedrive tuberculosis test is designed as an affordable rapid PCRbased test for the detection of MTB and rifampicin Rif resistance.
Target Market The TB market is large and well defined.
The Genedrive MTBRIF assay aims to increase the adoption and availability of sophisticated molecular diagnostic analysis.
Within India we are targeting small to medium size labs where throughput does not support more expensive lab equipment but where Genedrive can replace the need to refer to central labs.
TB is the largest single infectious cause of death among young people and adults TB diagnosis in many countries is still reliant on microscopy Molecular testing is the fastest growing TB test segment T uberculosis
Partners
Progress
Commercial traction in the first half of the year was impaired by a sample preparation component problem.
During the second half of the year we identified the issue isolated the component and sourced a replacement.
Commercial and contractual issues during this time have slowed our ability to subsequently reengage the market.
Currently the Company has the option to continue with the product or return to the market in the medium term with further refined sample preparation approach that could allow us to target market opportunities beyond India.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Non clinical applications
Pathogen
Detection
Portability flexibility and accuracy make Genedrive an attractive solution on pathogen detection markets.
Biodefence
The US DoD funded collaboration project on biohazard tests for Genedrive has continued to be a success.
The programme represents external validation for our development capability as well as significant funding for the enhancement and development of the Genedrive unit.
Revenues of 2.2m 2016 1.7m Units and assays delivered for fields trials Post year end the Company announced it had entered the next stage of the programme The Company expects around 1.4m of development income from the work in the year ending June 2018 plus an additional 0.5m of productrelated income.
Biodefence
Aquaculture
Aquaculture
Beyond the human healthcare market during the year funded filed trials of Genedrive for whitespot disease detection in farmed shrimp were conducted in collaboration with Cefas.
The positive outcomes demonstrate the potential of Genedrive for cost effective disease detection in animals.
The Company is actively seeking business partners to realise the commercial opportunities that may exist in this adjacent market.
Collaboration with Centre For Environment Fisheries and Aquaculture Sciences Cefas Point of need aquaculture test for diagnosis of pathogens Successful in country testing in Thailand in November 2016 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
FINANCIAL REVIEW
Results for the year delivered revenue and other income of 5.8m 2016 5.1m.
Research and development costs were 5.1m 2016 4.8m reflecting the continued investment in our Genedrive technology.
Contract and administration costs were 5.6m 2016 5.7m and gave a trading loss for the year of 4.9m 2016 5.4m.
During the year the Group reviewed the useful economic life of its intangible assets.
The conclusion from this review was that the assumed useful economic lives were too long given the rapid advances of technology in the market.
The Group has therefore shortened the remaining lives of the assets and impaired the assets down to their fair value.
This 2.4m noncash charge 2016 nil has been separated out on the face of the income statement to give readers a better understanding of the underlying performance of the Group.
Financing costs of 0.2m 2016 1.1m relate to the dollar denominated Global Health Investment Fund GHIF convertible bond.
The terms of the bond were amended in the year to 30 June 2016 but had an effective date for accounting period to 30 June 2017.
The total charge comprised 0.1m related to foreign exchange losses and 0.1m of fair value movements.
The fair value movements include both the IFRS financing charge for the year and a fair value gain on the amendment signed in the year.
The financing costs are all noncash following an election under the signed amendment to defer interest payable into the principal.
After financing costs and the impairment of intangibles the loss before taxation was 7.5m 2016 6.5m.
This reduces to 6.4m 2016 5.9m after the Research and development taxation credit for the year.
The basic loss per share was 34.9p 2016 56.2p.
Cash Resources Operating cash outflows were 7.3m 2016 5.4m.
Working capital contributed 1.3m 2016 nil to give a net cash outflow from operations of 2.6m 2016 4.2m.
Working capital movements were mainly owing to debtors as the Company benefitted from a movement to monthly invoicing on the DoD contract and the successful management of long overdue items.
Interest inflows were nil 2016 0.3m outflow.
Tax received was 0.8m 2016 0.7m and relates to cash received under the Corporation Tax Research and Development tax relief scheme operated in the UK.
In July 2016 the Company raised 6.0m after costs from the placement of 8125000 new ordinary shares.
The Group closed the year with cash of 5.1m 30 June 2016 1.1m.
Balance Sheet At the year end the convertible bond was 5.2m up from 5.0m in 2016.
The fair value gains from the amendment in July 2016 were offset by foreign exchange losses and the annual finance cost on the bond.
Genedrive related revenue was key to the growth in revenue for the year.
Given this growth we are approaching the criteria for triggering the 1.3m 2016 1.3m deferred consideration payable in shares however the Directors still consider it appropriate to classify the liability as noncurrent.
Balance sheet net assets at 30 June 2017 totaled 3.4m 30 June 2016 3.8m.
The increase in share capital of 6.0m is directly from the shares issue in July 2016.
Offsetting this increase was the consolidated loss for the year 6.4m 2016 5.9m loss.
Matthew Fowler Chief Financial Officer 17 October 2017 Matthew Fowler Chief Financial Officer Growth in the Diagnostics division underpinning the performance for the year.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Review Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS We report a strong growth in overall income driven by Genedrive development income.
Services income was slightly up in the period.
We report continued increase in development expenditure and increased administration costs as the Company focuses on the launch of the Genedrive molecular diagnostics platform.
Group Revenue Significant growth from Genedrive Development income Results After Tax Loss before tax interest finance costs and impairment of intangible assets of 4.9m Cash Reserves Cash reserves of 5.1m following 6.0m Placing in July 2016 Page Title at start Content Section at start Key Performance Indicators genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
Preclinical Services
Preclinical Research Services 2.1m revenue up from 2.0
Services Revenue Preclinical Research Services at 1.1m revenue Diagnostics Genedrive
Genedrive development collaboration delivered 2.6m income up from 1.9m Research and Development Costs Research and Development costs grew in 2017 to 5.1m
Costs
Administration costs amounted to 2.6m Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 PRINCIPAL RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES For the year ended 30 June 2017 The Board meets regularly to review operations and to discuss risk areas.
Details of the financial risks are disclosed in note 20 to the financial statements.
The Directors regularly assess and monitor the business risks faced by the Group.
Risk is an inherent feature of business and set out below are some key risks together with associated mitigating factors.
This list does not purport to be exhaustive.
Development Risk The Group undertakes significant activity with the aim of launching new products therapies and services.
There can be no guarantee that the development activity will enable the programmes to meet the technical and intellectual property hurdles required for a commercial launch to be undertaken.
The Group seeks to mitigate this risk by ensuring that development programmes are planned and undertaken by staff with the requisite skills.
The Group monitors industry trends and customer needs to ensure that its development targets remain relevant.
The Groups services to clients relate to projects which are also subject to development risk.
The Board regularly monitors the client profile and seeks to broaden the client base where possible.
Further information on significant clients is detailed in note 2 the financial statements.
Financing Risk In the forthcoming period the Board anticipates that the Groups investment in its development activities described above is likely to require additional equity investment into the Group.
The Board maintains close dialogue with the Groups advisers to monitor shareholder support for its investment programme and the Board is satisfied that it may reasonably expect to raise appropriate equity finance.
However there remains a risk that further equity fundraising will not be possible and in this event the Board will review the funding options available to the Group and the scope of its investment activities.
Quality Assurance and Regulatory Risk The Group operates in a regulated industry and maintains significant investment in its Quality Assurance systems.
In respect of its services the Group is accredited with GcLP
In respect of its products the Group is registered to ISO 13485 Certification.
There can be no guarantee that the Groups products or services will be able to obtain or maintain the necessary approval for the orderly conduct of its business.
Approvals can require evaluation of data relating to safety quality and efficacy standards.
The
Group seeks to mitigate regulatory risk by conducting its operations within recognised quality assurance standards and by undergoing external assessment.
Manufacturing Risk On commencement of the supply of products Genedrive units and assays the Group will be dependent on two key suppliers for the timely delivery of product at consistent quality and prices.
One key supplier is based in the Far East and one key supplier is based in the UK.
It is unlikely that dual sourcing of supply will be achievable in the short term.
Management and Employees The Groups future success is dependent on its management team and staff.
There is an ongoing risk that staff will leave to join competitor companies.
The Group seeks to mitigate this risk by establishing effective management organisation and leading staff incentive schemes.
Economic Risk The Groups programmes are targeted to meet the commercial requirements of its clients.
In the current economic climate clients plans may be subject to changes which may adversely affect the financial performance of the Group.
The Group seeks to mitigate this risk by operating a diversified business model across various technologies and territories.
Approved by the Board and signed on its behalf Dr Ian Gilham
17 October 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Principal Risks And Uncertainties genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 BOARD OF DIRECTORS Ian Gilham
Chairman
Ian was appointed a Director on 24 November 2014 and as NonExecutive Chairman on 11 May 2015.
He is currently NonExecutive Chairman of two life sciences companies AIM quoted Horizon Discovery Group Plc which provides geneediting tools to support translational genomics and the development of personalised medicine and Biosurfit SA focused on development and commercialisation of point of care diagnostic products.
Ian also serves as nonexecutive director of Vernalis plc and Elucigene
Dr Gilham was formerly
Chief Executive Officer
David Budd
Chief Executive Officer
David was appointed a Director and Chief Executive on 1 March 2016.
He has over 20 years of international commercial and operational experience in the diagnostics and medical devices field.
He previously served as General Manager of Leica Biosystems Amsterdam and Commercial Director at Leica Biosystems Newcastle with global responsibility for marketing product development and commercial launches for diagnostic tests.
Prior to Leica Davids roles included point of care molecular and central laboratory marketing and commercialisation responsibilities at Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Bayer Diagnostics and Visible Genetics.
Matthew Fowler Chief Financial Officer Matthew was appointed Chief Financial Officer on 13 December 2016.
He has over 15 years of experience in senior positions in the manufacturing power and support services industries.
Prior to joining Genedrive Matthew spent eight years as Group Financial Controller of Scapa Group plc a multinational manufacturing AIMquoted business.
Prior to that Matthew spent three years at British Nuclear Group as Finance Manager where he managed the corporate centres finance team and was responsible for planning reporting and accounting.
Matthew trained and qualified in the audit department of Deloitte and Touche.
Catherine Booth
Director Research Services Catherine is a cofounder of Epistem and prior to starting Epistem she worked for ten years with Prof.
Chris Potten at the Paterson Institute.
Whilst at the Paterson Institute she developed many preclinical assays.
This knowledge is at the core of the Epistem Contract Research Service.
Catherine received her Ph.
University of Cambridge.
Page Title at start Content Section at start
Board of Directors Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Allan Brown
Chief Operating Officer Allan has spent his career in the Life SciencesDiagnostics industry.
During a seventeen year period with Tepnel Life Sciences plc latterly Gen Probe Allans technical management roles covered product development through to commercial product launch his commercial management roles covered sales and business development and
After leaving Tepnel GenProbe Allan joined the leading Sample and Assay Technologies company QIAGEN N.
Centre of Excellence for molecular diagnostic product development.
Allan was appointed to the Board on 1 February 2014.
Robert Nolan
NonExecutive Director Robert has been a Non executive Director of the Company since 2004.
Having gained US post doctoral experience at Dartmouth Medical School and MIT he joined SANDOZ Forschungsinstitut in Vienna in 1972 to work on mechanism of antibiotic action and was also coopted on to Sandoz global strategic planning group.
He joined ICI pharmaceuticals which became AstraZeneca in 1979 to head up a natural products discovery programme and subsequently joined their product licensing group.
He brings with him a wealth of expertise in partnering and licensing negotiations with both small biotechnology and large pharmaceutical companies.
Prior to his retirement he was Director Global Licensing at AstraZeneca.
He is also a Nonexecutive Director of Phico Therapeutics Ltd.
Roger Lloyd
NonExecutive Director Roger joined the Board as a NonExecutive Director on 1 July 2007.
Trained as a biochemist Roger has 40 years experience in the healthcare and biotechnology sector particularly in the areas of strategic planning and business development.
International
ICI Plc and AstraZeneca Plc included living and working in the United States and Germany and having territorial responsibilities for Europe Japan Korea Mexico and the Middle East.
As Executive Director of Global Licensing at AstraZeneca he personally completed 24 transactions.
He operates as a Board Adviser in the Biotech sector.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 For the Year Ended 30 June 2017 The Directors present their report for genedrive plc the Company and its subsidiaries together genedrive plc or the Group for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Genedrive plc is the holding company for a group of companies operating in the disease diagnostics and drug development markets.
A review of the performance of the Groups businesses is contained on pages 1 to 14 and forms part of this report.
Results and Dividends The trading results for the year and the Groups financial position at the end of the financial year are shown in the audited consolidated financial statements on pages 32 to 60 of this report.
No dividend is proposed.
Going Concern After due consideration the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Group will have access to adequate resources to continue in operational existence for twelve months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
Whilst mindful of the Financing Risk detailed on page 62 the Directors continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
In arriving at this conclusion the Directors have reviewed detailed forecast models for the Company and the Group.
These models are based on best estimates of future performance and have been adjusted to reflect various downside scenarios and outcomes that could potentially impact the forecasts.
Annual General Meeting The Annual General Meeting will be held on 29 November 2017 at Grafton Street.
Details of the business to be considered at the Annual General Meeting and the Notice of Meeting are included in a separate document.
Share Capital Details of the issued share capital together with details of movements in the Companys issued share capital during the year are shown in note 23 to the Companys financial statements on page 60.
The Company has one class of ordinary share which carries the right to one vote at General Meetings of the Company.
The nature of the Directors Holdings is disclosed on page 24.
No person has any special rights of control over the Companys share capital and all issued shares are fully paid.
Subject to the provisions of the Companys Articles of Association and the Companies Act 2006 at a General Meeting of the Company the Directors may request authority to allot shares and the power to disapply preemption rights and the authority for the Company to purchase its own ordinary shares in the market.
The Board requests such authority at each Annual General Meeting.
Details of the authorities to be sought are set out in the Notice of Annual General Meeting.
Share Options Details of the Companys share capital and options over the Companys shares under the Companys employee share plans are given on pages 54 to 60.
Significant Agreements All of the Companys share plans contain provisions relating to a change of control.
On a change of control outstanding awards would normally vest and become exercisable subject to the satisfaction of any performance criteria.
The Directors are not aware of any agreements between the Company and its Directors or employees that provide for compensation for loss of office on a change of control.
The Company issued a convertible bond to the Global Health Investment Fund 1 LLC in July 2014.
Under the terms of this arrangement the bond holder has various options to convert its bond into shares over the term of the bond as detailed in note 18 on pages 52 to 53.
On 29 July 2010 the Company bought 100% of the share capital of Visible Genomics Limited.
As part of the consideration 1250k will become payable to the previous owner in the form of shares as detailed in note 17 on page 51.
Employees and Employment Policies genedrive plc is committed to the principle of equal opportunity in employment and ensuring that no applicant or employee receives less favourable treatment on the grounds of gender marital status age race colour nationality ethnicity religion disability sexuality or unrelated criminal convictions. ensure entry into and progression within the Company determined solely by personal ability and competency.
DIRECTORS REPORT For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Directors Report Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Board of Directors The names of the present Directors and their biographical details are shown on pages 16 to 17.
At the Annual General Meeting to be held on 29 November 2017 Matthew Fowler will offer himself for election.
All other members of the Board will offer themselves for reelection.
Significant Shareholdings In addition to the Directors holdings the Company has been advised of the following interests of over 5% of the issued ordinary shares
Calculus Capital 17.80 Odey Asset Mgt 10.69 Genedrive plc Director and Related Holdings 8.70 Hargreave Hale 8.42 MandG Investment Mgt 6.68 River and Mercantile Asset Mgt 5.64 Catherine Booth 5.24 Research and Development During the year ended 30 June 2017 the Group has incurred research and development costs of 5086k 2016 4836k.
Expenditure on Intangible Assets relating to research and development activities was nil 2016 16k as detailed in note 10 to the financial statements.
Takeover Directive The Company has one class of ordinary share and these have equal voting rights.
The nature of individual Directors holdings is disclosed above.
There are no other significant holdings of any individual.
Financial Risk Management
The Groups approach to managing financial risk is covered in note 20 to the Group financial statements Statement of Directors Responsibilities The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period.
In preparing the financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Group financial statements and IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed for the Company financial statements subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent and prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the Group and Companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006 and as regards the Group financial statements Article 4 of the IAS Regulation.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors of the ultimate parent Company are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the of the ultimate Parent Companys website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and Accounts taken as a whole is fair balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to assess the Group and Companys performance business model and strategy.
Each of the Directors whose names and functions are listed in Board of Directors confirm that to the best of their knowledge the Company financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and loss of the Company the Group financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union give a true and fair view of the assets liabilities financial position and loss of the Group and the Financial Review includes a fair review of the development and performance of the business and the position of the Group and Company together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that it faces.
Provision of Information to Auditors The Directors who were members of the Board at the time of approving the Directors Report are listed on pages 16 and 17.
Having made enquiries of fellow Directors and of the Groups auditors each of these Directors confirms that to the best of each Directors knowledge and belief there is no information that is information needed by the Groups auditors in connection with preparing their report of which the Groups auditors are unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that a Director might reasonably be expected to be taken to be aware of relevant audit information and to establish that the Groups auditors are aware of that information.
Independent Auditors The auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have indicated their willingness to continue in office and a resolution that they be reappointed will be proposed at the 2017 Annual General Meeting.
This report has been prepared in accordance with the special provisions relating to small companies within Part 15 of the Companies Act 2006.
On behalf of the Board Matthew Fowler Company Secretary 17 October 2017 DIRECTORS REPORT
Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
This report has been prepared in accordance with the requirements of Schedule 2 Pt1 to the Companies Act 2006 the Schedule and also meets the relevant requirements of the Listing Rules of the Financial Services Authority and describes how the Board has applied the Principles of Good Governance relating to Directors Remuneration.
Section 497 of the Act requires the auditors to report to the Companys members on the auditable part of the Directors Remuneration Report and to state whether in their opinion that part of the report has been properly prepared in accordance with Part 3 of the Schedule.
This report has therefore been divided into separate sections for audited and unaudited information.
Unaudited Information Remuneration Policy The Executive Directors have written terms of engagement with no fixed expiry date.
Executive remuneration packages are prudently designed to attract motivate and retain Directors of the necessary calibre and to reward them for enhancing value to shareholders.
The performance measurement of the Executive Directors and key members of senior management and the determination of their annual remuneration package is undertaken by the Remuneration Committee.
Executive Directors service contracts are subject to six months notice of termination.
Executive Directors are entitled to accept appointments outside the Company provided the Boards permission is sought.
The remuneration of the NonExecutive Directors is determined by the Board within limits set out in the Articles of Association.
NonExecutive Directors Terms of Engagement The NonExecutive Directors have specific terms of engagement.
Their remuneration is determined by the Board.
In the event that a NonExecutive undertakes additional assignments for the Company the NonExecutives fee will be agreed by the Company in respect of each assignment.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Directors Remuneration Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Audited Information Single Figure for Total Remuneration The following table sets out the single figure for total remuneration for Directors for the financial years ended 30 June 2017 and 2016.
Salary and
Bonus
Benefits in
Pension
Total
Executive
David Budd 2017 220000 73125 805 4400 298330 2016 73332 25000 382 1467 100181 Catherine Booth 2017 135643 14625 345 2713 153326 2016 133708 7500 425 2674 144307 Allan Brown 2017 154177 14625 434 3084 172319 2016 151987 7500 547 3040 163074 Matthew Fowler 2017 77538 21313  1551 100402 John Rylands 2017 117133  1262 1791 120186 2016 133709 7500 1641 2674 145524
Ian Gilham 2017 65000    65000 2016 65000    65000 Robert Nolan 2017 24000    24000 2016 24000    24000 Roger Lloyd 2017 24000    24000 2016 24000    24000 1 Appointed 13 December 2016 2 Resigned 8 November 2016 and left the Company on 28 February 2017 3 Under the terms of his termination John Rylands received a loss of office payment of 27600 in the year ending 30 June 2017.
The payment was entirely by way of compensation for the termination of employment.
In addition the Board exercised its discretion to extend the life of certain options granted to the Director from 10 January 2018 until 28 February 2018.
There were no other benefits or payments made to the employee.
Pension Contributions The Company pays contributions to the nominated personal pension plans of the Executive Directors in each case at a rate equal to 2% of salary.
Certain Directors elect to have their salary and fees paid into their pension scheme in under salary sacrifice.
In the remuneration table above salary and fees are stated before salary sacrifice.
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
For the year ended 30 June 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Annual Performance Bonus The 2017 bonus for the Executive Directors and Senior Executives was based on Revenue targets on sales of Genedrive units and assays A cash target for 30 June 2017 A trading loss target measured against prior year Progressing the attainment of CE marking for the HCV assay In each case the absolute targets have not been disclosed and the Directors were awarded bonuses of up to 32.5% of maximum potential bonus for the year.
Long Term Incentive Plans Details of the options for Directors who served during the year are as follows Start of financial year
Exercised
Lapsed
Number
Options
Granted
Number
End of financial year
Exercise price Earliest exercise date
Executive
David Budd 2017   397590 397590 0.43 05042020 04042027 2016 244444   244444 0.90 07042019 06042026 Allan Brown 2017  50000 50000 0.43 05042020 04042027 2016 200000   200000 3.25 25032017 25032024 Matthew Fowler 2017   141666 141666 0.60 14122019 13122026 John Rylands 2016 211180   211180 1.20  28022018
Ian Gilham 2017 100000   100000 2.78 17122018 16122025 2016 50000   50000 2.78 07042019 06042026 Roger Lloyd 2016 30000   30000 2.78 17122018 16122025 Robert Nolan 2016 78000 78000 There are no performance criteria associated with the options.
The exercise price of the awards was the share price at the date of grant.
The options above were issued under the Companys enterprise management incentive share option plan dated November 2007 which expired shortly after the year end.
The Company has recently replaced this scheme with the genedrive plc 2017 Enterprise Management Incentive plan and will issue future grants under the new scheme.
The new scheme is broadly aligned to the old scheme and has the following key features Executives may be awarded up to 100% of salary per annum in the form of options with allowance for up to 200% in exceptional circumstances The exercise price of options granted will not be below market price Awards will vest over a three year period subject to performance criteria being met The Board retains the right to scale back or reduce to zero the size of vesting awards if they are not satisfied that the status and performance of the business is sufficient or the individual has not met an acceptable level of personal performance Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Directors and Their Interests in Shares The Directors of the Company who held office throughout the year unless otherwise stated and their interests in the share capital of the Company including family and pension scheme trust interests were as follows Number of shares 30 June 1 July
David Budd 31250 Catherine Booth 980000 988126 Allan Brown 51999 26257 Matthew Fowler John Rylands 373147 221569
Ian Gilham 114250 20500 Roger Lloyd 12500 Robert Nolan 5065 5065 The shareholding of John Rylands is stated at the date of his retirement from the Company.
Share Investment Plan The details of the Epistem Share Investment Plan are outlined in note 19 to the financial statements.
In addition to the shares held directly listed in the table above the Directors interests in the shares of the Company include shares acquired under the Share Investment Plan as follows
Shares
Number
Matching
Shares
Number
Total SIP
30 June
Total SIP
30 June
Catherine Booth 6623 13255 19878 11339 Allan Brown 5000 9642 14642 5925 John Rylands    7568 The holding of John Rylands is stated at the date of his retirement from the Company.
Advice Received by the Committee The Committee has access to advice when it considers appropriate.
In the year ended 30 June 2017 the Committee received assistance and advice from the Company Secretary and in addition had specific advice on the genedrive plc 2017 Enterprise Management Incentive plan from Deloitte LLP.
This Remuneration Report was approved by a duly authorised Committee of the Board of Directors on 17 October 2017 and signed on its behalf by
Ian Gilham Chairman of the Remuneration Committee 17 October 2017
DIRECTORS REMUNERATION REPORT
For the year ended 30 June 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 The Group is subject to the continuing requirements of the AIM Rules and is committed to adhering to corporate governance standards appropriate for a company of its size.
Under the rules of the London Stock Exchange AIM Market the Group is not required to comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
This statement sets out below how the Board has applied the principles of good corporate governance in its management of the business in the year ended 30 June 2017.
The Group follows the Quoted Companies Alliance guidelines and has Remuneration Audit and Nomination committees with written terms of reference and a schedule of matters reserved for the Board which generally meets each month.
The Board has established an Audit Committee a Remuneration Committee and a Nomination Committee.
The membership of these committees and attendance at meetings is as follows Ian Gilham NonExecutive Chairman Robert Nolan NonExecutive Director Roger Lloyd NonExecutive Director RemunerationNominations Committees only
Committee
Audit
Committee
Remuneration
Committee
Nominations
Committee
Ian Gilham Robert Nolan Roger Lloyd 7 2 David Budd Allan Brown 8 Catherine Booth 8 Matthew Fowler John Rylands 4 1 1 a Roger Lloyd attended the Audit Committees via invite b Appointed 13 December 2016 Although not members of the Committees the Executive Directors attend meetings of the Audit Committee Remuneration Committee and Nominations Committee as invited as attendees when appropriate.
Remuneration Committee The Remuneration Committee is responsible for reviewing and determining the scale and structure of the Executive Directors and senior managements remuneration and the terms of their service contracts.
The remuneration and terms of appointment of the NonExecutive Directors are set by the Board.
The Remuneration Committee also approves the issue of share options under schemes approved by the Board.
None of the Committee members have any personal financial interest other than as shareholders conflicts of interest arising from crossdirectorships or daytoday involvement in the running of the business.
No Director plays a part in any final decision about his or her own remuneration.
Audit Committee The Audit Committee has responsibility for receiving accounts and reviewing reports from the management and the Companys auditors relating to Annual and Interim Accounts and the accounting and internal controls in place throughout the Group.
At this stage of the Groups size and development the Committee has decided that an internal audit function is not required as the Groups internal controls system in place is appropriate for its size.
The Audit Committee has met twice during the year.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Corporate Governance Report genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Nomination Committee The Nomination Committee has responsibility for reviewing the size structure and composition of the Board as well as retirements and appointments of replacement and additional Directors and for making appropriate recommendations to the Board.
Matthew Fowler Chief Financial Officer was appointed to the Board on 13 December 2016.
His appointment will be subject to formal approval by shareholders at the Annual General Meeting to be held on 29 November 2017.
Operation of the Board The Board held eight formal meetings during the year to 30 June 2017.
In addition there were two telephone update calls.
Reports from the Executive Directors which focus on major operational matters are circulated in advance of board meetings.
To ensure that the Board are kept fully informed on the status of the business reports and presentations are also produced by key senior management.
Relations with Shareholders The Group recognises the importance of communications with its shareholders to ensure that its strategy and performance is understood and that it remains accountable to shareholders.
The Board as a whole is responsible for ensuring that a satisfactory dialogue with shareholders takes place while the Chairman and Chief Executive ensure that the views of the shareholders are communicated to the Board as a whole.
The Board ensures that the Groups strategic plans have been carefully reviewed in terms of their ability to deliver longterm shareholder value.
Internal Controls The Board acknowledges its responsibility for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of internal controls and will continue to ensure that management keeps these processes under regular review and improves them where appropriate.
The system of internal controls is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve business objectives and can provide only reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement of loss.
Social Environmental and Ethical Matters The Board recognises the growing awareness of social environmental and ethical matters and its endeavours to take into account the interests of the Groups stakeholders including the investors employees suppliers and business partners when operating the business.
Employment
At a subsidiary level the individual Company has established policies which address key corporate objectives in the management of employee relations communications and employee involvement training and personal development and equal opportunities.
Health Safety and Environmental Issues The Board recognises its legal responsibilities to ensure the wellbeing safety and welfare of its employees and to maintain a safe and healthy working environment for them and for its visitors and subcontractors Health and Safety is on the agenda for regularly scheduled Board meetings.
By their nature the Groups regular operations are judged to have a low environmental impact and are not expected to give rise to any significant inherent environmental risks over the next 12 months.
The Group is committed to maintaining high standards in implementing appropriate health safety and environmental protection policies.
Waste materials are recycled where possible and hazardous waste is catalogued and handled by licensed specialist disposal companies.
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE REPORT For the year ended 30 June 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the group financial statements
In our opinion genedrive plcs group financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups affairs as at 30 June 2017 and of its loss and cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the consolidated statement of profit or loss and comprehensive income the consolidated balance sheet the consolidated statement of changes in equity and the consolidated cash flow statement and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the Group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
Our audit approach
Audit scope Key audit matters
255400 2016 48600 Based on 5% of loss before tax adjusted for the impairment of intangible assets.
We conducted audit work over genedrive plc the parent company of the Group and Epistem Limited a 100% owned subsidiary which accounted for 100% of revenue and loss before tax adjusted for the impairment of intangible assets.
Accounting treatment related to convertible bond Valuation of intangible assets Going concern The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Independent Auditors Report Group
Statements genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Accounting treatment related to convertible bond Refer to note 18.
During the year the Group entered into a Deed of Amendment with the Global Health Investment Fund GHIF that modified the terms of the USD 8m convertible bond issued in 2014.
The modification has been treated as an extinguishment of the previous financial liability which has been derecognised and a new financial liability recognised in its place.
The difference between these two liabilities of 380k has been recorded as a gain in the consolidated statement of profit or loss and comprehensive income.
The new financial liability has been measured at amortised cost using managements estimate of a market interest rate for a similar instrument excluding the conversion option.
We read the Deed of Amendment and considered managements proposed accounting treatment.
Our testing focussed on the key judgements and estimates as follows In concluding that the modification should be treated as an extinguishment of the previous financial liability management calculated the impact on the future cash flows of the change in terms.
We reviewed this analysis and found it to be appropriate.
We assessed the interest rate used in valuing the new financial liability and consider this to be within a reasonable range.
Valuation of intangible assets Refer to note 10.
The Groups intangible assets are amortised over their useful economic lives and assessed annually for indicators of impairment.
At the year end the net book value of intangible assets was 3038k 2016 6273k.
Due to the loss made in the current year management has performed a full impairment review to compare the carrying value of the intangible assets to their recoverable value.
An impairment charge of 2379k has been recognised to reduce the carrying value of intangible assets to their recoverable value.
The determination of recoverable value was based on value in use which required management to make a number of judgements and assumptions of which the following are considered to be key The period over which the current technology is expected to be commercially viable and hence the length of the forecast period.
Given the relatively limited expected life of the technology the impact of one years cash flows to the value in use is significant.
The forecast volumes of units sold which show increases on actual units sold to date.
The genedrive unit is forecast to be sold in relatively low quantities and therefore the value in use is sensitive to changes in sales volumes.
The discount rate used as a small change in this could have a large impact on value in use.
We evaluated and challenged the Groups future cash flow forecasts the process by which they were drawn up and the underlying value in use calculations.
We compared the Groups forecasts to the latest Board approved budget and found them to be consistent.
Our testing was focused on the key judgements and assumptions as follows In determining the forecast period of the value in use model management has assessed similar products being developed by competitors and the impact these would have on the genedrive product.
Whilst development of the genedrive product is expected to continue this has not been considered in managements value in use model which correctly considers the technology in its current state.
We have applied sensitivity analyses to the volumes of sales included in the value in use model.
Whilst the value in use calculation is sensitive to changes in forecast sales volumes we found managements forecasts to be reasonable.
We challenged the discount rate used by assessing the cost of capital for the Group and comparing against similar organisations.
We performed a sensitivity analysis of the discount rate applied to ascertain the magnitude of change required for a material misstatement to occur.
We determined that a change arising of this extent was unlikely.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the group financial statements
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Going concern Refer to note 1.
The Group financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis meaning that the Directors believe that the Group will have the cash resources it requires to settle its liabilities for the period extending 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
In concluding on this basis of preparation the Directors have prepared a cash flow forecast extending to October 2018 which is based on their best estimate of the expected financial performance of the Group.
In addition the Directors have also prepared a sensitised cash flow forecast covering the same period that takes into account the financial impacts of a number of risks that the Directors believe have a reasonable likelihood of occurrence.
The Group recorded a net cash inflow during the year of 4129k and ended the year with a cash balance of 5129k.
This net cash inflow was due to 6023k of proceeds from the Groups share issue during July 2016 and is offset by an operating cash outflow of 1837k and an investing cash outflow of 56k.
The Directors have stated that the Groups strategic focus is on the molecular diagnostic business and this is supported by investment in research and development included in the Groups cash flow forecasts.
Due to the fact that the Genedrive has not yet been commercialised there is inherent uncertainty over the future profitability of the business and therefore the cash resources of the Group are forecast to reduce to a relatively low level during the forecast period whilst remaining positive throughout.
We evaluated and challenged the Groups future cash flow forecasts and the process by which they were drawn up.
We compared the Groups forecasts to the latest Board approved budget and found them to be consistent.
Our testing was focused on the key judgements and assumptions as follows We have compared significant forecast revenue streams to supporting information including correspondence confirming funding and purchase orders and found these to be consistent.
Where significant revenue streams have been forecast with reference to previous performance we have compared these forecasts to equivalent amounts recognised in previous years and discussed with management the reasons for any significant variances.
We have compared forecast costs to equivalent amounts incurred in previous years and discussed with management the reasons for any significant variances.
We have challenged managements sensitivity analysis in light of our understanding of the business and its environment including matters that have arisen subsequent to the preparation of managements forecasts.
In particular we have focussed on forecast revenue that is not yet secured and managements ability to control costs if necessary.
We have found the sensitivity analysis performed to be sufficiently robust.
We have performed additional sensitivity analysis to ascertain the magnitude of change in key estimates required for the cash headroom to be eliminated.
When considered along with the mitigating actions that management could execute to reduce cash outflows we determined that adverse variances of this extent were unlikely.
How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the Group the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
The Group comprises the following entities genedrive plc parent company of the Group Epistem Limited Epistem Inc and Epistem SIP Trustee Limited.
The Group audit team in the UK performed an audit of the complete financial information of genedrive plc and Epistem Limited which we regarded as financially significant components of the Group.
These components accounted for 100% of the Groups revenue and loss before tax adjusted for the impairment of intangible assets.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall group materiality 255400 2016 48600.
How we determined it 5% of loss before tax adjusted for the impairment of intangible assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied Based on the benchmarks used in the annual report loss before tax adjusted for the impairment of intangible assets is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the group and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
For each component in the scope of our group audit we allocated a materiality that is less than our overall group materiality.
The range of materiality allocated across components was between 80000 and 245000.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 12770 2016 2430 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the groups ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the group financial statements
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 June 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the Group and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors responsibilities the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other matter We have reported separately on the company financial statements of genedrive plc for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Hazel Macnamara Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
17 October 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF PROFIT OR LOSS AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME For the year ended 30 June 2017
Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Revenue 2 3166 3094 Other income  development grant funding 2619 1969 Revenue and other income 5785 5063 Contract costs 3 2998 3285 Research and development expenditure 3 5086 4836 Administrative costs 3 2614 2368 Trading loss 4913 5426 Impairment of intangible assets 2379 Operating Loss 3 7292 5426 Finance costs 6 195 1071 Loss on ordinary activities before taxation 7487 6497 Taxation on ordinary activities 7 1051 582 Loss for the financial year 6436 5915 Total Comprehensive Expense for the financial year 6436 5915 Loss per share pence Basic 9 34.9 56.2 Diluted 9 34.9 56.2 All of the activities of the Group are classed as continuing.
The Company has taken advantage of section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 not to publish its own Income Statement.
Page Title at start Content Section at start Consolidated Statement of Profit or Loss and Comprehensive Income genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report
30 June 30 June
Noncurrent assets Plant and equipment 11 568 713 Intangible assets 10 3038 6273 3606 6986 Current assets Inventory 12 444 202 Trade and other receivables 13 1654 2797 Current tax asset 7 1213 757 Cash and cash equivalents 14 5129 1114 8440 4870
Current liabilities Deferred revenue 15 98 88 Trade and other payables 16 2058 1774 2156 1862 Net current assets 6284 3008 Total assets less current liabilities 9890 9994 Deferred consideration payable in shares 17 1250 1250 Convertible Bond 18 5199 4991 6449 6241 Net assets 3441 3753 Capital and reserves Calledup equity share capital 23 281 158 Share premium account 23 25988 20088 Employee share incentive plan reserve 229 240 Share options reserve 1382 1281 Reverse acquisition reserve 2484 2484 Accumulated losses 21497 15050 Total equity 3441 3753 The financial statements were approved by the board of directors and authorised for issue on 17 October 2017.
They were signed on its behalf by David Budd Matthew Fowler
Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer
Company number CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET As at 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Consolidated Balance Sheet genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
Share premium account
Share options reserve
Accumulated losses Total equity Balance at 30 June 2015 158 20088 196 1197 2484 9218 9545 Allotment of ordinary shares Purchase of own shares SIP   44    44 Lapsed share options    83  83 Forfeit of share options    6   6 Equitysettled sharebased payments    173   173 Total comprehensive expense for the year      5915 5915 Balance at 30 June 2016 158 20088 240 1281 2484 15050 3753 Share issue 123 5900     6023 Transfer of shares to SIP members   11   11 Equitysettled sharebased payments    101   101 Total comprehensive expense for the year      6436 6436 Balance at 30 June 2017 281 25988 229 1382 2484 21497 3441 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report All on continuing operations Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Cash flows from operating activities Operating loss for the year Depreciation amortisation and impairment ATL Research credits Sharebased payment expense Operating loss before changes in working capital and provision 3902 4236 Increase in inventories 242 39 Decrease Increase in trade and other receivables 1256 606 Increase decrease in deferred revenue 10 38 Increase in trade and other payables 284 651 Net cash outflow from operations 2594 4192 Tax received 757 691 Net cash outflow from operating activities 1837 3501 Cash flows from investing activities Finance income 14 7 Acquisition of plant and equipment and intangible assets 70 164 Net cash outflow from investing activities 56 157 Cash flows from financing activities Proceeds from share issue 23 6023 Finance costs  interest paid  304 Share Investment Plan  purchase of own shares  44 Net inflowoutflow from financing activities 6023 348 Net increasedecrease in cash equivalents 4129 4006 Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 115 192 4015 3814 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 1114 4928 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 5129 1114 Analysis of net funds Cash at bank and in hand 14 5129 1114 Net funds 5129 1114 CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Consolidated Cash Flow Statement genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 General Information genedrive plc the Company is a company incorporated in the UK which changed its name from Epistem Holdings Plc on 22 July 2016. genedrive plc is a public limited company whose shares are listed on the London Stock Exchange Alternative Investment Market. diseases and for use in patient stratification genotyping pathogen detection and other indications.
The Genedrive platform and MTBRIF test have been launched in India and a Genedrive HCV test has been successfully assessed by the Institut Pasteur Paris.
The Group also provides contract research services to drug development companies under the Epistem brand name.
Significant accounting policies This note provides a list of the principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these consolidated financial statements.
The accounting policies set out below have unless otherwise stated been applied consistently to all periods represented in these consolidated financial statements.
Basis of accounting The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and therefore comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
The consolidated financial statements consolidate those of the Company and its subsidiaries together referred to as the Group.
They are presented in pounds sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest one thousand k except where otherwise indicated.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS requires the use of certain critical accounting estimates.
It also requires management to exercise its judgement in the process of applying the Groups accounting policies.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial statements are disclosed below Determining the value of Intangible Assets requires a judgement about the extent to which the relevant asset will be brought into economic use by the Company.
RandD expenditure will generally be expensed unless associated income can be identified.
Determining the market value of the Debt Component of the Convertible Bond requires the Board to make a judgement about the market rate of interest to apply to instrument of this nature.
Determining the value of deferred income and expenditure requires an assessment of the duration of the contract to which the deferred income and expenditure relates and informs decisions as to when to recognise revenue and whether to carry forward costs.
Determining what components of expenditure fit the definitions of the RandD tax credit regime requires an estimation and interpretation of tax rules on research and development costs.
Determining the value of a Derivative requires a judgement as to the most appropriate valuation model to be used.
The Board seeks the opinion of experts in making this judgement.
Determining the fair value of share options requires a judgment as to the most appropriate valuation model to be used.
In applying the model requires a judgement as to the most appropriate interest rate and volatility level of the market value of the Companys shares.
NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Notes to the Financial
Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Estimates and underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis.
Revisions to accounting estimates are recognised in the period in which the estimate is revised and in any future periods affected.
The Directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for 12 months from the balance sheet date.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
In arriving at this conclusion the Directors have reviewed detailed forecast models for the Company and the Group.
These models are based on best estimates of future performance and have been adjusted to reflect various scenarios and outcomes that could potentially impact the forecasts.
The model outputs support the Directors conclusion.
Basis of consolidation Subsidiaries are entities controlled by the Group.
Control exists when the Group has the power directly or indirectly to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities.
In assessing control potential voting rights that are currently exercisable or convertible are taken into account.
The financial statements of subsidiaries are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date that control commences until the date that control ceases.
Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transaction between Group companies are eliminated.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated.
Where necessary amounts reported by subsidiaries have been adjusted to conform with the Groups accounting policies.
On 16 March 2007 genedrive plc formerly Epistem Holdings Plc merged with Epistem Ltd and on that date the shareholders of Epistem Ltd exchanged their shares for equivalent shares in Epistem Holdings Plc.
As Epistem Holdings Plc was newly incorporated at the time of the transaction under the terms of IFRS 3 Business Combinations this transaction was accounted for as a reverse acquisition on the basis that the shareholders of Epistem Ltd gained a controlling interest in the Group.
The financial statements therefore represent a continuation of the financial statements of Epistem Ltd.
Revenue
Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and net of discounts and salesrelated taxes.
Revenue recognition a.
Contract revenue Contract revenue is recognised by reference to the stage of completion of the related transaction at the end of the reporting period.
The Group recognises revenue when the amount of revenue can be reliably measured when it is probable that future economic benefits will flow to the entity and when specific criteria have been met for each of the Groups activities as described below. b.
Collaboration and licensing revenue Contractually agreed upfront payments and similar nonrefundable payments in respect of collaboration or licence agreements which are not directly related to ongoing research activity are recorded as deferred income and recognised as revenue over the anticipated duration of the agreement.
Where the anticipated duration of the agreement is modified the period over which revenue is recognised is also modified.
Nonrefundable milestone and other payments that are linked to the achievement of significant and substantive technological or regulatory hurdles in the research and development process are recognised as revenue upon the achievement of the specified milestone.
Income which is related to ongoing research activity is recognised as the research activity is undertaken in accordance with the contract.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017 c.
Other income  development grant funding Income receivable in the form of Government grants to fund product development is recognised as development grant funding over the periods in which the Group recognises as expenses the related eligible costs which the grants are intended to compensate and when there is reasonable assurance that the Group will comply with the conditions attaching to them and that the income will be received.
Government grants whose primary condition is that the Group should purchase or otherwise acquire noncurrent assets are recognised as deferred revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and transferred to the Statement of Comprehensive Income on a systematic and rational basis over the useful lives of the related assets.
Segment reporting A segment is a group of assets liabilities and operations engaged in providing products or services that are subject to risks and returns that are different from those of other parts of the business.
Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decision maker.
The chief operating decision maker who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of the operating segments has been identified as the Board of Directors.
Research and development Research expenditure is written off as it is incurred.
Development expenditure is written off as it is incurred up to the point of technical and commercial validation.
Thereafter costs that are measurable and attributable to the project are carried forward as intangible assets subject to having met the following criteria demonstration that the product will generate profitable future economic benefit and of an intention and ability to sell the product assessment of technical feasibility confirmation of the availability of technical financial and other resources to complete the development management intends to complete the development so the product will be available for use and the expenditure attributable to the development can be reliably measured.
Intangible assets Intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortisation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Amortisation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an intangible asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Acquired intellectual property  the shorter of 5% straight line basis or their estimated useful life Developed intellectual property  the shorter of 10% straight line basis or their estimated useful life Patents  over the shorter of 17 years or their estimated useful lives on a straightline basis No amortisation is charged on those assets which are not yet available for use.
Plant and equipment Plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Depreciation is calculated so as to write off the cost of an asset less its estimated residual value over the useful economic life of that asset as follows Lab equipment  25% reducing balance basis Fixtures and fittings  straight line over 48 months Other equipment  straight line over 48 months Operating lease agreements Rentals applicable to operating leases where substantially all of the benefits and risks of ownership remain with the lessor are charged to the income statement over the period of the lease.
Significant accounting policies continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Impairment of nonfinancial assets Intangible assets that have an indefinite useful life or intangible assets not ready to use are not subject to amortisation and are tested annually for impairment.
Assets that are subject to amortisation are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable.
An impairment loss is recognised for the amount by which the assets carrying amount exceeds its recoverable amount.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs of disposal and value in use.
For the purposes of assessing impairment assets are grouped at the lowest levels for which there are largely independent cash inflows Cash Generating Units.
Prior impairments of nonfinancial assets are reviewed for possible reversal at each reporting date.
Foreign currencies a Functional and presentation currency Items included in the financial statements of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in Sterling which is the groups presentation currency.
Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the settlement of such transactions and from the translation at year end exchange rates of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are recognised in the Income Statement except when deferred in equity as qualifying net investment hedges.
Nonmonetary items carried at fair value and denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the rates prevailing on the date when fair value is determined.
The foreign currency risks relating to assets and liabilities are detailed in note 20.
Share based payments The Group issues equitysettled sharebased payments to certain employees including Directors.
The fair value of the employee services received in exchange for the grant of the options is calculated using appropriate valuation models and is recognised as an expense over the vesting period.
The total amount to be expensed over the vesting period is determined by reference to the fair value of the options granted.
Fair value is measured using the BlackScholes pricing model.
The expected life used in the model has been adjusted based on managements best estimate experience and behavioural considerations.
At each Balance Sheet date the entity revises its estimates of the number of options that are expected to become exercisable.
It recognises the impact of the revision of original estimates if any in the Income Statement and a corresponding adjustment to equity over the remaining vesting period.
The proceeds received net of any directly attributable transaction costs are credited to share capital nominal value and share premium when the options are exercised.
The issuance by the Company of share options to employees of its subsidiary represents additional capital contributions and the fair value of such options and awards is therefore recognised as an increase in the Companys investment in Group undertakings with a corresponding increase in total equity shareholders funds.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Share Incentive Plan SIP The Company operates a SIP scheme and has a policy not to issue new shares to settle the liability but rather offer the cash equivalent to employees.
The liability to settle the shares accrued under the SIP scheme is thus treated as a cash settled liability on the Balance Sheet with the cost of the liability being expensed to the income statement.
The Balance Sheet liability is adjusted periodically to reflect the change in the share price over the life of the scheme with the movement taken to the income statement.
Any shares bought in anticipation of settling the SIP scheme are held as a debit in reserves.
Where a leaver requests to take shares instead of cash as permitted under the SIP scheme the historic cost of shares acquired is moved from reserves to the balance sheet liability.
Pension Contributions Contributions to personal pension plans of employees on a defined contributions basis are charged to the income statement in the period in which they are payable.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is calculated on a first in and first out basis and includes bought in cost and where appropriate other direct costs.
Net realisable value represents the estimated selling price less applicable selling costs.
Where applicable provision is made for slowmoving and obsolete inventory.
Trade and other receivables Trade and other debtors are recognised and carried forward at invoiced amounts less provisions for any doubtful debts.
Bad debts are written off when identified.
After initial recognition these are carried forward at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents are included in the Balance Sheet at cost.
Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash at bank and in hand and shortterm deposits with an original maturity of three months or less.
Interestbearing loans and borrowings All loans and borrowings are recognised initially at cost which is the fair value of the consideration received net of issue costs associated with the borrowing.
After initial recognition interestbearing loans and borrowings are measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Gains or losses are recognised in the consolidated income account when liabilities are derecognised or impaired as well as through the amortisation process.
Investments
Investments in subsidiaries are stated at cost less any provisions for impairment.
An impairment is recognised when the recoverable amount of the investment is less than the carrying amount.
Taxation
Current tax is provided at amounts expected to be paid or recovered using the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Taxation credits which fall under the category of Above the Line Research and Development Credits ATL Research Credit as detailed in the Finance Act 2013 are offset against the expenditure to which they relate and in the Statement of Profit and Loss are disclosed within Contract and Discovery and development costs as appropriate.
Deferred tax is recognised in respect of all temporary differences identified at the Balance Sheet date except to the extent that the deferred tax arises from the initial recognition of goodwill if amortisation of goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes or the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting profit nor taxable profit and loss.
Temporary differences are differences between the carrying amount of the Groups assets and liabilities and their tax base.
Significant accounting policies continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Deferred tax liabilities are offset when there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets and liabilities and when the deferred tax balances relate to the same taxation authority.
Current tax assets and liabilities are offset where an entity has a legally enforceable right to offset and either intends to settle on a net basis or to realise the asset and settle the liability simultaneously.
Deferred tax is provided on temporary differences arising in subsidiaries jointly controlled entities and associates except where the timing of reversal of the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.
Deferred tax is measured at the average tax rates that are expected to apply in the periods in which the asset is realised or liability settled based on tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantially enacted by the Balance Sheet date.
Measurement of deferred tax liabilities and assets reflects the tax consequence expected to fall from the manner in which the asset or liability is recovered or settled.
Financial instruments including Convertible Bond Financial instruments are classified and accounted for according to the substance of the contractual arrangement as either financial assets financial liabilities or equity instruments.
An equity instrument is any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of the Company after deducting all of its liabilities.
As disclosed in note 18 the Company has in issue a convertible bond which is a compound instrument comprising a liability component or debt host and an equity derivative component.
On initial recognition convertible bonds are recorded at fair value net of issue costs.
The initial fair value of the debt host is determined using the market interest rate applied by a market participant for an equivalent nonconvertible debt instrument.
Subsequent to initial recognition the debt host is recorded using the effective interest method until extinguished on conversion or maturity of the bonds.
The amortisation of the debt host and the interest payable in each accounting period is expensed as a finance cost.
Equity derivatives embedded in the convertible instruments which are required to be recorded as financial liabilities are initially recognised at fair value.
At each reporting date the fair values of the derivative are reassessed by management.
Where there is no market for such derivatives the Company uses option pricing models to measure the fair value.
The amortisation of the debt host interest payable in the period and gains or losses on the fair value of the derivative are disclosed with Finance income and costs detailed in note 6.
Parent Company assets The assets of the parent Company are subject to impairment review in each financial period.
New standards and interpretations not applied The Group has not early adopted any standards in the current or prior year.
The following amendments have been adopted in the year IFRS 1 Clarification of the meaning of effective IFRSs IFRS 3 Clarification of the scope exclusion for joint ventures IFRS 13 Clarification of the scope of the portfolio exemption IAS 40 Clarification of the relationship between IFRS 3 and IAS 40 Annual improvements to IFRSs 20102012 cycle Dec 2014 Annual improvements to IFRSs 20112013 cycle Dec 2013 The above interpretations and revised standard have not had any material impact on the amounts reported in these financial statements or the disclosures required.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
At the date of authorisation of these financial statements the following standards and interpretations which have not been applied in these financial statements were in issue but not yet effective and in some cases had not yet been adopted by the EU IFRS 9 Financial instruments IFRS 14 Regulatory deferral accounts IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers IFRS 16 Leases IRFIC 22 Foreign currency transactions and advance consideration Amendments to IAS 1 Disclosure initiative Amendments to IFRS 10 IFRS 12 and IAS 28 The application of the investment entities exemptions Amendments to IFRS 10 and IAS 28 Sale or contribution of assets between an investor and its associate or joint venture Amendments to IFRS 11 Accounting for acquisitions of interest in joint operations Amendments to IAS 16 and IAS 38 Clarification of acceptable methods of depreciation and amortisation Amendments to IAS 27 Equity method in separate financial statements Amendments to IAS 12 Recognition of deferred tax assets for unrealised losses Amendments to IAS 7 Disclosure initiative Amendment to IAS16 and 41 Agriculture Bearer plants Annual improvements to IFRSs 20122014 cycle Sep 2014 Annual improvements to IFRSs 20142016 cycle Dec 2016 The Directors do not expect that the adoption of the standards listed above will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Group in future periods except as follows IFRS 9 will impact both the measurement and disclosures of financial instruments IFRS 15 may have an impact on revenue disclosures but is unlikely to impact significantly the financial statements and IFRS 16 will impact the recognition measurement and disclosure of operating leases.
It is considered that the amount of lease assets and liabilities requiring recognition on the Group Balance Sheet as the lessee recognises a rightofuse asset for all leases will not be material.
It is anticipated that finance charges will require reclassification in the Group income statement.
Beyond the information above it is not practicable to provide a reasonable financial estimate of the effect of these standards until a detailed review has been completed.
Segment information For internal reporting and decision making the Group is organised into three operating divisions  Preclinical Research Services Pharmacogenomic Services and Diagnostics.
Preclinical Research Services provides preclinical testing services.
Pharmacogenomic
Services specialises in molecular measures of biological effect.
Diagnostics is commercialising the Genedrive Point of Need molecular testing platform.
The chief operating decision maker primarily relies on turnover and operating profit to assess the performance of the Group and make decisions about resources to be allocated to each segment.
Geographical factors are reviewed by the chief operating decision maker but as substantially all operating activities are undertaken from the UK geography is not a significant factor for the Group.
Accordingly only sales have been analysed into geographical statements.
Significant accounting policies continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report The results of the three operating divisions of the Group are detailed below.
Business segments
Research
Services
Pharmaco genomics
Diagnostics
Segment
Administrative earnings
Year ended 30 June 2017 Revenue 2069 1097 2619  5785 Segment EBITDA 246 14 1592 2510 3842 Less depreciation and amortisation 118 51 811 91 1071 Impairment of intangible assets    2379 2379 Operating profitloss 128 37 2403 4980 7292 Net Finance costs 195 Loss on ordinary activities before tax 7487 Taxation 1051 Loss for the financial year 6436
Research
Services
Pharmaco genomics
Diagnostics
Segment
Administrative earnings
Year ended 30 June 2016 Revenue 2010 1147 1906  5063 Segment EBITDA 113 38 1995 2332 4252 Less depreciation and amortisation 62 141 885 86 1174 Operating profitloss 51 179 2880 2418 5426 Net Finance costs 1071 Loss on ordinary activities before tax 6497 Taxation 582 Loss for the financial year 5915
Research
Services
Pharmaco genomics
Diagnostics
Segment
Administrative earnings
Year ended 30 June 2017 Segment assets 612 985 3783 6666 12046 Segment liabilities 402 429 686 7082 8605 Year ended 30 June 2016 Segment assets 1072 1303 7454 2027 11856 Segment liabilities 248 328 467 7060 8103 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Geographical segments The Groups operations are located in the United Kingdom.
The following table provides an analysis of the Groups revenue by customer location All on continuing operations Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June United Kingdom
United States of America Rest of world 5785 5063 Revenues from customers accounting for more than 10% of total revenue in the current or prior years are detailed below a 2233k revenue was derived from the US Department of Defense with revenue included within the Diagnostics Segment 2016 1739k b 585k revenue was derived from a major international pharmaceutical company with revenue included within the Preclinical Research Services 2016 460k.
Operating loss The Group operating loss is stated after chargingcrediting Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Research and development expenditure ATL Research Credit note 7 Amortisation of intangible assets Depreciation of owned tangible fixed assets Impairment of intangible assets Cost of inventories consumed Auditors remuneration as auditors for other services Operating lease costs  property rent The current year auditors remuneration includes a 17.5k under accrual from the 2016 audit and 18500 of audit costs related to the Convertible Bond amendment.
The basic audit fee for the year ending 30 June 2017 is 51350 which includes a limited review of the Interim Accounts.
Other services in the prior year related to grant claim work.
Segment information continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Particulars of employees The average number of staff including Directors employed by the Group during the financial year was Year ended 30 June
Year ended 30 June
Contract services 32 36 Research and Development 34 28 Administration The aggregate employee costs including Directors were Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Salaries and other shortterm employee benefits 3649 3818 Social security costs 414 396 Equitysettled sharebased payments 102 167 Pension costdefined contribution plans 61 154 Cost of SIP matching shares provision 43 52 4269 4587 Directors remuneration key management Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Salaries and other shortterm employee benefits 1146 899 Social security cost 147 124 Equitysettled sharebased payments 105 122 Pension costdefined contribution plans 18 7 Cost of SIP matching shares provision 12 8 1428 1160 For the current year the key management of the Company is the executive team.
The executive teams includes the four Executive Board members plus three members of the senior staff.
For the prior year there was no equivalent and so the key management is defined as the Directors of the Company.
Full details of the Directors remuneration and Directors options are contained in the
Directors Remuneration Report.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Finance incomecosts
Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Interest income on bank deposits 13 7 Gain on amendment to Convertible Bond 380 Movement in fair value of derivative embedded in Convertible Bond 30 37 Finance cost of Convertible Bond 308 304 Unwind of discount on Convertible Bond 209 272 Foreign exchange movement in Convertible Bond 101 539 195 1071 Taxation on ordinary activities a Recognised in the income statement
Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Current tax Research and development tax credits 1220 763 Less recognised as ATL Research Credit 162 151 Adjustments in respect of prior years 7 Total current tax 1051 612 Total deferred tax  30 Total tax credit for the year 1051 582 b Reconciliation of the total tax charge The tax assessed on the profit on ordinary activities for the year is higher 2016 higher that the weighted average applicable tax rate for the year ended 30 June 2017 of 19.75% 2016 20%.
The differences are explained below Loss before tax 7487 6497 Tax using the UK corporation tax rate of 19.75% 1478 1299 Adjustment in respect of RandD tax credit recognised above the line ATL 162 151 Adjustment in respect of RandD tax credit claimed 585 397 Items not deductible for tax purposes  permanent 24 5 Items not deductible for tax purposes  temporary 29 21 Deferred tax not recognised 790 937 Adjustment relating to a previous year 7 Total tax credit for the year 1051 582 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report No deferred tax assets are recognised at 30 June 2017 2016 nil.
Having reviewed future profitability in the context of trading losses carried it is not probable that there will be sufficient profits available to set against brought forward losses.
The Group had losses as computed for tax purposes of approximately 9455k 2016 8513k available to carry forward to future periods.
A change to the UK corporation tax rate was announced in the Chancellors Budget on 16 March 2016.
The change announced is to reduce the main tax rate to 17% from 1 April 2020.
Changes to reduce the UK corporation tax rate to 19% from 19% from 1 April 2017 and to 18% from 1 April 2020 had already been substantially enacted on 26 October 2015.
As the change to 17% had not been substantially enacted at the Balance Sheet date its effects are not included in these financial statements.
If the change had applied to the deferred tax balance at the Balance Sheet date the overall effect on both the deferred tax balance and tax credit for the year is not material.
In accordance with the provisions of the Finance Act 2000 in respect of research and development allowances the Group is entitled to claim tax credits for certain research and development expenditure.
These credits are disclosed partly as Above The Line Research and Development Credits ATL Research Credits within Research and Development Costs and partly as Research and Development tax credits within Taxation on ordinary activities.
The total amount included in the financial statements in respect of the year ended 30 June 2017 is 1220k 2016 763k which includes 162k 2016 151k disclosed as ATL Research Credit deducted from Research and Development Costs with the balance of 1051k 2016 582k disclosed within Taxation on ordinary activities as detailed above.
Profit attributable to members of the Parent Company The loss dealt with in the accounts of the Parent Company was 24812k 2016 loss of 1378k.
Earnings per share
Loss for the year after taxation 6436 5915
Number
Number
Weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 18466232 10564546 Weighted average number of SIP matching shares not vested  32931 Adjusted weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue 18466232 10531615 Dilutive ordinary shares from options and warrants in issue  3385 Dilutive weighted average number of ordinary shares 18466232 10535000 Loss per share basic diluted 34.9p 56.2p The basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing the earnings attributable to ordinary shareholders for the year by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year.
As the Company is loss making no potentially dilutive options have been added into the EPS calculation.
Had the Company made a profit in the period there would be no potentially dilutive share options because as shown in note 19 all share options in issue are underwater and there would be 90175 of dilutive SIP shares as described in note 19 the total accrued shares under the SIP is 217967 and the Company holds 127801 to meet the SIP commitments.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Intangible assets
Patents
Acquired
Intellectual
Property
Developed
Intellectual
Total
Cost
At 1st July 2016 717 3193 4001 7911
At 30 June 2017 717 3193 4001 7911 Accumulated amortisation At 1 July tel766 1638 Charge for the year
6tel430 At 30 June 2017 687 1119 3067 4873 Net book value At 30 June 2016 354 2684 3235 6273 At 30 June 2017 30 2074 934 3038
At 1st July 2015 717 3177 4001 7895 Additions  16  16 At 30 June 2016 717 3193 4001 7911 Accumulated amortisation At 1 July Charge for the year telAt 30 June tel766 1638 Net book value At 30 June 2015 355 3092 3744 7191 At 30 June 2016 354 2684 3235 6273 The net book value of Intangible assets all relates to the Genedrive unit and assays 2016 6273k.
The charges for amortisation are included in the Contract and Research and Development expense headings.
During the year to 30 June 2017 the cost of the Companys Patents assessed as not being available for economic use amounted to nil 2016 nil.
During the year the Intangible assets have been assessed for impairment in accordance with the Companys Accounting Policies.
The recoverable amount was determined on a value in use basis using the management approved 12 month forecasts.
The base 12 month projection was inflated for years two and three and then deflated down to zero in year four  as the estimated useful economic life of the assets in their current state without further investment is three and a half years.
These projected cash flows were discounted at a pretax discount rate of 12.5%.
As a result of this analysis the carrying value of the intangible assets at 30 June 2017 was reduced to 3038k 2016 6273k and an impairment charge of 2379k 2016 nil was booked during the period.
The Group has conducted sensitivity analysis on the impairment test.
An increase in the pretax discount rate to 16.5% would still support the carrying value of the intangible assets of 3038k.
A reduction in the year two and year three growth rate of 7.5% would still support the carrying value of the intangible assets of 3038k.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Plant and equipment
Lab equipment
Other
Total
Cost
At 1 July 2016 1957 185 418 2560 Additions Disposals 7  2 9 At 30 June 2017 1992 187 449 2628 Accumulated Depreciation At 1 July 2016 1480 88 279 1847 Charge for the year Depreciation on disposed assets 2  1 3 At 30 June 2017 1603 123 334 2060 Net book value At 30 June At 30 June
Lab equipment
Other
Total
Cost
At 1 July 2015 1922 131 364 2417 Additions Disposals   5 5 At 30 June 2016 1957 185 418 2560 Accumulated Depreciation At 1 July 2015 1325 50 237 1612 Charge for the year Depreciation on disposed assets   5 5 At 30 June 2016 1480 88 279 1847 Net book value At 30 June At 30 June Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Inventories
Group
Raw materials 332 202 Finished goods 112 Genedrive units are treated as raw materials.
The units are required to go through a testing and software process before being sold.
Trade and other receivables
Trade receivables 1376 2290 Less provisions for impairment 218 Trade receivables  net 1158 2290 Other receivables 86 217 Prepayments 410 290 1654 2797 Analysis of trade receivables Neither impaired nor past due 472 1338 Past due but not impaired 686 952 Trade receivables 1158 2290 At the year end net trade receivables were aged as follows
Not overdue 472 1338 Less than 1 month overdue 203 112 Later than 1 month less than 3 months overdue 147 409 Later than 3 months overdue 336 431 Total 1158 2290 The movement in the impairment provision for trade receivables is as follows
Opening provision Charge for the year 218 Closing provision at 30 June 218 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Ageing of impaired receivables
Greater than 3 months 218 There is no other class of financial assets that is past due but not impaired except for trade receivables.
The Groups credit period generally ranges up to 60 days.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash at bank and in hand 5129 952 Short term bank deposits  162 5129 1114 Cash and cash equivalents comprise current accounts held by the Group with immediate access and short term bank deposits with a maturity of three months or less.
Market rates of interest are earned on such deposits.
The credit risk on such funds is limited because the counter parties are banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies.
Deferred revenue The items recorded as deferred revenue are to be recognised over future periods as follows
Amounts to be recognised within 1 year 98 88 Trade and other payables
Trade payables 816 914 Accruals 923 675 Other payables 319 185 2058 1774 Deferred consideration payable in shares
Payable in shares 1250 1250 The deferred consideration relates to the acquisition of Visible Genomics Ltd in July 2010.
Under the terms of the acquisition 1250k becomes payable in the form of shares in genedrive plc to the former owner of Visible Genomics Ltd.
The liability becomes payable on the achievement of certain milestones.
At 30 June 2017 the Directors reviewed the terms of the earnout milestones and consider that the criteria will be met during a period greater than twelve months but less than five years following the Balance Sheet date.
The liability is therefore classified as noncurrent.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Convertible Bond
Derivative 4 Debt host 5195 4991 5199 4991 Collaboration and Convertible Bond Purchase Agreement On 21 July 2014 the Company entered into a Collaboration and Convertible Bond Purchase Agreement Agreement with the Global Health Investment Fund 1 LLC GHIF or the bond holder.
The purpose of the Agreement was to fund the Companys development production and commercialisation of Genedrive to address Global Health Challenges and achieve Global Health Objectives.
Under the terms of the Agreement the Company issued to GHIF a fiveyear Convertible Bond with a 5% coupon payable half yearly totalling Further as part of the Agreement GHIF and the Company entered into a Global Access Commitment.
Under the Global Access Commitment the Company will undertake appropriate regulatory strategic steps and registrations to secure access for Genedrive in developing countries in tuberculosis malaria or other infectious diseases as agreed between the parties.
In addition the Company will establish a tiered pricing framework that is commercially reasonable and reflects the needs of poor patients in developing countries.
The Company will taking into account its profitability and other commercial interests allocate sufficient capacity and product distribution to make Genedrive and its assays accessible to people most in need in developing countries.
In return GHIF will use commercially reasonable efforts through its global access network to ensure support for the Company in placing Genedrive and its assays in global territories to reflect the needs and price sensitivity of poor patients in the developing world.
Notwithstanding any early Conversion Redemption or Termination of the agreement the Global Access Commitment shall endure for five years from 22 July 2014.
During the period of the Agreement the Company has entered into undertakings commensurate with a Convertible Bond
These include undertakings relating to incurring financial indebtedness and financial default undertakings relating to maintenance of appropriate records undertakings relating to standards of social responsibility and ethical behaviour.
Deed of Amendment to Convertible Bond Purchase Agreement On 23 June 2016 the Company and GHIF entered into a Deed of Amendment and Restatement of the Agreement which came into effect on 11 July 2016.
The principal effects of the Deed of Amendment were To extended the maturity of the GHIF Bond by two years to 21 July 2021.
To split the GHIF Bond into two tranches the first tranche of US2m has a Conversion Price of 1.50 per Ordinary Share and the second tranche of US6m has a Conversion Price remaining at 4.89 per Ordinary Share.
To change the Company conversion option on the first tranche of US2m into new Ordinary Shares in circumstances where the average closing price of the Companys Ordinary Shares is greater than or equal to 2.50 per ordinary Share for a period of 20 consecutive days.
To allow for interest periods ending on or before but not after 21 January 2019 the Company to elect to pay none or a portion of the 5% interest payable semiannually on the accrued and outstanding principal amount of the GHIF Bond and instead capitalise and compound some or all of such outstanding interest due until the earlier of the date on which the GHIF Bond is repaid if converted into Ordinary Shares.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report
Due to the Convertible Bond being denominated in a different currency to the Companys functional currency IFRS requires the Convertible Bond to be accounted for as a compound instrument comprising a Debt Host liability component and a Derivative equity component.
The Debt host is required to be recorded initially at fair value.
Whilst the coupon is 5% IFRS requires that the fair value is calculated based on the rate of interest which a market participant would lend to the Company.
Given the nature of the Companys activities the Company has used a rate of 10.0% in calculating this liability.
The Derivative has been valued using a Quanto Option Valuation model which takes account of the multicurrency aspects of the Convertible Bond.
The variables used in running the model are as follows volatility of the Companys Share Price 24% expected life of the Derivative 4.4 years risk free interest rate 0.58% and a dividend yield of 0%.
Host
Derivative
Bond
Balance at 30 June 2015 3988 37 4025 IncreaseDecrease in fair value 272 37 235 Increase in liability caused by foreign exchange movements 731  731 Balance at 30 June 2016 4991  4991 Fair value impact from Deed of Amendment 414 34 380 IncreaseDecrease in fair value 209 30 179 Finance costs on Convertible Bond 308  308 Foreign exchange movement in Convertible Bond 101  101 Balance at 30 June 2017 5195 4 5199 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Sharebased payments A Share options outstanding at 30 June 2017 Prior to 28 November 2007 the Company operated a number of HMRandC approved and unapproved share option schemes for employees including Directors.
The original options were granted by Epistem Ltd but following its acquisition in 2007 by Epistem Holdings Plc these were released in exchange for equivalent options over the ordinary shares of Epistem Holdings Plc.
On
28 November 2007 the Company established the 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme.
Share Options
Number of awards
Period within which options are exercisable Fair value per option Fair value EMI  Unapproved 127847 1.20 10 Jan 2006 to 09 Jan 2018 0.43p 54974 EMI  Approved 83333 1.20 10 Jan 2006 to 09 Jan 2018 0.43p 35833 EMI  Approved 22603 1.67 27 Jul 2007 to 26 Jul 2017 0.39p 8815 EMI  Unapproved 57727 1.60 15 Oct 2007 to 14 Oct 2017 0.36p 20782 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 13400 1.77 31 Jul 2011 to 30 Jul 2018 0.37p 4958 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 7750 4.03 10 Dec 2013 to 09 Dec 2020 1.64p 12710 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 30000 3.60 10 May 2014 to 09 May 2021 1.46p 43800 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 9500 3.60 10 Feb 2015 to 09 Feb 2022 1.46p 13870 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 19265 5.50 28 Mar 2016 to 27 Mar 2023 2.23p 42961 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 79300 3.22 29 Jan 2017 to 28 Jan 2024 1.21p 95953 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 200000 3.25 25 Mar 2017 to 24 Mar 2024 1.21p 242000 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 32500 3.25 12 Aug 2017 to 11 Aug 2024 0.60p 19500 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 20000 3.25 20 Sep 2017 to 19 Sep 2024 0.60p 12000 2014 Unapproved Share Options 130000 2.75 17 Dec 2017 to 16 Dec 2024 0.52p 67600 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 64000 1.20 11 Dec 2018 to 19 Sep 2025 0.33p 21120 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 244444 0.90 07 Apl 2019 to 06 Apl 2026 0.29p 70889 Epistem Unapproved Share Options 50000 2.78 07 Apl 2019 to 06 Apl 2026 0.05p 2500 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 22000 0.82 02 May 2019 to 01 May 2026 0.27p 5940 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 50000 0.90 01 Jun 2019 to 31 May 2026 0.31p 15550 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 20000 0.90 14 Jul 2019 to 13 Jul 2026 0.31p 6200 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 118750 0.80 01 Oct 2019 to 01 Oct 2026 0.11p 13063 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 9000 0.80 15 Oct 2019 to 14 Oct 2026 0.08p 720 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 10000 0.80 31 Oct 2019 to 30 Oct 2026 0.07p 700 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 141666 0.60 22 Dec 2019 to 21 Oct 2026 0.05p 7083.30 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 70589 0.43 04 Apr 2020 to 03 Apr 2027 0.06p 4235.34 Epistem Unapproved Share Option 427001 0.43 04 Apr 2020 to 03 Apr 2027 0.06p 25620.06 Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Option valuations The options were valued using the BlackScholes optionpricing model.
The fair value per option granted and the assumptions used in the calculations are in the table below.
The Groups effective date for IFRS 2 Share Based Payments implementation is 1 July 2006 and the IFRS has been applied to all options granted after 7 November 2002 which have not been vested by this effective date.
Award Grant date
Note a
Note b
Note c
Note d
EMI  Unapproved 10 Jan 2006 5 years 0 60 4.50 Note EMI  Approved 10 Jan 2006 5 years 0 60 4.50 None EMI  Approved 27 Jul 2007 5 years 0 45 5.50 None EMI  Unapproved 15 Oct 2007 5 years 0 45 5.75 None 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 31 Jul 2008 5 years 0 40 5.00 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 10 Dec 2010 5 years 0 50 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 10 May 2011 5 years 0 50 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 10 Feb 2012 5 years 0 50 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 26 Mar 2013 5 years 0 50 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 29 Jan 2014 5 years 0 43 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 25 Mar 2014 5 years 0 43 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 12 Aug 2014 5 years 0 43 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 20 Sep 2014 5 years 0 43 0.50 Note 2014 Unapproved Share Options 17 Dec 2014 5 years 0 43 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 11 Dec 2015 5 years 0 30 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 07 Apr 2016 5 years 0 36 0.50 Note Epistem Unapproved Share Option Scheme 07 Apr 2016 5 years 0 36 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 02 May 2016 5 years 0 37 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 01 Jun 2016 5 years 0 39 0.50 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 14 Jul 2016 3 years 0 19 0.25 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 1 Oct 2016 3 years 0 19 0.25 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 15 Oct 2016 3 years 0 19 0.25 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 31 Oct 2016 3 years 0 19 0.25 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 22 Dec 2016 3 years 0 12 0.25 Note 2007 Epistem Share Option Scheme 04 Apr 2017 3 years 0 20 0.25 Note Epistem Unapproved Share Option Scheme 04 Apr 2017 3 Years 0 20 0.25 Note The expected term used in the model is three to five years and is based upon the Directors best estimates for the effects of exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations The dividend yield of 0% reflects the absence of a history of paying dividends and a clear dividend policy at the relevant grant dates Prior to 2011 the expected volatility was estimated by the Directors after inspection of the financial statements of comparable businesses in the same business sector as the Group.
Thereafter the expected volatility has been calculated by reference to the historic share price of the Company The risk free rate used is based upon the prevailing UK bank base rate at the date of the grant These options vest on dates dependant on anniversaries of commencing employment with the Group which commenced 1 September 2005 with the final tranche vesting on 1 September 2008 The performance conditions for these options to vest were satisfied in 2010 g These options are subject to performance criteria which are appropriate to the option holders role within the Company and which are assessed by the Remuneration Committee. within the Company and which are assessed by the Remuneration Committee.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
The number of options and their weighted average exercise prices are as follows
Weighted average exercise price Weighted average remaining contracted life  Years
Outstanding as at 1 July 1908274 1821252 2.22 2.27 Granted during the year 797506 441194 0.53 1.16 Exercised during the year Forfeited during the year  9900  1.69 Lapsed during the year 645105 294272 2.12 2.23 Outstanding as at 30 June 2060675 1958274 1.48 2.22 7.31 5.54 Options exercisable at 30 June 833225 1005130 1.03 2.23 1.78 2.47 There were no options exercised in the year ended 30 June 2017 2016 nil.
B Share Investment Plan The Company operates a share investment plan SIP The Epistem Share Investment Plan which is open to Directors and employees in accordance with Inland Revenue approved rules.
Under the terms of the SIP Directors and employees may invest up to 150 per month to be invested in ordinary shares Partnership Shares in the Company at the prevailing market price.
Participants may withdraw their Matching Shares once their associated Partnership Shares have been held for three years.
At the same time as each monthly subscription a maximum of two Matching Shares for each Partnership Share is accrued by the Company on behalf of the SIPs participants.
The Matching shares vest after three years if an employee leave the Company unvested shares lapse.
The monthly cost of the Matching Shares is expensed to the income statement.
At 30 June 2017 the number of partnership shares earnt by employees was 73350.
The total number of potential Matching Shares provided for employees at 30 June should all the employees meet the three year vesting rule was 144626.
Of the 144626 shares 27540 have vested under the three years service rule.
In order to satisfy the shares accumulated as both Partnership and the Matching Shares Epistem SIP Trustee Ltd a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company periodically purchases shares on behalf of the schemes participants.
At the balance sheet date Epistem SIP Trustee Ltd owned 127801 2016 134046 shares in the Company.
The historic cost of the purchased shares is recorded as a debit in reserves and the movement over the period is record below.
Historic cost of shares acquired Brought forward 240 196 Transferred out to participants 11 Purchase of own shares to settle future share liabilities  44 Outstanding at 30 June 229 240 Sharebased payments continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Financial risk management objectives and policies The Group holds or issues financial instruments in order to achieve two main objectives being a to finance its operations to manage its exposure to interest and currency risks arising from its operations and from its sources of finance.
In addition various financial instruments e.
Groups and the Companys operations.
Transactions in financial instruments result in the Group assuming or transferring to another party one or more of the financial risks described below.
Interest rate risk The Group currently finances its operations through reserves of cash and liquid resources.
In addition to equity the Groups capital structure includes 8m Convertible Bond detailed at note 18.
The coupon on the Convertible Bond is fixed at 5%.
Surplus cash at bank is placed on deposits at variable rates.
The Board monitors the financial markets and the Groups own requirements to ensure that the policies are exercised in the Groups best interests.
The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a possible change in interest rates on the Groups profit before tax through the impact of floating rate cash balances.
Decrease in the basis points Effect on loss before tax and equity Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents 25 3 An increase in 25 basis points would have a similar opposite effect.
Capital management The Groups objective in managing its capital is to ensure that the Group has adequate capital to fund is trading operations and ensure the Groups ability to continue as a going concern.
In achieving this objective the Group seeks to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce its cost of capital and provide returns for shareholders.
In managing its capital the Group may from time to time issue new shares sell assets or issue other capital instruments to optimise its capital structure.
In July 2016 the Company issued 8125000 new shares as described in note 23.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Credit risk The Group monitors credit risk closely and considers that its current policies of credit checks meet its objectives of managing exposure to credit risk.
Amounts shown in the Balance Sheet best represent the maximum credit risk exposure in the event that other parties fail to perform their obligations under financial instruments.
The credit status of the Trade Receivables is detailed below Government related agencies 261 1081 Independent Biotechnology companies 897 996 India distributor  213 1158 2290 Liquidity risk The Boards policy aims to ensure that sufficient funds are held on a shortterm basis in order to meet operational needs.
The age profile of the Groups obligations are detailed below Payable within 1 year 2058 1862 Payable within 1  2 years 1250 1250 Payable within 3  5 years 5199 4991 8507 8103 Currency risk The Groups functional currency is sterling.
The exposure to currency risk relates to licence income those shortterm trade receivables which are not invoiced in sterling and foreign denominated cash held in UK banks .
There are no significant costs incurred that involve payments in foreign currency.
The Group has no forward contracts at the year end 2016 nil to manage foreign currency risk.
Balances which are denominated in US Dollars are detailed below
Trade and other receivables 476 1087 Cash and cash equivalents 438 172 Less Convertible Bond 5199 4991 4285 3732 Financial risk management objectives and policies continued Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report The following table demonstrates the sensitivity to a possible change in currency rates on the Groups loss before tax through the impact of sterling weakening against the US dollar.
Decrease in the currency rate Effect on equity Trade and other receivables 5% 24 Cash and cash equivalents 5% 22 Convertible Bond 5% 260 Trade and other receivables 5% 54 Cash and cash equivalents 5% 9 Convertible Bond 5% 250 An increase in currency rate of 5% would have a similar opposite effect.
Fair values of financial assets and liabilities There is no material difference between the book value and the fair value of the Groups financial assets or liabilities.
Commitments under operating leases At 30 June 2017 the Group had commitments under noncancellable operating leases as set out below.
Group
Land and buildings Operating leases which expire Within 1 year 542 390 1 year to 2 years Related party transactions Other than items relating Directors remuneration and employment there were no related party transactions during the year 2016 nil.
At the Balance Sheet date in respect of I Gilham and R Nolan Trade and Other payables included amounts of 5732 2016 5964 and 1700 2016 1700 respectively.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Calledup equity share capital Allotted and called up
Number
Brought forward at 1 July 10564446 158 10564446 158 Share issue July 2016 8125000 123 Ordinary shares of 0.015 each 18689446 281 10564446 158 At the Balance Sheet date there are two potentially convertible arrangements that could result in the issue of additional shares Note 17 details the contingent consideration paid to acquire Visible Genomics Ltd.
At the satisfaction of certain milestones 1250000 becomes payable in the form of shares in genedrive plc to the former owner of Visible Genomics Ltd.
At a 30 June 2017 share price of 42.5p the number of shares required to satisfy this consideration would be 2941176.
Note 18 details the terms of the Convertible Bond Agreement entered into on 21 July 2014.
The Agreement was amended by a Deed of Amendment and Restatement on 23 June 2016 which came into force on 11 July 2016.
Under the terms of the amended Agreement if a conversion occurs in respect of 2.0m at an initial conversion price of 1.50 per share at the fixed exchange rate of 1.69131 together with 6.0m at an initial conversion price of 4.89 per share at the fixed exchange rate of 1.69131 this would result in the issue of 1513821 shares 2016 1513821.
Reserves
The reverse acquisition reserve arises as a difference on consolidation under merger accounting principles and is solely in respect of the merger of the Company and Epistem Ltd during the year ended 30 June 2007.
The employee share incentive plan reserve represents 127 801 shares in Epistem Holdings Plc 2016 134046 shares all of which are held by Epistem SIP Trustee Ltd.
These shares are listed on the Alternative Investment Market and their market value at 30 June 2017 was 54315 2016 120641.
The nominal value held at 30 June 2017 was 1917 2016 2011.
The separate financial statements of genedrive plc are presented on pages 65 to 70.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with Financial Reporting Standard 101 Reduced Disclose Framework FRS101 and in accordance with applicable accounting standards.
They are therefore presented separately to the Group consolidated financial statements which have been prepared under International Financial Reporting Standards.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report
In our opinion genedrive plcs company financial statements the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the companys affairs as at 30 June 2017 and of its cash flows for the year then ended have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
We have audited the financial statements included within the Annual Report which comprise the company balance sheet the company statement of changes in equity and the company statement of cash flows and the notes to the financial statements which include a description of the significant accounting policies.
Basis for opinion We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
Independence
We remained independent of the group in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK which includes the FRCs Ethical Standard as applicable to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
Our audit approach
Audit scope Key audit matters
89900 2016 46170 based on 1% of total assets.
All material financial statement line items were audited.
Accounting treatment related to convertible bond Going concern The scope of our audit As part of designing our audit we determined materiality and assessed the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements.
In particular we looked at where the directors made subjective judgements for example in respect of significant accounting estimates that involved making assumptions and considering future events that are inherently uncertain.
As in all of our audits we also addressed the risk of management override of internal controls including evaluating whether there was evidence of bias by the directors that represented a risk of material misstatement due to fraud.
Key audit matters Key audit matters are those matters that in the auditors professional judgement were of most significance in the audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud identified by the auditors including those which had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters and any comments we make on the results of our procedures thereon were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
This is not a complete list of all risks identified by our audit.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the company financial statements Page Title at start Content Section at start Independent Auditors Report Company genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Key audit matter How our audit addressed the key audit matter Accounting treatment related to convertible bond Refer to note 18.
During the year the company entered into a Deed of Amendment with the Global Health Investment Fund GHIF that modified the terms of the USD 8m convertible bond issued in 2014.
The modification has been treated as an extinguishment of the previous financial liability which has been derecognised and a new financial liability recognised in its place.
The difference between these two liabilities of 380k has been recorded as a gain.
The new financial liability has been measured at amortised cost using managements estimate of a market interest rate for a similar instrument excluding the conversion option.
We read the Deed of Amendment and considered managements proposed accounting treatment.
Our testing focussed on the key judgements and estimates as follows In concluding that the modification should be treated as an extinguishment of the previous financial liability management calculated the impact on the future cash flows of the change in terms.
We reviewed this analysis and found it to be appropriate.
We assessed the interest rate used in valuing the new financial liability and consider this to be within a reasonable range.
Going concern Refer to Basis of accounting note.
The company financial statements have been prepared on the going concern basis meaning that the Directors believe that the company will have the cash resources it requires to settle its liabilities for the period extending 12 months from the date of approval of the financial statements.
In concluding on this basis of preparation the Directors have prepared a cash flow forecast extending to October 2018 which is based on their best estimate of the expected financial performance of the company.
In addition the Directors have also prepared a sensitised cash flow forecast covering the same period that takes into account the financial impacts of a number of risks that the Directors believe have a reasonable likelihood of occurrence.
The company recorded a net cash inflow during the year of 3781k and ended the year with a cash balance of 4105k.
This net cash inflow was due to 6023k of proceeds from the companys share issue during July 2016 and is offset by an operating cash outflow of 2242k.
The Directors have stated that the companys strategic focus is on the molecular diagnostic business and this is supported by investment in research and development included in the companys cash flow forecasts.
Due to the fact that the Genedrive has not yet been commercialised there is inherent uncertainty over the future profitability of the business and therefore the cash resources of the company are forecast to reduce to a relatively low level during the forecast period whilst remaining positive throughout.
We evaluated and challenged the companys future cash flow forecasts and the process by which they were drawn up.
We compared the companys forecasts to the latest Board approved budget and found them to be consistent.
Our testing was focused on the key judgements and assumptions as follows We have compared significant forecast revenue streams to supporting information including correspondence confirming funding and purchase orders and found these to be consistent.
Where significant revenue streams have been forecast with reference to previous performance we have compared these forecasts to equivalent amounts recognised in previous years and discussed with management the reasons for any significant variances.
We have compared forecast costs to equivalent amounts incurred in previous years and discussed with management the reasons for any significant variances.
We have challenged managements sensitivity analysis in light of our understanding of the business and its environment including matters that have arisen subsequent to the preparation of managements forecasts.
In particular we have focussed on forecast revenue that is not yet secured and managements ability to control costs if necessary.
We have found the sensitivity analysis performed to be sufficiently robust.
We have performed additional sensitivity analysis to ascertain the magnitude of change in key estimates required for the cash headroom to be eliminated.
When considered along with the mitigating actions that management could execute to reduce cash outflows we determined that adverse variances of this extent were unlikely.
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the company financial statements
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report How we tailored the audit scope We tailored the scope of our audit to ensure that we performed enough work to be able to give an opinion on the financial statements as a whole taking into account the structure of the company the accounting processes and controls and the industry in which it operates.
All material financial statement line items were audited.
Materiality
The scope of our audit was influenced by our application of materiality.
We set certain quantitative thresholds for materiality.
These together with qualitative considerations helped us to determine the scope of our audit and the nature timing and extent of our audit procedures on the individual financial statement line items and disclosures and in evaluating the effect of misstatements both individually and in aggregate on the financial statements as a whole.
Based on our professional judgement we determined materiality for the financial statements as a whole as follows Overall materiality 89900 2016 46170.
How we determined it 1% of total assets.
Rationale for benchmark applied We believe that total assets is the primary measure used by the shareholders in assessing the performance of the entity and is a generally accepted auditing benchmark.
We agreed with the Audit Committee that we would report to them misstatements identified during our audit above 4495 2016 2430 as well as misstatements below that amount that in our view warranted reporting for qualitative reasons.
Conclusions relating to going concern We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which ISAs UK require us to report to you when the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
However because not all future events or conditions can be predicted this statement is not a guarantee as to the companys ability to continue as a going concern.
Reporting on other information The other information comprises all of the information in the Annual Report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
The directors are responsible for the other information.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and accordingly we do not express an audit opinion or except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in this report any form of assurance thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify an apparent material inconsistency or material misstatement we are required to perform procedures to conclude whether there is a material misstatement of the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report based on these responsibilities.
With respect to the Strategic Report and Directors Report we also considered whether the disclosures required by the UK Companies Act 2006 have been included.
Based on the responsibilities described above and our work undertaken in the course of the audit ISAs UK require us also to report certain opinions and matters as described below.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Strategic Report and Directors Report In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the Strategic Report and Directors Report for the year ended 30 June 2017 is consistent with the financial statements and has been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
In light of the knowledge and understanding of the company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we did not identify any material misstatements in the Strategic Report and Directors Report.
Responsibilities for the financial statements and the audit Responsibilities of the directors for the financial statements As explained more fully in the Statement of Directors responsibilities the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements in accordance with the applicable framework and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
The directors are also responsible for such internal control as they determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the FRCs website at www. rc. auditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Use of this report This report including the opinions has been prepared for and only for the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006 and for no other purpose.
We do not in giving these opinions accept or assume responsibility for any other purpose or to any other person to whom this report is shown or into whose hands it may come save where expressly agreed by our prior consent in writing.
Other required reporting Companies Act 2006 exception reporting Under the Companies Act 2006 we are required to report to you if in our opinion we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit or adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or the financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns.
We have no exceptions to report arising from this responsibility.
Other matter We have reported separately on the group financial statements of genedrive plc for the year ended 30 June 2017.
Hazel Macnamara Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors
17 October 2017 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF GENEDRIVE PLC Report on the audit of the company financial statements
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report COMPANY BALANCE SHEET As at 30 June 2017 Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June
Assets
Noncurrent assets Investment in subsidiaries a 4101 6615 Current assets Amounts receivable from Group undertakings and other receivables b 784 20542 Cash and cash equivalents c 4105 314 4889 20856
Current liabilities Other payables 14telNet current assets 4745 20712 Total assets less current liabilities 8846 27327 Noncurrent liabilities Deferred consideration payable in shares a 1250 1250 Convertible Bond d 5198 4991 6448 6241 Net assets 2398 21086 Capital and reserves Calledup equity share capital 281 158 Share premium account 25988 20088 Share options reserve a 1683 1582 Accumulated losses At 1 July 742 636 Total comprehensive expense for the year 24812 1378 25554 742 Total shareholders funds equity 2398 21086 These financial statements were approved by the Directors and authorised for issue on 17 October 2017 and are signed on their behalf by David Budd Matthew Fowler
Chief Executive Officer
Chief Finance Officer genedrive plc Company number Page Title at start Content Section at start Company Balance Sheet genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the year ended 30 June 2017
Share premium account
Accumulated
Losses
Total equity At 1 July 2015 158 20088 1365 636 22247 Recognition of equity settled share based payments   223  223 Forfeit of share options   6  6 Total comprehensive expense for the year    1378 1378 At 30 June 2016 158 20088 1582 742 21086 Balance at 1 July 2016 158 20088 1582 742 21086 Share issue 123 5900   6023 Recognition of equity settled share based payments   101  101 Total comprehensive expense for the year    24812 24812 At 30 June 2017 281 25988 1683 25554 2398 Page Title at start Content Section at start Company Statement of Changes in Equity genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Year ended 30 June Year ended 30 June Cash flows from operating activities Operating loss for the year 24615 115 Impairment of assets 24615 Operating profit before changes in working capital and provisions  115 Increase in amount receivable from Group companies 2242 3026 Increase in trade and other payables  45 Net cash outflow from operations 2242 3096 Proceeds from issue of share capital 6023 Interest received  7 Interest paid  304 Net cash inflowoutflow from financing activities 6023 297 Net increasedecrease in cash equivalents 3781 3393 Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 10 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 314 3707 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year 4105 314 Analysis of net funds Cash at bank and in hand 4105 314 Net funds 4105 314 COMPANY STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Company Statement of Cash Flows genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Basis of accounting The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and therefore comply with Article 4 of the EU IAS Regulation International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations Committee IFRS IC interpretations and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The financial statements have been prepared on a historical cost basis as modified by the revaluation of financial assets and financial liabilities including derivative instruments at fair value through profit or loss.
The principal accounting policies adopted in the preparation of these financial statements have been disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements of the Group above.
The Company is wholly owned subsidiary of genedrive plc and is included in the consolidated financial statements of genedrive plc which are publically available.
The Directors have at the time of approving the financial statements a reasonable expectation that the Company and the Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for 12 months from the balance sheet date.
Thus they continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting in preparing the financial statements.
In arriving at this conclusion the Directors have reviewed detailed forecast models for the Company and the Group.
These models are based on best estimates of future performance and have been adjusted to reflect various scenarios and outcomes that could potentially impact the forecasts.
The model outputs support the Directors conclusion. a.
Investments
The Company is the holding company of the Group.
The Company owns 100% of the issued share capital of Epistem Ltd Epistem SIP Trustees Ltd and Epistem Inc. incorporated in the United States of America.
The principal activities of the subsidiary companies are Epistem Ltd  the provision of services to the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries incorporated in England1 Epistem Inc.
Epistem SIP Trustees Ltd  to act as trustee to the Epistem Share Incentive Plan incorporated in England On 28 July 2010 Epistem Holdings Plc acquired 100% of the share capital of Visible Genomics Ltd whose 1 The Incubator Building Grafton Street Manchester M13 9XX 2 One Broadway 14th Floor Cambridge MA 02142 USA Principal activity had been the development of diagnostic assays and equipment.
The assets and liabilities of Visible Genomics were hived into Epistem Ltd and Visible Genomics Ltd ceased to trade.
Following a variation of Purchase and Sales agreement agreed with the vendor of Visible Genomics Ltd on 5 March 2015 the following earnout of deferred consideration payable to the vendors of Visible Genomics Ltd remained outstanding
Deferred consideration payable in shares Achievement of commercial milestones relating to Genedrive sales 1250 1250 The commercial milestones referred to above and outstanding at 30 June 2017 1250k 20161250k relate to the recognition of 5m of Genedrive related income or contractual commitments from any of a list of 16 IVD companies which provide a minimum combined value of 5m.
The deferred consideration above is payable in shares.
The value at which shares are to be issued is to be calculated by reference to LSE daily share price over a five day period commencing 30 days after the date that the achievement of the milestones is announced.
The Consideration shares are subject to a lockin provision under which the Vendor covenants not to sell consideration shares for a period of up to 24 months without the consent of the Company except in the event that an offer for the whole of the issued share capital of the Company is received and which is either recommended by the Board or becomes unconditional as to acceptances.
In the event that an offer for the whole of the issued share capital of the Company or for the Genedrive business is received and which is either recommended by the Board or is declared unconditional as to acceptances then the Vendor will become entitled to be allotted shares in the Company up to a maximum value of 2.65m save to the extent that consideration shares as detailed above have already been issued.
The value at which these shares are issued will be the relevant offer price.
NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017 Page Title at start Content Section at start Notes to the Company Financial Statements genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report The Board is of the opinion that as at 30 June 2017 the value of further consideration of 1250k 2016 1.25m was capable of assessment and provision for this liability has been made in these accounts.
Based on the share price of 42.5p at 30 June 2017 this would result in the issue of 2941177 shares.
Year ended 30 June 2017 Investment in subsidiaries
At 1 July 2016 6615 Impairment 2615 Additions 101 At 30 June 2017 4101 Net book value At 30 June 2017 4101 At 30 June 2016 6615 Year ended 30 June 2016 Investment in subsidiaries
At 1 July 2015 6398 Additions 217 At 30 June 2016 6615 Net book value At 30 June 2016 6615 At 30 June 2015 6398 Additions in the year ended 30 June 2017 comprised the fair value of the share options issued to employees of the subsidiary undertaking during the period of 101k 2016 217k.
Full details of the share options issued are set out in note 19 to the consolidated financial statements.
Following an impairment review the carrying value of the investments were impaired by 2615k 2016 nil.
During the year the carrying value of Investments and the recoverability of amounts receivable from Group undertakings were assessed for impairment in accordance with the Companys Accounting Policies.
The recoverable amount was determined on a value in use basis using the management approved 12 month forecasts.
The base 12 month projection was inflated for years two to five at a growth rate of 5% in each year.
For years five to ten there was no growth assumed.
These projected cash flows were discounted at a pretax discount rate of 12.5%.
As a result of this analysis the carrying value of the investments at 30 June 2017 was reduced to 4101k 2016 6273k and an impairment charge of 2615k 2016 nil was booked during the period.
In addition the carrying value of receivables from Group undertakings was reduced to 784k 2016 20542k and an impairment charge of 22000k 2016 nil was booked during the period.
The Group has conducted sensitivity analysis on the impairment tests.
An increase in the pretax discount rate to 15.5% or a reduction in the year two to five growth rate to 0% would still support the carrying value of investments and receivables in the Balance Sheet.
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 b.
Amounts receivable from Group undertaking and other receivables
Opening amounts receivable from Group undertakings 20542 17516 Additions in the year 2242 3026 Impairment provision to forgive amount owing from subsidiary 22000 Closing amounts receivable from Group undertakings 784 20542 Amounts receivable from Group undertakings are held in intercompany accounts with no security specified repayment terms.
During the period the carrying value of amounts receivable was subject to an annual impairment review.
In the view of the Directors an impairment provision of 22000k was required at the Balance Sheet date 2016 nil and the receivable was forgiven down to 784k 2016 20542. c.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash at bank and in hand 4105 152 Short term bank deposits  162 4105 314 Cash and cash equivalents comprise current accounts held by the Company with immediate access and short term bank deposits with a maturity of three months or less.
Market rates of interest are earned on such deposits.
The credit risk on such funds is limited because the counter parties are banks with high credit ratings assigned by international credit rating agencies. d.
Convertible Bond The Company issued a Convertible Bond to the Global Health Investment Fund 1 LLC in July 2014.
This bond was amended and restated on 11 July 2016.
Full details of the bond and the amendment can be found under note 18 of the main Company accounts. e.
Related party transactions All of the employees of the Group are employed by Epistem Ltd.
There are no employees of the Company.
During the course of the year Epistem SIP Trustee Ltd acquired nil 2016 41502 shares in genedrive plc on behalf of the Epistem Share Investment Plan at a cost of nil 2016 60k NOTES TO THE COMPANY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS For the year ended 30 June 2017
Page Title at start Content Section at start genedrive plc Annual Report 2017 Financial Statements Governance Strategic Report Directors Registered Office Ian Gilham The Incubator Building Grafton Street David Budd Manchester M13 9XX Catherine Booth United Kingdom Allan Brown Matthew Fowler Nominated Adviser and Broker Roger Lloyd Peel Hunt Ltd LLP Robert Nolan Moor House 120 London Wall Company Secretary London EC2Y 5ET Matthew Fowler Principal Banker Registrars NatWest Commercial Banking Neville Registrars Ltd 1 Spinningfields Square 18 Laurel Lane Deansgate Halesowen B63 3DA Manchester M3 3AP Legal Advisers Independent Auditors Covington and Burling LLP PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 265 Strand Chartered Accountants and Statutory Auditors London WC2R 1BH 101 Barbirolli Square Lower Mosley Street
M2 3PW Page Title at start Content Section at start Directors Secretary and
DIRECTORS SECRETARY AND ADVISERS genedrive plc Annual Report 2017
