FORWARDLOOKING STATEMENTS Certain statements in this Swallowfield plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 constitute forwardlooking statements.
Forwardlooking statements may sometimes but not always be identified by words such as will may should continue believes expects intends or similar expressions.
These forwardlooking statements are subject to risks uncertainties and other factors which as a result could cause Swallowfield plcs actual future financial condition performance and results to differ materially from the plans goals and expectations set out in the forwardlooking statements.
Such statements are made only as at the date of this Report and except to the extent legally required Swallowfield plc undertakes no obligation to revise or update such forwardlooking statements.
Swallowfield plc is a market leader in the development formulation and supply of personal care and beauty products.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
STRATEGIC REPORT
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 04 HIGHLIGHTS 08 CHAIRMANS FOREWORD
12 CHIEF EXECUTIVES REPORT
24 PRINCIPLE RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES
26 FINANCIAL REVIEW
32 PEOPLE AND SUSTAINABILITY 36 CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 38 BOARD OF DIRECTORS 40 DIRECTORS REPORT
42 INDEPENDENT AUDITORS REPORT
48 GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME 49 GROUP AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL POSITION 51 GROUP AND COMPANY STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN EQUITY 53 GROUP AND COMPANY CASH FLOW STATEMENTS 54 NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS 85 FIVE YEAR SUMMARY 86 CORPORATE DIRECTORY
CONTENTS HIGHLIGHTS
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  4
FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
FY2014 Revenue adjusted from 53 weeks to a 52 week basis Adjusted operating profit and adjusted earnings per share are calculated before exceptional items and amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles Underlying operating profit is calculated by adding back the charge for sharebased payments to adjusted operating profit.
This measure was adopted as the charge for sharebased payments is a material 1.76m 2016 0.22m and is intended to provide a more representative reflection of the trading performance of the Group.
ADJUSTED
OPERATING
PROFIT
MILLION
UNDERLYING
OPERATING
PROFIT
MILLION
REVENUE
MILLION
ADJUSTED
BASIC
EARNINGS
PER SHARE
74.3 2016 54.5 3.9 2016 1.8 5.6 2016 2.0 17.7 2016 12.6 36% 115% 180% 40% FY2017 FY2016
FY2014
FY2013
FY2017 FY2016
FY2014
FY2013
FY2017
FY2017
FY2016
FY2016
FY2015
FY2015
FY2014
FY2014
FY2013
FY2013
17.7 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
STATUTORY
BASIC
EARNINGS
PER SHARE
STATUTORY
OPERATING
PROFIT
MILLION
15.2 2016 17.7 3.3 2016 2.4 14% 38% FY2017 FY2016 FY2015 FY2014
FY2017 FY2016 FY2015 FY2014 FY2013
FY2017
FY2016
FY2016
FY2015
FY2015
FY2014
FY2014
FY2013
FY2013
TOTAL
DIVIDENDS
PER SHARE
NET DEBT
5.2 2016 3.1 3.6 2016 4.3 68% 16% 3.6 HIGHLIGHTS ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  6
HIGHLIGHTS
Strong revenue growth of 36% 8% excluding The Brand Architekts acquisition to 74.3m 2016 54.5m.
Sterling weakness benefitted the topline with revenue growth on a constant currency basis of 31% and 2% respectively.
Owned brands now represent 24% of revenues.
Underlying operating profit increased by 180% year on year to 5.6m 2016 2.0m.
Adjusted EPS increased by 40% year on year to 17.7 pence 2016 12.6 pence.
Net Debt of 3.6m 2016 4.3m inclusive of 2.0m additional termloan funding to support The Brand Architekts acquisition.
Proposed final dividend of 3.5p per share 2016 2.3p in addition to the interim dividend of 1.7p already paid to give a full year dividend of 5.2p 2016 3.1p an increase of 68%.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
OPERATIONAL
HIGHLIGHTS
The Brand Architekts acquisition now successfully integrated delivering strong year on year growth driven by several successful new product launches across all key customers.
Original Swallowfield brands also showing strong growth and extending retail distribution.
Manufacturing business performing robustly underpinned by successful launches for global brand owners and new contract wins.
Further improvements in % contribution margin achieved by growth of owned brands drive category focus and cost base optimisation despite material and components price increases.
Strong financial performance allowing investment in brand support and organisational capability whilst still delivering significantly improved profitability.
Ecommerce now live across seven brands supported by increasing digital marketing activity.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  8 CHAIRMANS FOREWORD m unless otherwise stated 2017 2016 Reported Results Revenue 74.3m 54.5m Adjusted revenue constant currency Underlying operating profit Adjusted operating profit Adjusted earnings per share Statutory Results Revenue 74.3m 54.5m Operating profit 3.3m 2.4m Basic earnings per share 15.2p 17.7p Total Dividend per share 5.2p 3.1p Net debt 3.6m 4.3m BRENDAN HYNES CHAIRMAN  18th September 2017 I am delighted to be able to report another year of considerable progress for Swallowfield and one in which we have seen real benefits from consistent focus on the elements of our Building a Better Swallowfield strategy which we first put in place in 2014.
Sales profitability earnings per share and shareholder value have again increased significantly through a combination of both organic growth and successful acquisition activity.
RESULTS
Revenue translated at 2016 exchange rates Adjusted operating profit and adjusted earnings per share are calculated before exceptional items and amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles.
Underlying operating profit is calculated by adding back the charge for sharebased payments to adjusted operating profit.
This measure was adopted as the charge for sharebased payments is a material 1.76m 2016 0.22m and is intended to provide a more representative reflection of the trading performance of the Group.
CHAIRMANS
FOREWORD ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  9 CHAIRMANS FOREWORD Our business comprises two complementary streams and it is pleasing that both have performed well over the course of the year.
Our manufacturing business focusses on the development formulation and supply of personal care and beauty products for customers which include many of the worlds leading brands.
Through continued investment and execution of our Drive Category Focus our offering to those customers has become increasingly differentiated which has the dual benefit of a positive impact on margin contribution and also improving our competitive advantage thereby making the Group more resilient.
Over the last three years we have developed both organically and through acquisition a growing portfolio of brands that are owned and managed by the Group and which we control from formulation through to distribution.
The acquisition of The Brand Architekts in June 2016 has significantly accelerated this owned brand segment of our business and brought critical mass to our portfolio.
This now represents 24% of Group revenues in the period.
DIVIDEND
Further evidence of our confidence in the business can be seen in the Boards intention to propose a final dividend of 3.5 pence.
Together with the interim dividend already paid of 1.7 pence this represents a total dividend for the year of 5.2 pence an improvement of 68% over the prior year 2016 3.1p.
It remains the directors intention to align future dividend payments to the underlying earnings and cash flow of the business taking in to account the gearing and the operational requirements of the business.
BOARD SUCCESSION After eight successful years as Group Finance Director Mark Warren has decided to retire from his fulltime executive career and therefore will be stepping down from the Board.
Mark has played a significant role in helping the business grow and develop over that period and the Board and his colleagues in the business are grateful for his contribution and wish him continued success in the future.
Advanced notice of Marks intentions has allowed the Board to engage in a thorough and structured search for his successor and we are pleased to announce that Matthew Gazzard will be succeeding Mark.
Matthew has extensive experience in senior financial leadership roles.
He served as Group Finance Director for four years at Thatchers Cider during a period of substantial growth for that business where he delivered the financial support required to underpin both the development of the Thatchers brand itself and the companys manufacturing facilities.
Prior to that he spent nine years as both Group Finance Director and ultimately CEO of British Ceramic Tiles where he successfully navigated the business through challenging times and to a merger with Ceramic Prints Ltd.
Matthew will join Swallowfield on 2 October 2017 and work alongside Mark until the end of the calendar year to ensure a smooth and thorough handover.
Matthew will formally replace Mark on the Board with effect from 1 January 2018.
OUTLOOK
We have delivered another significant improvement in business performance in the year helped by the acquisition of The Brand Architekts and major new product launches in our manufacturing business.
We expect the strong momentum in our branded business to continue supported by a steady stream of new products innovation and continued strong support for our brands across our retail customers.
In our manufacturing business the outlook is solid with a steady flow of new product development NPD and new contract wins that will positively impact the year ahead.
As indicated previously this needs to be balanced against the normalisation of volumes on particularly large product launches that bolstered H2 FY16 and H1 FY17 performance.
In line with the industry both business segments have been challenged by increasing material and packaging costs resulting from the fall in sterling and global inflationary pressures.
Our teams have put in place a wide range of programmes to mitigate the impact of these increases and we believe that these measures and our strong overall trading momentum will compensate.
Having successfully integrated The Brand Architekts we continue to be alert to further acquisition opportunities should they offer the potential to build incremental shareholder value.
Over the course of the year we have strengthened both sides of our business with an improved ability to deliver the innovation quality and service demanded by our customers.
This combined with the progress made on our owned brands gives us confidence that we are well positioned for the future.
Brendan Hynes
18 September 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  10
REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT It has been a year of excellent progress for the Group with the successful execution of our stated strategy
CHRIS HOW CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER STRATEGIC REPORT
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  12 It has been a year of tremendous progress for the Group.
Our
Architekts business.
Within The Brand Architekts portfolio it is pleasing to report that all major brands and major customers are showing year on year growth and that the pace and quality of new product launches have continued seamlessly.
This is a great credit to the team at Teddington who have proved themselves to be as talented professional and committed as we had hoped at the time of acquisition.
In the manufacturing business our ability to support our customer base with the innovation quality and service they require has enabled us to continue to grow sales and contribution margins against strong prior year comparators and the headwinds of significant raw material and packaging inflation.
Our reputation and relationship has been enhanced across several key customers both longstanding and new as we have successfully supported a number of critical product launches for them which contributes to current business performance and augurs well for future projects.
CHIEF EXECUTIVES
OUR BUSINESS AND STRATEGY WHAT WE DO
Swallowfield plc is a market leader in the development formulation and supply of personal care and beauty products including its own portfolio of brands.
Our business strategy is to leverage our Group expertise resources and assets across two complimentary and connected value streams owned brands and manufacturing.
Within each value stream we have three strategic pillars which we believe are the critical focus areas to ensure we continue to grow these businesses in the medium and long term.
Our manufacturing business focusses on the development formulation and supply of personal care and beauty products for customers which include many of the worlds leading brands.
Through continued investment and execution of our Drive Category Focus our offering to those customers has become increasingly differentiated which has the dual benefit of a positive impact on margin contribution and also improving our competitive advantage thereby making the Group more resilient.
SWALLOWFIELD EXPERTISE AND RESOURCES
VALUE STREAM innovation quality service to global brand owners drive category focus cost base optimisation OWNED BRANDS VALUE STREAM new product development at pace consumer and customer relevant leverage swallowfield resources international growth ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Prestige Brands 27% OUR MANUFACTURING CUSTOMERS AND MARKETS Figure 1 outlines the range of customer types we supply in our manufacturing business.
We are proud to work with some of the worlds leading brands and retailers.
Our manufacturing business invoiced 57% of sales to customers in the United Kingdom 39% to those in Europe and 4% in Rest of World.
With a number of customers onward exporting globally.
Swallowfield produced products will be found in many markets around the world.
OUR PRODUCTS Figure 2 outlines the current sales value mix of product types for our Manufacturing business.
BeautyFashion
Retailers
32%
Retailers
36% Prestige Brands 29% Mass Brands 32% Mass Brands 29% 7%
Retailers
8%
Retailers
Hot Pour Hot Pour
Liquids T ubes
Premium
Liquids T ubes
Figure 1 BY CUSTOMER TYPE FY2017 Figure 1 BY CUSTOMER TYPE FY2016 Figure 2 BY PRODUCT TYPE FY2017 Figure 2 BY PRODUCT TYPE FY2016 Personal Care
54% Personal Care
56%
15%
17% 6% 6% 7% 7%
Cosmetics and Pencils 18%
Cosmetics and Pencils 14% STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  14
Our talented chemists have an industrywide reputation for developing great new product formulations especially in our Drive product categories.
Packaging Solutions Our team works across our customer base to design innovative and effective packaging solutions.
Regulatory Expertise Our team are able to advise customers on regulatory requirements across a broad range of product types and across a variety of geographies thereby enhancing the potential of these products in export markets.
Quality Customer Base The vast majority of our products are developed and produced for strong brands or more premium beauty and fashion retailers.
Expertise In Our Drive Categories We have an industry reputation for quality expertise and cost competitiveness in our drive categories e.
Aerosols
Hot Pour Products.
These product categories also have significant barriers to entry in terms of skill and assets required.
Geographic Flexibility Our ability to fill and pack products in the UK Central Europe and Asia enable us to tailor our offer to meet a variety of customer needs around cost quality complexity and leadtimes.
Formulatory Expertise The majority of our sales are from formulations that we have either developed ourselves or jointly with our customers.
This enables our relationships and specific contracts to be on a more secure long term partnership basis.
OUR COMPETITIVE STRENGTH
EXPERTISE
Regulatory
Expertise
Packaging
Solutions
Innovation
Geographical
Flexibility
Quality
Customer
Base
Expertise in our Drive Categories ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Over the last three years we have developed both organically and through acquisition a growing portfolio of brands that are owned and managed by the Group and which we control from formulation through to distribution.
The acquisition of The Brand Architekts in June 2016 has significantly accelerated this owned brand pillar and brought critical mass to our portfolio now representing 24% of Group revenues in the period.
The convergence of a number of macro trends has created a significant and demonstrable opportunity for smaller more agile companies to create and profitably grow wellcrafted and well positioned brands in the Personal Care and Beauty sector.
National retailers are keen to support brands that can differentiate their offering and thereby drive shopper loyalty.
Digital channels and social media allow brands to deliver well targeted fast and flexible consumer communication campaigns at a fraction of the cost of traditional media.
Smaller companies are able to identify trends and develop new products without the time consuming and complex decisionmaking processes that can often be a feature of larger global companies.
Bringing together the product development production and supply chain expertise of Swallowfield with the proven creative and dynamic brand management team of The Brand Architekts creates a strong and broad capability within the group to profitably realise market opportunities through development of our owned brand portfolio.
OWNED BRANDS STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  16 OUR OWNED BRANDS CUSTOMERS AND MARKETS Figure 3 outlines the range of customer types we supply in our owned brands business.
Figure 3 BRAND SALES BY CHANNEL FY17 UK Grocery Retail 57%
24% UK Non Food Retail 19% ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT OUR LOCATIONS
WELLINGTON SOMERSET FACTORY AND GROUP HQ Our head office and a manufacturing and development location predominately focused on aerosol and hot pour deodorant sticks.
BIDEFORD NORTH DEVON
Manufacturing and development location focused on cosmetic wood pencils and small hot pour lip balms and plastic pencils.
TEDDINGTON MIDDLESEX THE BRAND ARCHITEKTS The base of The Brand Architekts a proven and experienced team.
FRANCE
PARIS
SALES OFFICE Sales support office located close to our customers.
CHINA
SHANGHAI
FACTORY
A local representative office and location of our 19% investment in Shanghai Colour Cosmetic Technology Company
SCCTC are focused on gift packs and cosmetics.
CZECH REPUBLIC
FACTORY
A filling location focused on cosmetics fragrance tubes and rollons.
USA
NEW YORK SALES OFFICE Sales support office located close to our customers.
STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  18 CREATING FOR TOMORROW DELIVERING FOR TODAY ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT Fast paced new product development that quickly identifies and responds to market trends is a core element of our success JANE FLETCHER GROUP SALES AND MARKETING DIRECTOR STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  20 Our business strategy is developed on two complimentary platforms the first Creating for Tomorrow identifies within each of the manufacturing and owned brands value streams the three strategic pillars which we believe are the critical focus areas to ensure we continue to grow these businesses in the medium and long term. deliver our more immediate i. current fiscal performance.
EXECUTING OUR
The three strategic pillars that we are focussing on within our owned brands value stream are NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT NPD Fast paced NPD that quickly identifies and responds to market trends is a core element of The Brand Architekts business model.
We are pleased that this responsiveness continues as part of the Swallowfield Group and that retailer appetite remains high.
78 new lines were launched in the course of the financial year across 11 different brands.
Of
Salts under the Dr.
SuperFacialist range.
We are busy on further new ranges to be launched in Autumn 2017.
Progress has also continued on our original Swallowfield brands.
The Real Shaving Company has grown strongly in the year thanks in part to the good performance of a new gift range but also the effect of digital marketing activity linked to the sponsorship of Somerset T20 cricket.
The Bagsy Savannah Miller collection was launched in the year and has helped us to find new distribution opportunities for the brand.
MR our premium male hair loss brand has seen rate of sale increase even further with the introduction of new packaging for the shampoo conditioner and styling paste lines and continued innovative and impactful digital marketing activity.
We have also seen very good growth in our range of value brands such as Tru Shave aimed at the growing UK value retail sector.
We have successfully added new products to our offering and in doing so have extended the number of retail customers to virtually all the major national UK chains in this channel.
On 4 September 2017 we concluded a transaction to acquire a 70% shareholding in Sterling Shave Club Ltd.
Over the last two years Sterling has established a presence in the fastgrowing online subscription shave club sector.
The business is currently at a relatively small scale and our investment is appropriately modest.
The entire consideration is to be invested into the business to support a significantly enhanced marketing plan directed at accelerating membership recruitment and expanding the range of products available beyond the current range of blades and shaving products which currently include our own The Real Shaving Company range.
It offers us the opportunity to further develop our knowledge and capabilities in ecommerce which we believe will be critical to the further development of our owned brands business in the years ahead.
As the business will very much be in an invest to grow phase we expect a broadly neutral impact on group profitability in the current financial year moving to a positive contribution in subsequent years.
OWNED BRANDS ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT LEVERAGE SWALLOWFIELD RESOURCES At the time of acquisition of The Brand Architekts we identified a number of opportunities to either drive revenue growth or create savings by leveraging the existing resources and capabilities of the parent business.
We are pleased to have made excellent progress in this regard through the course of the year.
Several Swallowfield developed and produced products are now on shelf including Dirty Works Body Sprays and Happy Naturals footcare products.
Many more projects are in progress covering not only new products but also the transfer of some existing products from other suppliers.
Swallowfield had prior to the acquisition developed a very competent digital marketing and ecommerce capability and we have been able to utilise these resources to launch digital marketing programmes and ecommerce functionality across Dirty Works SuperFacialist Quick Fix Facials and Kind Natured.
PR and Marketing agencies were consolidated across the portfolio in the course of the year which has led to better quality output at lower cost.
On the Supply side we are leveraging our materials and packaging sourcing network including our China purchasing office our knowledge of best practice production processes and our expertise in product design and formulation to drive cost improvements across the inherited The Brand Architekts supply base.
As part of this programme we have secured significant savings in freight and duty on shipments of gifts and accessories from China by combining our expertise and our buying power.
INTERNATIONAL EXPANSION Growth in international revenues has been strong led in particular by export sales to North America.
Across the full portfolio of our brands international sales now account for 24% of segment sales and we are investing to grow this further still.
We have put in place dedicated resource to grow this area and are pleased in the course of the year to have opened new distribution channels for a number of our brands in France Netherlands Austria and Chile.
Additionally we are extending the international reach of our Christmas gifting ranges with orders already having been received for USA Turkey Ireland and South Africa.
STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  22 We have continued to make measurable progress across our three strategic pillars in this segment of our business.
INNOVATION
Our manufacturing business relies on our ability to bring innovative new products to our customer base which consists of some of the leading global brand owners and retailers in the Personal Care and Beauty sector.
In the financial year we introduced over 200 Swallowfield developed new products a level of innovation activity that compares favourably to prior year.
We were particularly active in haircare and colour cosmetic products with a number of our innovations being taken to market by leading brands.
Volumes on our innovative plastic aerosol products continued to grow in the period and during the year we have progressed projects which we expect will lead to the technology being introduced by other customers in the new financial year.
DRIVE CATEGORY FOCUS In the reporting period we have seen particularly strong growth in Personal Care Aerosols Cosmetic Pencils and Premium Liquids.
In each case recently won contracts to support new product launches have been a major contributor underlining our position as a reliable partner for major global brand owners.
The success of our partnership with a major European cosmetics company has supported a project to increase wood pencil capacity and improve cost efficiency at our Bideford site to meet growing demand.
Further improvements in capacity and capability have been completed at our Wellington site with particular focus on Personal Care aerosols and Hot Pour products which enabled us to both extend existing contracts and win new ones.
COST BASE OPTIMISATION Energy saving improvements continue at the Wellington site and line efficiency programmes continue to contribute to margin improvement across all sites.
The investment in pencil automation in Bideford decreases cost per unit and increases capacity.
The flexibility of our site footprint has enabled us to accommodate the needs of a major customer who needed to transfer sourcing from a dollar denominated supply chain out of China to a eurodenominated supply chain.
The first wave of products were produced for The Brand Architekts brands in this financial year.
This will now be accelerated with significant volumes brought inhouse over the next 18 months.
MANUFACTURING ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 23  STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  24 The Group operates in an environment that is constantly changing and as a result the risks it is facing will change over time.
The Groups management processes assess risks and then develop strategies for dealing with these risks on an ongoing basis.
A formal review of these risks is carried out by the Group twice a year.
The review process involves the classification of risks assessment to determine the relative likelihood of them impacting the business and the potential severity of the impact and determination of whether changes to management processes are needed to manage them effectively.
COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT AND CUSTOMER REQUIREMENTS The market remains competitive and the Group therefore has exposure to loss of contracts andor slowdown in demand for products.
The focus on the six strategic pillars of creating for tomorrow outlined earlier in this report are a key part of the risk management process associated with this specific risk.
Within the manufacturing business the drive category focus product innovation and cost base optimisation pillars all help to strengthen customer relations and position the Group as a strong partner supporting customers key needs of innovation quality cost efficiency and service.
The development of our owned brands adds a further level of diversification to managing this risk and now represents 24% of Group sales.
PRODUCT QUALITY Product quality is a key strength of the Group and failure to maintain a high standard of quality and safety would have a severe impact on service levels customer relationships and have financial repercussions.
We have formalised development protocols to ensure the products we design are safe fit for purpose and comply with all legal requirements working with our suppliers to prepare detailed product component and material specifications and ensure correct materials are chosen and specified and that the products are clearly labelled for any markets in which they are sold.
The Groups quality assurance procedures are reviewed continuously with improvements made as appropriate.
The Group is subject to frequent internal and external safety environmental and quality audits covering both accreditations held and our customers required operating standards.
RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT LABOUR COSTS PRICES AND SUPPLY The Group along with other businesses will face the risk of inflationary pressures through commodities cost increases further driven by currency weakness post Brexit the National Living Wage and other ongoing legislative changes.
The Group in the normal course of its business transacts in and holds various currencies and follows a policy of managing currency exposure through natural hedging wherever possible.
The Group maintains a high level of expertise in its purchasing and supply chain team.
The team seeks to cultivate strong relationships with major suppliers to ensure continuity of supply at competitive prices.
The regular renovation and innovation across our products can help to manage margin pressures in an effective manner as far as the competitive environment allows.
Ongoing capital investment and improvements in operational efficiency help reduce the impacts of inflation.
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT The market place remains challenging and there is an uncertain macroeconomic outlook following the vote to leave the EU.
Our focus on executing our clear strategy outlined earlier in this report has improved our ability to deliver the innovation quality and service requirements of our manufacturing business customers which alongside the progress made on our owned brands both developed internally and through acquisition leaves us well placed to navigate any potential macro uncertainty.
CYBER SECURITY The Group along with other businesses is exposed to the risk of increasingly sophisticated cyberattacks aimed at causing business disruption capture of data for financial gain general embarrassment and reputational damage or that the Groups data privacy protective measures are considered by regulators to be inadequate.
PENSION FUND DEFICIT The revaluation of the one defined benefit pension scheme on a technical provision basis at each reporting date can cause large fluctuations in valuations based on factors outside the Groups control.
There is an agreed deficit recovery plan fixed until July 2025 or until a new schedule is agreed based on the next triennial valuation which will be at 5 April 2017.
This deficit recovery plan provides certainty over cash flows between triennial reviews.
The Group maintains a close relationship and regular communication with the Trustees.
STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  26
REVIEW ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT The overall reshaping of the business towards stronger growth and margins has enabled us to deliver a close to threefold increase in underlying operating profit.
MARK WARREN GROUP FINANCE DIRECTOR STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  28 m unless otherwise stated 2017 2016 Reported Results Revenue 74.3m 54.5m Adjusted revenue constant currency Contribution Margin % 32.2% 31.9% Underlying operating Profit Adjusted operating profit Adjusted earnings per share Statutory Results Revenue 74.3m 54.5m Operating profit 3.3m 2.4m Basic earnings per share 15.2p 17.7p Total Dividend per share 5.2p 3.1p Net debt 3.6m 4.3m KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS To implement our growth strategy effectively we have set ambitious targets and milestones.
We monitor these goals closely to focus our effort and ensure we deliver both in the short term and long term.
A summary of the financial measures used are
REVIEW
RESULTS
Revenue translated at 2016 exchange rates Adjusted operating profit and adjusted earnings per share are calculated before exceptional items and amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles.
Underlying operating profit is calculated by adding back the charge for sharebased payments to adjusted operating profit.
This measure was adopted as the charge for sharebased payments is a material 1.76m 2016 0.22m and is intended to provide a more representative reflection of the trading performance of the Group.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT 2017 2016 Total Total Underlying profit from operations 5617 2015 Charge for sharebased payments 1755 222 Adjusted operating profit 3862 1793 Net borrowing costs Adjusted profit before taxation 3645 1629 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles 187 Exceptional costs  credit 343 645 Profit before taxation 3115 2274
A reconciliation of underlying operating profit to statutory profit before taxation is shown below The Group uses a number of nonGAAP measures which are shown in the tables above and in the segmental analysis.
These measures are used to illustrate the impact of nonrecurring and nontrading items on the Groups financial results.
In addition to the financial key performance measures a range of nonfinancial key performance indicators are monitored at an operational level covering amongst others new product development customer service quality and health and safety.
The Board receives an overview of these on a regular basis.
Revenue growth has been bolstered by the continuing strong performance of owned brands in particular The Brand Architekts portfolio acquired in June 2016.
In the Groups manufacturing business revenues continued to perform solidly on the back of a stream of innovative new product launches.
Revenue growth was 36% at 74.3m 2016 54.5m and 8% excluding the acquisition of The Brand Architekts which completed on 27 June 2016.
The weakness of Sterling has increased sales revenue by 3.4m with 1.8m of this coming from US dollar denominated sales and 1.6m from the Euro so revenue growth on a constant currency basis would have been 31% and 2% excluding the acquisition.
The favourable currency impact on revenue has been offset by an equivalent adverse currency impact on cost of goods reflecting the Groups broadly natural hedge profile.
Notwithstanding this impact contribution margin % has improved mainly due to the increase of owned brands in our product mix.
The overall reshaping of the business towards stronger growth and margins has enabled us to deliver a close to threefold increase in underlying operating profit to 5.6m 2016 2.0m at a time when we have also increased investment in organisational capability and brand support.
Underlying operating profit is shown before charges for sharebased payments with a provision made of 1.76m 2016 0.22m reflecting the share price appreciation in the year and the impact on the accounting valuation of the phantom shares awarded at the closing share STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  30 price of 395p 2016 180p.
The majority of the charge on sharebased incentives relates to awards made in 2014 and become exercisable towards the end of 2017.
These share options were put in place in order to incentivise the Groups wider management team including the executive directors of Swallowfield and to ensure that their interests are aligned with shareholders.
At the time this incentive plan was introduced the average share price was 95p and since that time shareholders have been rewarded with a capital improvement of over 250% in addition to progressive dividend income.
The net effect is that the Group made an adjusted operating profit of 3.9m 2016 1.8m.
Adjusted profit before tax increased to 3.6m 2016 1.6m.
The exceptional item of 0.34m in the current period relates to one off costs incurred in the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Ltd.
In 2016 there was an exceptional credit of 0.65m relating to the closure to future accrual of the defined benefit pension scheme.
The overall effective rate of Group taxation for the period was 17.4% 2016 12.0% of pretax profits.
The prior year benefitted from broughtforward UK tax losses which were fully utilised in the last financial year.
The current year tax charge reflects standard UK and the Czech Republic rates of taxation.
This results in adjusted earnings per share of 17.7p 2016 The Groups strategic investment of a 19% shareholding in Shanghai Colour Cosmetics Technology Company Limited SCCTC was further revalued upwards by 0.68m during the period to fair value based on SCCTCs June 2017 net assets.
The initial cost of this investment was 0.14m and this is now valued at 1.24m.
This improved valuation reflects a very strong trading performance supplying customers in Europe and the USA.
In addition a dividend of 0.1m was received in the year 2016 0.06m.
NET DEBT AND CASH FLOW Net debt decreased to 3.6m 2016 4.3m.
This includes an additional 2m fiveyear term loan facility taken out to support the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Ltd.
The
Group maintains a broadly natural hedge position on the Euro and US Dollar and manages timing differences through a multicurrency invoice finance facility.
At the reporting date the Group was maintaining a hedged position by holding Euro and US Dollar cash balances whilst drawing on its GBP facility resulting in an increased cash position in the statement of financial position of 4.1m 2016 0.8m whilst retaining an overall net debt position of 3.6m 2016 4.3m note 24 provides an analysis of net debt.
The movement in the components of working capital reflect the impact of the four major product launches in our manufacturing business across the prior June yearend plus the inclusion of The Brand Architekts working capital components in the closing position.
The increase in tax paid reflects the payment of The Brand Architekts prioryear corporation tax and the reintroduction of quarterly instalments across the enlarged Group.
Financing costs of 0.31m 2016 0.22m comprised interest expense of 0.16m 2016 0.13m plus a pension scheme notional finance charge of 0.15m 2016 charge 0.08m.
Capital expenditure was 1.4m which was broadly in line with depreciation.
We have made a number of investments to improve line efficiencies and support incremental new customer contracts and have an active capital investment programme planned for the new year.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION SCHEME The defined benefit pension scheme underwent its last triennial valuation as of 5 April 2014.
The deficit on a statutory funding basis was 1.3m and the Group entered into a revised deficit recovery plan and schedule of contributions in July 2015.
The deficit reduction payment will be 108k per annum previously 111.5k per annum for ten years.
The scheme was subsequently closed to future accrual with effect from 31 December 2015.
The latest triennial valuation at April 2017 is in process and it is expected will be finalised during yearending June 2018.
For accounting purposes at 24 June 2017 the Group recognised under IAS19 employee benefits a deficit of 6.1m 25 June 2016 4.5m.
The Accounting Standards require the discount rate to be based on yields on high quality usually AArated corporate bonds of appropriate currency taking into account the term of the relevant pension schemes liabilities.
Corporate bond indices are used as a proxy to determine the discount rate.
At the reporting date the yields on bonds of all types were lower than they were at 25 June 2016.
This has resulted in lower discount rates being adopted for accounting purposes compared to last year which has been coupled with an increase in expectations of long term inflation with the combination materially increasing the fair value of the scheme liabilities with the strong investment return performance only partially mitigating.
This has translated into an increased liability under the IAS19 methodology.
DIVIDENDS
The Board is pleased to announce that it will be proposing a final dividend of 3.5 pence.
Together with the interim dividend already paid of 1.7 pence this represents a total dividend for the year of 5.2 pence an improvement of 68% over the prior year 2016 3.1p.
If approved the final dividend will be paid on 8 December 2017 to shareholders on the register on 17 November 2017.
The shares will be marked as exdividend on 16 November 2017.
GOING CONCERN As part of its normal business practice the Group prepares annual and longerterm plans and in reviewing this information the Directors have a reasonable expectation that the Company and Group have adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the foreseeable future.
Accordingly we continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the annual report and accounts.
STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  32 EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES The success of our business is dependent upon the quality commitment and behaviour of our employees.
Therefore the Group provides clear policies and direction to our employees and strives for the highest standards of behaviour.
The Building a Better Swallowfield agenda outlines the key elements of how we want to build a Swallowfield that is an interesting and rewarding place to work that consistently exceeds the expectations and needs of our customers and delivers sustained profitable growth for our shareholders.
This has provided a framework that clarifies our values our short mid and longterm priorities and the key measures in place to measure our progress.
The foundation of this agenda is our values.
These are the behaviours that we believe are critical to be successful in everything we do and are as follows Making it happen  means being action oriented and being accountable for what we have agreed and committed to do with colleagues customers and suppliers.
If something needs doing lets get it done.
Making it better  means a mindset of continuous improvement in everything we do and a challenge to not only identify things that are not working so well but to also to do something about it.
Making it together  reminds us that whatever we are trying to make happen or to make better we are highly unlikely to be able to do it on our own.
We will always need the involvement and support of colleagues customers and suppliers to ensure solutions work best for all concerned.
Also within the Building a Better Swallowfield agenda we have set out both a clear set of near term and longerterm business priorities and focus areas.
The nearer term initiatives are set out under the heading of Delivering for Today and the longerterm initiatives are set out under the heading of Creating for Tomorrow.
The Delivering for Today initiatives have been varied on an annual basis.
All of these elements come together under our Building a Better Swallowfield pyramid which is used across the business as a visual mnemonic to capture how we want to develop the business.
PEOPLE AND SUSTAINABILITY ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT EMPLOYEE COMMUNICATION The policy of informing and consulting with employees is given prominence and has continued by means of regular briefing groups and consultative committees.
Employees are encouraged to present their views and suggestions in respect of the Groups performance.
During the year a number of employee workshops and briefings have taken place to engage employees in the delivery of Building a Better Swallowfield.
This has been supported through the all employee reward and recognition scheme and an online facility to capture employee suggestions and questions.
EQUALITY AND DIVERSITY The Group continues to carefully consider applications for employment by an individual from any background including disabled persons.
The Groups training development and promotion policies aim to ensure all employment decisions are based on fairness and merit.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY The Group recognises the importance of social responsibility in its business and remains strongly committed to reducing the environmental impact of its production and design processes and advancing its systems and policies to comply with and wherever possible anticipate changing legislative and customer demands.
This important area is covered as part of regular team briefs to all members of staff and the Group uses a variety of key performance indicators as part of its regular reporting cycle.
The Group is subject to regular external audits associated with both accreditations held and customer requirements and during the year hosted over 35 separate audits.
These include ISO 9001 ISO 14001 ISO 22716 Cosmetics GMP ISO 13485 Medical Devices FDA CLAS BRC FSC plus a number of Ethical Environmental Health and Safety Executive COMAH and Customer audits.
ETHICAL TRADING The Group is a member of SEDEX Supplier Ethical Data Exchange and regularly participate in SMETA audits at its production sites to ensure compliance with all applicable Ethical and responsible business practices in global supply chains covering Labour Standards Business Ethics Health and Safety and the Environment.
The Group discloses on and is assessed on the EcoVadis CSR platform giving assurance of meeting the highest standards of sustainable procurement business practices environment and labour practices.
EcoVadis gathers information from around 24000 subscribers based in 95 different countries and 145 different industry sectors.
Over 100 multinational companies use EcoVadis to monitor the CSR performance of their suppliers.
The Group was awarded a Gold award following initial assessment in 2015 and this Gold rating was maintained in 2016 placing the Group in the top 13% of all suppliers assessed across all categories.
Within its supply chain the Group is also certified to FSC ensuring the ethical supply chain of wood and members of RSPO for ethical and sustainable purchase of palm oil with each organisation giving assurance that correct business practices are being applied.
A statement made pursuant to the Modern Slavery Act 2015 setting out the steps the Group has taken to ensure that slavery and human trafficking is not taking place in our supply chains or in any part of our business has been incorporated within our Ethical Policy and can be found on our website.
STRATEGIC REPORT ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  34 HEALTH AND SAFETY The philosophy of Continuous Improvement remains core to the Groups approach to Health and Safety Management.
There are regular Health and Safety reviews led by senior management involving the Health and Safety Manager and workforce representatives.
All areas of the business are audited twice each year to assess any Health and Safety strengths and remedy any identified weaknesses.
Action plans for all issues are developed and monitored by the Health and Safety Manager and local management and are reviewed by senior management.
Risk Assessments are prepared for all foreseen issues and are regularly reviewed.
The Groups Health and Safety System is designed to run parallel to BS 18001.
The Group has invested in the IOSH Working safely training package which is being rolled out across all UK employees over a twoyear period with over 120 employees receiving the training to date.
The Working safely package is a completely different approach to safety and health training.
Its a high impact programme designed to be enjoyable and stimulating and is aimed at getting people involved at all levels across the organisation.
Working safely covers defining hazard and risk identifying common hazards improving safety performance protecting our environment Successful delegates are awarded an IOSH Working safely certificate a nationally recognised and respected certificate.
Successful delegates are now utilising their training to run proactive hazard spotting workshops in their own areas of work with employees coming together to spot potential hazards before they could develop into incidents.
These potential hazards are then analysed and if necessary corrective actions are raised.
All Accidents Incidents and Near Misses are fully investigated to identify root cause and preventive actions are developed and put in place and we continue to increase our focus on nearmiss reporting.
All the above are afforded a score rating which is assessed each year and monitored through the Groups Building a Better Swallowfield Score Card.
The Group Health and Safety Manager is a chartered member of the Institution of Occupational Safety and Health IOSH.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017 STRATEGIC REPORT
The Group remains strongly committed to continuously reduce the environmental impact of its operations and products.
The Groups Environmental Management System was certified by BSI to ISO14001 in December 2005.
Since that date all sixmonthly surveillance audits have been passed with no major nonconformances.
No major nonconformances were reported in the last financial year and the Group transitioned to the new ISO140012015 standard in June 2017.
The Group has made significant steps forward in reducing its consumption of energy and its impact on the environment since 20056 and uses site based metrics to monitor energy consumption water usage and CO2 emissions.
The Group has registered under the UK CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme and a result of energy saving initiatives such as replacing compressors and installing more LED lighting has seen Group electricity consumption reduce by over 17.9% since 2012 and at 4102 MWh currently falls well below the full compliance thresholds outlined under CRC of 6000 MWh.
The Group also publicly declares its carbon emissions via the CDP scheme achieving awareness status and has changed over to the use of Zero Carbon Renewable Electricity in the UK from December 2016.
The Group was also given a 64% sustainability rating score from Carbon Clear compared to an industry average of 49%.
The Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme ESOS is a mandatory energy assessment and energy saving identification scheme for large undertakings and their corporate groups.
The Group achieved the mandatory requirement under the ESOS scheme to comply by December 2015.
The report continues to assist the Group in identifying any further savings opportunities.
Levels of dry waste recycling or reuse for aluminium metal cardboard wood paper plastic etc. waste recycled.
Challenging objectives have been established for the forthcoming year with the aim of continuing to reduce the overall environmental impact of our business including that of our operations and products.
The Group continues to seek to be environmentally responsible in all its activities and to minimise the impact of our activities on the environment.
Copies of our Health and Safety Environmental and Ethical policies plus current certifications and accreditations are available on the Swallowfield website site.
By order of the Board Chris How Mark Warren Chief Executive Officer Group Finance Director 18 September 2017 GOVERNANCE ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  36 The Group is committed to business integrity high ethical values and professionalism in all its activities.
As an essential part of this commitment the Group supports the highest standards in corporate governance.
The Board is accountable to the Companys shareholders for good governance and this statement describes how the principles of good governance set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code published by the Financial Reporting Council are applied within the company.
We do not comply with the UK Corporate Governance Code.
However we have reported on our Corporate Governance arrangements by drawing upon best practice available including those aspects of the UK Corporate Governance Code we consider to be relevant to the Company.
RELATIONS WITH SHAREHOLDERS Communications with shareholders are given high priority.
The Chairmans foreword and Strategic report on pages 8 to 35 include a detailed review of the business and future developments.
There is regular dialogue with institutional and other major shareholders including presentations after the Companys announcement of final and interim results.
The Board also uses the Annual General Meeting to communicate with private and institutional investors and welcomes their participation.
All Directors will be available to answer questions at the Annual General Meeting on 9 November 2017 and the resolutions to be proposed can be found on the separate circular sent to shareholders with a copy of this Report and Accounts.
The Chairman and Non Executive Directors meet and communicate with shareholders as requested.
They also use the Companys broker and informal discussions after the Annual General Meeting to maintain open routes of communication with shareholders.
All presentations to shareholders are shown in the investors section of the Groups website.
THE WORKINGS OF THE BOARD AND ITS COMMITTEES The Board The Board currently comprises an Independent NonExecutive Chairman the Chief Executive Officer two other Executive Directors and three other NonExecutive Directors.
The biographies appearing on page 3839 demonstrate a range of experience and sufficient calibre to bring independent judgement on issues of strategy performance resources and standards of conduct that are vital to the success of the Group.
The Board is responsible to shareholders for the proper management of the Group.
A statement of the Directors responsibilities in respect of the accounts is set out on page 41 and a statement of going concern on page 31.
The Board has overall responsibility for the Group and there is a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for decision by the Board.
Each Executive Director has been given responsibility for specific aspects of the Groups affairs and independent advice is available to all Directors.
Appropriate training is given when Directors are appointed to the Board.
The Board meets a minimum of six times per year to review trading performance set and monitor strategy approve matters reserved for decision by the Board and to ensure that adequate funding exists.
All Directors are supplied with information in a manner to enable the Board to discharge its duties.
Indemnity Insurance The Group carries liability and indemnity insurance for Directors Officers and Senior Managers.
CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
Nomination Committee The current members of the Nomination Committee are Brendan Hynes Committee Chairman Roger McDowell and Franklin Berrebi.
The Committee is responsible for proposing candidates for appointment to the Board having regard to the balance and structure of the Board.
In appropriate cases recruitment consultants are used to assist the process.
The terms of reference of the Nomination Committee are published on the Groups website.
All Directors are subject to reelection at least every three years.
Audit Committee The current members of the Audit Committee are Edward Beale Committee Chairman Brendan Hynes Roger McDowell and Franklin Berrebi.
It meets at least twice a year to review the Groups accounting policies and reporting procedures external audit reports and other relevant matters.
The external auditors Group Finance Director and Chief Executive Officer are also invited to attend but are not entitled to vote.
The terms of reference of the Audit Committee are published on the Groups website.
The Group receives nonaudit services such as taxation and other consultancy advice from the Groups auditors.
The Audit Committee assesses the independence of the external auditors by means of an internal review of relationships with the auditors together with a review of an annual independence report issued by the auditors.
The Group does not have an internal audit function.
Remuneration Committee The current members of the Remuneration Committee are Roger McDowell Committee Chairman Brendan Hynes Franklin Berrebi and Edward Beale.
The Chief Executive Officer and Group Finance Director attend the Remuneration Committee meetings by invitation but are not entitled to vote.
The Committee reviews the terms and conditions of service of Executive Directors and ensures that salaries bonuses and share option awards satisfy any relevant performance criteria.
Terms of reference of the Remuneration Committee are published on the Groups website.
INTERNAL CONTROL The Board is responsible for the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
Such a system can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The key procedures established are as follows Responsibility levels the ethos of the Group the delegation of authority and other control procedures together with appropriate accounting policies are communicated throughout the Group The Group appoints experienced and professional staff of the necessary calibre both through promotion and recruitment to fulfil their responsibilities The Group maintains an annual budget process.
The Board sets budgets once per year and monitors actual performance against those budgets at every Board meeting.
The Board also reviews forecasts and expectations in the light of uptodate circumstances and takes action as appropriate The Audit Committee considers significant control matters.
Management letter points raised by the external auditors are discussed by the Audit Committee and are dealt with as appropriate The Group maintains an expenditure approval process that ensures that the Board approves major expenditure and investments and The Board undertakes a review of internal controls annually.
The Group has established a Group Risk Management Register and the Board has procedures in place for regular reviews.
GOVERNANCE
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  38 BRENDAN M HYNES MBA FCMA NonExecutive Chairman CHRIS HOW
Chief Executive Officer
JANE FLETCHER BSc Hons Group Sales and Marketing Director MARK WARREN BSc Hons FCCA Group Finance Director Brendan joined the Company as NonExecutive Chairman on 1st July 2013.
He is also currently the Senior Independent NonExecutive Director and Chairman of the Audit Committee of Churchill China plc Non Executive Director of private online education business Webexaminer and a member of the Criticaleye Advisory Board.
He was CEO of Nichols plc from 2007 to 2013 having previously been Group Finance
He has plc main board experience across a range of other sectors including TMT retail consumer goods buildings and automotive.
Previous roles have included Executive Director at Knowledge Management Software plc and Group Finance Director at William Baird plc a branded clothing business and Director of the Consumer Retail and Distribution CRD practice of PricewaterhouseCoopers advising Times 100 companies.
Brendan chairs the Nomination Committee and is a member of the Audit and Remuneration Committees.
Chris joined the Company as Chief Executive on 15th July 2013.
He has extensive international experience across the personal care and household sector having held senior General Management and Sales and Marketing positions with PZ Cussons and Colgate Palmolive.
Chris has previously been Managing Director PZ Cussons Australia Regional Director PZ Cussons Europe Asia South Pacific Managing Director PZ Cussons UK General Manager Colgate Palmolive Benelux as well as holding European and UK Sales Director positions within Colgate Palmolive.
Chris is a member of the Cosmetics Toiletries and Perfumery Association CTPA executive.
Jane joined the Company in 1996 and was promoted to the position of Group Sales and Marketing Director in October 2004.
Prior to this she gained valuable experience in product buying at Marks and Spencer.
Jane has over 20 years experience within the industry working and developing products with both brands and retailers.
Mark joined the Company in January 2010 as Group Finance Director.
Mark has extensive financial commercial and operational management experience from across a range of customer oriented businesses operating in global markets.
Mark previously held senior roles in GEC plc Whitbread plc Interbrew SA Alpharma Inc. and Actavis.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
FRANKLIN BERREBI
NonExecutive Director ROGER MCDOWELL
NonExecutive Director EDWARD BEALE NonExecutive Director Franklin joined the Company in July 2010 and brings a wealth of international experience in the consumer goods market having spent 33 years with LOral latterly as the Managing Director of LOral Consumer Goods Europe.
Since retiring from LOral in 2004 Franklin has worked with AXA Private Equity now Ardian and Activa Capital and sits on the Board of a number of companies.
Franklin is a member of the Audit Remuneration and Nomination Committees.
Roger was reappointed to the Board in March 2012 having previously served as a NonExecutive Director from July 2011 to January 2012.
Roger is an experienced director of over 30 years standing he led the Oliver Ashworth Group through dramatic growth main market listing and sale to St.
Gobain following which he was appointed to a number of nonexecutive roles including chairmanships in both public and private equity backed businesses.
He is currently Chairman of Avingtrans plc and is Senior NonExecutive Director of Servelec Group plc and Tribal Group plc.
He is also a NonExecutive Director of D4T4 Solutions plc and Proteome Sciences plc.
Roger chairs the Remuneration Committee and is a member of the Audit and Nomination Committees.
Edward joined the Company as a NonExecutive Director on 1 July 2014.
Mr Beale is a Chartered Accountant and is the Finance Director of Marshall Monteagle plc.
He is a member previously chairman of the Corporate Governance Committee of the Quoted Companies Alliance.
He was a member of the Accounting Standards Board of the Financial Reporting Council for six years to 31st August 2013.
He is a nonexecutive director of London Finance and Investment Group P.
Western Selection P.
Heartstone Inns Limited and some of their subsidiary and associated companies.
Edward chairs the Audit Committee and is a member of the Remuneration Committee.
GOVERNANCE
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  40 Significant Shareholdings Shareholding Percentage of issued shares SFM UK 2163000 12.8 WESTERN SELECTION 1500000 8.9 R and A PERSEY 1375936 8.2 HARGREAVE HALE LIMITED 1167134 6.9 OLD MUTUAL PLC 920540 5.5 CHARLES STANLEY and CO LTD 851250 5.0 RIVER AND MERCANTILE 750000 4.4 FIL LIMITED 674209 4.0 BUSINESS GROWTH FUND PLC 581000 3.4
The Companys current Directors are listed on page 3839 together with their biographical details.
The Directors who served at any time during the year and since the year end were as follows B M Hynes M W Warren R S McDowell C G How F P Berrebi E J Beale J M Fletcher STRATEGIC REPORT The Strategic Report set out on pages 1035 provides a fair review of the Groups business for the year ended June 2017.
It also explains the objectives and strategy of the Group its competition and the markets in which it operates the principal risks and uncertainties it faces employee information the Groups financial position key performance indicators and likely future developments of the business.
DIRECTORS
REPORT
SHAREHOLDINGS
Save for these interests the Directors have not been notified that any person is directly or indirectly interested in 3% or more of the issued ordinary share capital of the Company.
SUBSTANTIAL SHAREHOLDINGS As at 18 September 2017 the following shareholders had notified the Company that they held an interest in 3% or more of its issued ordinary share capital ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
GENERAL MEETING This years Annual General Meeting will be held at the Registered Office on Thursday 9 November 2017 at 12 noon.
A separate circular has been sent to shareholders and includes the following Notice of meeting Form of proxy Details and information on the resolutions to be proposed.
Grant Thornton UK LLP Grant Thornton have expressed their willingness to continue in office as auditors and a resolution proposing their reappointment will be presented at the forthcoming Annual General Meeting.
STATEMENT OF DIRECTORS RESPONSIBILITIES The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial year.
Under that law the Directors have elected to prepare financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union.
The financial statements are required by law to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group and of the profit or loss of the Group for that period.
In preparing these financial statements the Directors are required to select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent state whether applicable IFRSs have been followed subject to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements and prepare financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records which disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information on the Groups website.
Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and dissemination of the financial statements and other information included in annual reports may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION TO AUDITORS At the date of making this report each of the Companys Directors as set out on page 3839 confirm the following so far as each Director is aware there is no relevant information needed by the Companys auditors in connection with preparing their report of which the Companys auditor is unaware and each Director has taken all the steps that they ought to have taken as a director in order to make themselves aware of any relevant information needed by the Companys auditors in connection with preparing their report and to establish that the Companys auditor is aware of that information.
By Order of the Board Mark Warren Group Finance Director and Company Secretary 18 September 2017 Company Number  GOVERNANCE ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  42 OUR OPINION ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IS UNMODIFIED We have audited the financial statements of Swallowfield plc the company and its subsidiaries the group for the 52 week period ended 24 June 2017 which comprise the group statement of comprehensive income the group and company statements of financial position the group and company statements of changes in equity the group and company cash flow statements and notes to the financial statements including a summary of significant accounting policies.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in the preparation of the group financial statements is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as regards the company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the groups and of the companys affairs as at 24 June 2017 and of the groups profit for the period then ended the group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union the company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and the financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
BASIS FOR OPINION We conducted our audit in accordance with International Standards on Auditing UK ISAs UK and applicable law.
Our responsibilities under those standards are further described in the Auditors responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements section of our report.
We are independent of the group and the company in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the financial statements in the UK including the FRCs Ethical Standard as applied to listed entities and we have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements.
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion.
WHO WE ARE REPORTING TO This report is made solely to the companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the company and the companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
CONCLUSIONS RELATING TO GOING CONCERN We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the ISAs UK require us to report to you where the directors use of the going concern basis of accounting in the preparation of the financial statements is not appropriate or the directors have not disclosed in the financial statements any identified material uncertainties that may cast significant doubt about the groups or the companys ability to continue to adopt the going concern basis of accounting for a period of at least twelve months from the date when the financial statements are authorised for issue.
INDEPENDENT
AUDITORS REPORT
TO THE MEMBERS OF SWALLOWFIELD PLC OPINION ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
OVERVIEW OF OUR AUDIT APPROACH Overall materiality 372000 which represents 0.5% of total group revenues for the period ended 24 June 2017 Key audit matters were identified as the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Limited applicable to the Group the accounting treatment applied in relation to share based payments applicable to the Company and disclosures in relation to the defined benefit pension scheme applicable to the Company We performed full scope UK statutory audit procedures on the company and significant components Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited MR.
Haircare Limited and The Brand Architekts Limited Full scope audit procedures were performed by the component auditor Grant Thornton Prague on the significant component Swallowfield s.
Analytical procedures at group level were performed by us for nonsignificant components Swallowfield s.
Swallowfield
Inc.
KEY AUDIT MATTERS Key audit matters are those matters that in our professional judgment were of most significance in our audit of the financial statements of the current period and include the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement whether or not due to fraud that we identified.
These matters included those that had the greatest effect on the overall audit strategy the allocation of resources in the audit and directing the efforts of the engagement team.
These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the financial statements as a whole and in forming our opinion thereon and we do not provide a separate opinion on these matters.
KEY AUDIT MATTER  GROUP Acquisition of The Brand Architekts Limited On 27 June 2016 the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of The Brand Architekts Limited.
The total consideration payable was 12.08m of which 1.85m was contingent upon The Brand Architekts Limited performance during the first 12 months post acquisition.
The contingent consideration was accrued at the period end and was paid on 24 July 2017.
The acquisition was financed via the issue of 5558985 new 0.05 Ordinary shares to raise 8.6m and a new 2.00m loan facility.
Following the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Limited a purchase price allocation exercise was performed by management to determine how the assets associated with the acquisition should be recognised within the consolidated financial statements.
Following this exercise intangible assets with a total value of 8.21m were recognised.
This total value is classified as brands 5.09m customer relationships 1.65m and goodwill Customer lists are being amortised over a tenyear period.
Management considers that the brands have an indefinite useful economic life on the basis that they are wellestablished brands and there is no foreseeable limit on the period of time over which they are expected to contribute to cash flows.
Therefore brands are not being amortised but instead are being tested for impairment annually.
In accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the European Union goodwill is not being amortised but is being tested for impairment annually.
The acquisition was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement because it is a transaction that is outside of the normal course of business.
HOW THE MATTER WAS ADDRESSED IN THE AUDIT  GROUP Our audit work included but was not restricted to An assessment of the acquire entitys statement of financial position at the date of acquisition to assess whether any fair value adjustments were required An assessment of the reasonableness of the accounting treatment applied in relation to the share issue directly attributable expenditure and the contingent consideration A Grant Thornton valuation specialist was engaged to assess managements purchase price allocation exercise and challenge the model and the underlying assumptions and An assessment of the amortisation policies applied by management including the charge recognised in the period and the assertion that no impairment charge is required in the period in relation to brands and goodwill.
The groups accounting policy on intangible assets is shown in note 1 to the financial statements and the related disclosures are included in note 13.
KEY OBSERVATIONS Our audit work did not identify any significant issues that would require us to amend the nature or scope of our planned detailed testing.
Overall based on our audit work our assessment is that the accounting treatment applied is considered appropriate.
GOVERNANCE
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  44 KEY AUDIT MATTER  COMPANY Share based payments During the period a charge of 1.76m 2016 0.22m has been recognised in relation to the Long Term Incentive Plans for executive directors 1.48m and the management team The transaction was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement based on the material nature of the charge and the level of management judgement required in its calculation.
HOW THE MATTER WAS ADDRESSED IN THE AUDIT  COMPANY Our audit work included but was not restricted to An assessment of the method used to calculate the share option charge Observation of issue documentation for new schemes during the period An assessment of the reasonableness of the underlying assumptions for all schemes Calculation of the expected charge and comparison with the charge recognised in the financial statements and An assessment of whether the associated financial statement disclosures are in accordance with accounting standards.
The companys accounting policy on share based payments is shown in note 1 to the financial statements and the related disclosures are included in note 6.
KEY OBSERV ATIONS Our audit work did not identify any significant issues which would require us to amend the nature or scope of our planned detailed testing.
The treatment applied is deemed to be appropriate and in accordance with accounting standards.
Defined Benefit Pension Scheme The Company operates a defined benefit pension scheme.
The valuation at 24 June 2017 shows that the pension scheme deficit has increased to 6.1m 2016 The value of the scheme assets is comparable at 23.3m 2016 20.2m with the increase in the deficit is primarily due to a decrease in the discount rate.
Accounting Standards require the discount rate to be based on yields on high quality usually AArated corporate bonds of appropriate currency taking into account the term of the relevant pension schemes liabilities.
Corporate bond indices are used as a proxy to determine the discount rate.
At the reporting date of 24 June 2017 the yields on bonds of all types were lower than they were at 25 June 2016.
This has resulted in lower discount rates being adopted for accounting purposes compared to the prior period offset by a reduction in expectations of long term inflation this coupled with the volatile market conditions at the reporting date impacting fair value asset valuations has translated into an increased liability under International Accounting Standard IAS 19.
The transaction was one of the most significant assessed risks of material misstatement as the measurement of pension liabilities involves significant judgement and is subject to a number of complex actuarial assumptions.
Our audit work included but was not restricted to An assessment of the qualifications and competency of the valuation specialist used by management to prepare the actuarial report as at 24 June 2017 An assessment of the assumptions of the actuary included within the actuarial report and the associated financial statement disclosures and Confirmation of all scheme assets directly with the scheme.
The companys accounting policy on the defined benefit pension scheme is shown in note 1 to the financial statements and the related disclosures are included in note 26.
KEY OBSERVATIONS Whilst confirming the scheme assets it was identified that assets with a value of 2.4m had been omitted from the original valuation by the actuary in error resulting in the scheme deficit being overstated by 2.4m.
The required adjustment has been posted to the financial statements.
The assumptions of the actuary are considered to be appropriate and derived on a consistent basis with those used in previous valuations.
The revised associated financial statement disclosures are also considered to be appropriate.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
OUR APPLICATION OF MATERIALITY We define materiality as the magnitude of misstatement in the financial statements that makes it probable that the economic decisions of a reasonably knowledgeable person would be changed or influenced.
We use materiality in determining the nature timing and extent of our audit work and in evaluating the results of that work.
MATERIALITY MEASURE GROUP COMPANY Financial statements as a whole 372000 which is 0.5% of total group revenues.
This benchmark is considered the most appropriate because the business is revenue driven.
Materiality for the current period is higher than the level that we determined for the period ended 25 June 2016 to reflect increased revenues following the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Limited.
292000 which is 0.5% of company revenues.
This benchmark is considered the most appropriate because the business is revenue driven.
Materiality for the current period is higher than the level that we determined for period ended 25 June 2016 to reflect increased revenues.
Performance materiality used to drive the extent of our testing 75% of financial statement materiality.
75% of financial statement materiality.
Communication of misstatements to the audit committee 5% of financial statement materiality and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds.
Directors remuneration and related party transactions and balances are material by nature and any differences identified in these areas warrant reporting.
5% of financial statement materiality and misstatements below that threshold that in our view warrant reporting on qualitative grounds.
Directors remuneration and related party transactions and balances are material by nature and any differences identified in these areas warrant reporting.
Materiality was determine as follows The graph below illustrates how performance materiality interacts with our overall materiality and the tolerance for potential uncorrected misstatements.
Tolerance for potential uncorrected mistatements Tolerance for potential uncorrected mistatements
Performance materiality OVERALL MATERIALITY  GROUP OVERALL MATERIALITY
75% 75% 25% 25% GOVERNANCE ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  46 AN OVERVIEW OF THE SCOPE OF OUR AUDIT Our audit approach was a riskbased approach founded on a thorough understanding of the groups business its environment and risk profile and in particular included evaluation by the group audit team of identified components to assess the significance of that component and to determine the planned audit response based on a measure of materiality.
This evaluation focused on the significance of the component based on its percentage of the groups total assets revenues and profit before taxation a full scope UK statutory audit in respect of the company.
This included an interim review evaluation of the internal controls environment including its IT systems and controls and attendance at two perpetual inventory counts one of which was at period end at the Wellington and Bideford sites a full scope UK statutory audit was also performed in respect of significant components Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited MR.
Haircare Limited and The Brand Architekts Limited.
These included evaluation of the internal controls environment including IT systems and controls and attendance at two perpetual inventory counts one of which was at period end at The Brand Architekts Limited under instruction from us full scope audit procedures were performed by Grant Thornton Prague in respect of significant component Swallowfield s.
We performed a full review of the Grant Thornton Prague audit file.
This audit included evaluation of the internal controls environment including IT systems and controls and attendance at the periodend stock take.
Regular correspondence was maintained with the component audit throughout the audit process the procedures detailed above covered 100% of group revenue 100% of group underlying profit before taxation and 100% of total group assets and analytical procedures at group level were performed by us for nonsignificant components Swallowfield s.
Swallowfield
Inc.
OTHER INFORMATION The directors are responsible for the other information.
The other information comprises the information included in the annual report other than the financial statements and our auditors report thereon.
Our opinion on the financial statements does not cover the other information and except to the extent otherwise explicitly stated in our report we do not express any form of assurance conclusion thereon.
In connection with our audit of the financial statements our responsibility is to read the other information and in doing so consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit or otherwise appears to be materially misstated.
If we identify such material inconsistencies or apparent material misstatements we are required to determine whether there is a material misstatement in the financial statements or a material misstatement of the other information.
If based on the work we have performed we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information we are required to report that fact.
We have nothing to report in this regard.
OUR OPINION ON OTHER MATTERS PRESCRIBED BY THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 IS UNMODIFIED In our opinion based on the work undertaken in the course of the audit the information given in the strategic report and the directors report for the financial period for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements and the strategic report and the directors report have been prepared in accordance with applicable legal requirements.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT 2006 In the light of the knowledge and understanding of the group and the company and its environment obtained in the course of the audit we have not identified material misstatements in the strategic report or the directors report.
MATTERS ON WHICH WE ARE REQUIRED TO REPORT BY EXCEPTION We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters in relation to which the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion adequate accounting records have not been kept by the company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or the company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or certain disclosures of directors remuneration specified by law are not made or we have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DIRECTORS FOR THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS As explained more fully in the directors responsibilities statement set out on page 41 the directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view and for such internal control as the directors determine is necessary to enable the preparation of financial statements that are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
In preparing the financial statements the directors are responsible for assessing the groups and the companys ability to continue as a going concern disclosing as applicable matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting unless the directors either intend to liquidate the group or the company or to cease operations or have no realistic alternative but to do so.
AUDITORS RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE AUDIT OF THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements as a whole are free from material misstatement whether due to fraud or error and to issue an auditors report that includes our opinion.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with ISAs UK will always detect a material misstatement when it exists.
Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are considered material if individually or in the aggregate they could reasonably be expected to influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these financial statements.
A further description of our responsibilities for the audit of the financial statements is located on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. iteauditorsresponsibilities.
This description forms part of our auditors report.
Norman Armstrong Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of Grant Thornton UK LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountant
18 September 2017 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  48 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GROUP STATEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 Junetel NOTES 000 000
2 74314 54455 Cost of sales 60404 46393 Gross profit 13910 8062 Commercial and administrative costs 10235 6269 Operating profit before exceptional items 3675 1793 Exceptional items Operating profit 3332 2438 Finance income Finance costs Profit before taxation 4 3115 2274
Profit for the year 2572 2001 Other comprehensive incomeloss Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Remeasurement of defined benefit liability 1697 2160 Items that will be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Exchange differences on translating foreign operations Gain on available for sale financial assets Other comprehensive loss for the year 874 1828 Total comprehensive income for the year 1698 173 Profit attributable to Equity shareholders 2554 2001 Noncontrolling interests Total comprehensive income attributable to Equity shareholders 1680 173 Noncontrolling interests Earnings per share basic diluted
Paid in year 000 Paid in year pence per share Proposed 000 Proposed pence per share The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  49 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GROUP STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 Junetel NOTES 000 000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 12 11076 10852 Intangible assets 13 9145 1167 Deferred tax assets 22 1088 1064
14 1235 560 Total noncurrent assets 22544 13643 Current assets
15 11430 9043 Trade and other receivables 16 16345 15358 Cash and cash equivalents 4057 798 Current tax receivable Total current assets 31920 25303 Total assets 54464 38946
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 17 23524 20540 Interestbearing loans and borrowings Current tax payable Total current liabilities 24301 20803 Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 19 1559 442 Postretirement benefit obligations 26 6132 4495 Deferred tax liabilities Total noncurrent liabilities 8098 5351 Total liabilities 32399 26154 Net assets 22065 12792
Share capital Share premium 23 11744 3830 Revaluation of investment reserve 23 1091 416 Exchange reserve Pension remeasurement reserve 23 3894 2197 Retained earnings 23 12404 10467 Equity attributable to holders of the parent 22047 12792 Noncontrolling interest Total equity 22065 12792 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
Approved by the Board on 18 September 2017 and signed on its behalf by Mark Warren Group Finance Director and Company Secretary Company Number  ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  50 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS COMPANY STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 Junetel NOTES 000
Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 12 10063 Intangible assets 13 1101 Deferred tax assets 22 1090 Trade and other receivables 16 Investments 14 15975 Total noncurrent assets Current assets Inventories 15 8587 Trade and other receivables 16 12743 Cash and cash equivalents Current tax receivable Total current assets Total assets
Current liabilities Trade and other payables 17 23927 Interestbearing loans and borrowings 18 534 Current tax payable Total current liabilities Noncurrent liabilities Interestbearing loans and borrowings 19 1559 Postretirement benefit obligations 26 6132 Deferred tax liabilities 22 407 Total noncurrent liabilities Total liabilities Net assets
Share capital 23 844 Share premium 23 11744 Revaluation of investment reserve 23 1091 Capital reserve 23 467 Pension remeasurement reserve 23 3894 Retained earnings 23 9597 Total equity Company profit before taxation The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
Approved by the Board on 18 September 2017 and signed on its behalf by Mark Warren Group Finance Director and Company Secretary Company Number  ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  51 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS GROUP STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 June 2016 Share Share Revaluation Exchange Pension re Retained Non Total Capital Premium of investment Reserve measurement Earnings controlling Equity reserve reserve interest Group balance as at June 2016 566 3830 416 290 2197 10467  12792
Issue of new shares 278 7914      8192 Noncontrolling interest Share based payments Transactions with owners 278 7914    617 18 7593 Profit for the year 2554  2554 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of defined benefit liability 1697   1697 Exchange difference on translating foreign operations Gain on available for sale financial assets Total comprehensive income for the year 675 148 1697 2554  1680 Balance as at June 2017 844 11744 1091 142 3894 12404 18 22065 Share Share Revaluation Exchange Pension re Retained Non Total Capital Premium of investment Reserve measurement Earnings controlling Equity reserve reserve interest Group balance as at June 2015 566 3830 246 452 37 8771  12924
Share based payments Transactions with owners Profit for the year 2001  2001 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of defined benefit liability 2160   2160 Exchange difference on translating foreign operations Gain on available for sale financial assets Total comprehensive income for the year 170 162 2160 2001  173 Balance as at June 2016 566 3830 416 290 2197 10467  12792 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  52 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS COMPANY STATEMENT OF CHANGES IN EQUITY For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 June 2016 Share Share Revaluation Exchange Pension re Retained Non Total Capital Premium of investment Reserve measurement Earnings controlling Equity reserve reserve interest Company balance as at June 2016 566 3830 416 467 2197 8601  11683
Issue of new shares 278 7914      8192 Share based payments Transactions with owners 278 7914    617  7575 Profit for the year 1613  1613 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of defined benefit liability 1697   1697 Gain on available for sale financial assets Total comprehensive income for the year 675  1697 1613  591 Balance as at June 2017 844 11744 1091 467 3894 9597  19849 Share Share Revaluation Exchange Pension re Retained Non Total Capital Premium of investment Reserve measurement Earnings controlling Equity reserve reserve interest Group balance as at June 2015 566 3830 246 467 37 6860  11932
Share based payments Transactions with owners      305  305 Profit for the year 2046  2046 Other comprehensive income Remeasurement of defined benefit liability 2160   2160 Gain on available for sale financial assets Total comprehensive income for the year 170  2160 2046  56 Balance as at June 2016 566 3830 416 467 2197 8601  11683 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  53 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS CASH FLOW
For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 June 2016
Companytel 2016 Cash flow from operating activities Profit before taxation 3115 2274 1621 2303 Depreciation 1249 1152 990 973 Amortisation Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment  41  41 Noncash pension scheme curtailment gain  870  870 Finance income 97 55 1100 66 Finance cost 31telIncreaseDecrease in inventories 2387 2550 456 2550 IncreaseDecrease in trade and other receivables 995 4956 2555 4778 IncreaseDecrease in trade and other payables 2074 7152 4534 6914 Increase in sharebased payments provision 1755 222 1755 222 Contributions to defined benefit plans 108 321 108 321 Current service cost of defined benefit plan  305  305 Cash generated from operations 5159 2680 2022 2459 Finance expense paid 165 134 164 134 Taxation paid 1142 10 94 10 Net cash flow from operating activities 3852 2536 1764 2315 Cash flow from investing activities Dividend income received 97 55 1097 66 Purchase of property plant and equipment 1367 1181 1207 1032 Purchase of intangible assets 8 34 8 34 Purchase of subsidiary 9401  9401 Net cash flow from investing activities 10679 1160 9519 1000 Cash flow from financing activities Proceeds  repayment on invoice discounting facility 1059 272 982 272 Proceeds from new loan 2000  2000 Issue of new share capital 8192  8192 Repayment of loans 490 137 490 137 Finance income received   3 Dividends paid 675 317 675 317 Net cash flow from financing activities 10086 726 10012 726 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 3259 650 2257 589 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year 79telCash and cash equivalents at end of year 4057 798 2971 714 The accompanying accounting policies and notes form part of the financial statements.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  54 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTES TO THE ACCOUNTS NOTE 1 SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES GENERAL INFORMATION Swallowfield plc is a Company incorporated in the United Kingdom under the Companies Act 2006.
The address of the registered office is given on page 86.
The nature of the Groups operations and its principal activities are set out in the Strategic Report.
BASIS OF PREPARATION The Group has prepared its consolidated financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and also in accordance with IFRS issued by the International Accounting Standards Board.
These financial statements have been prepared under the historical cost convention modified to include the revaluation of certain noncurrent assets and financial instruments.
The Directors have considered trading and cash flow forecasts prepared for the Group and based on these and the confirmed banking facilities are satisfied that the Group will continue to be able to meet its liabilities as they fall due for at least one year from the date of signing of these accounts.
On this basis they consider it appropriate to adopt the going concern basis in the preparation of these accounts.
The consolidated financial statements are presented in sterling and all values are rounded to the nearest thousand 000 except where otherwise indicated.
BASIS OF CONSOLIDATION The Group financial statements consolidate the financial statements of the Company and its subsidiary undertakings.
The results and net assets of undertakings acquired or disposed of during a financial year are included in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income and Group Statement of Financial Position from the effective date of acquisition or to the effective date of disposal.
Subsidiary undertakings have been consolidated using the purchase method of accounting.
In accordance with the exemptions given by section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company has not presented its own Statement of Comprehensive Income.
The Companys profit before tax for the year to June 2017 was 1.621m 2016 profit before tax 2.303m.
The Group financial statements consolidate those of the parent company and all of its subsidiaries as of June 2017.
The parent controls a subsidiary if it is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the subsidiary and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the subsidiary.
All subsidiaries have a reporting date of June.
All transactions and balances between Group companies are eliminated on consolidation including unrealised gains and losses on transactions between Group companies.
Amounts reported in the financial statements of subsidiaries have been adjusted where necessary to ensure consistency with the accounting policies adopted by the Group.
Profit or loss and other comprehensive income of subsidiaries acquired or disposed of during the year are recognised from the effective date of acquisition or up to the effective date of disposal as applicable.
BUSINESS COMBINATIONS The acquisition method of accounting is used to account for all business combinations regardless of whether equity instruments or other assets are acquired.
The consideration transferred for the acquisition of a subsidiary comprises the fair values of the assets transferred liabilities incurred to the former owners of the acquired business equity interests issued by the group fair value of any asset or liability resulting from a contingent consideration arrangement and fair value of any preexisting equity interest in the subsidiary.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed in a business combination are with limited exceptions measured initially at their fair values at the acquisition date.
The group recognises any noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity on an acquisitionbyacquisition basis either at fair value or at the noncontrolling interests proportionate share of the acquired entitys net identifiable assets.
Acquisitionrelated costs are expensed as incurred.
The excess of the consideration transferred amount of any noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity and acquisitiondate fair value of any previous equity interest in the acquired entity over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
If those amounts are less than the fair value of the net identifiable assets of the business acquired the difference is recognised directly in profit or loss as a bargain purchase.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  55 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Where settlement of any part of cash consideration is deferred the amounts payable in the future are discounted to their present value as at the date of exchange.
The discount rate used is the entitys incremental borrowing rate being the rate at which a similar borrowing could be obtained from an independent financier under comparable terms and conditions.
Contingent consideration is classified either as equity or a financial liability.
Amounts classified as a financial liability are subsequently remeasured to fair value with changes in fair value recognised in profit or loss.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS i Computer software Computer software is stated at cost less accumulated amortisation.
Computer software is amortised on a straight line basis over the expected useful life of 3 years.
Expenditure on the research phase of projects to develop new products is recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly attributable to a projects development phase are recognised as intangible assets provided they meet the following recognition requirements the development costs can be measured reliably the project is technically and commercially feasible the Group intends to and has sufficient resources to complete the project the Group has the ability to use or sell the development the development will generate probable future economic benefits.
Development costs not meeting these criteria for capitalisation are expensed as incurred.
Any capitalised development costs that are not yet complete are not amortised but are subject to impairment testing.
Complete development projects are amortised on a straight line basis over 5 years.
Brand names and customer relationships acquired are recognised as intangible assets at their fair values see note Customers relationships are amortised on a straightline basis over 5 or 10 years based on evaluation at point of acquisition.
Brand names are considered to have an indefinite life and are tested for impairment annually.
This is on the basis that the brand is well established and there is no foreseeable limit on the period of time over which it is expected to contribute to cash flow.
An impairment test is undertaken where there are indicators of impairment or on an annual basis where intangible assets are determined to have an infinite useful life such as brands and goodwill.
Brands and goodwill are combined together as part of the same CGU and tested together using a discounted cash flow approach.
PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Property plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation.
Where there is evidence of impairment property plant and equipment is written down to its recoverable amount.
Any such write down is charged to the profit or loss for the year.
Property plant and equipment are depreciated on a straightline basis over their expected useful lives as follows Freehold buildings 2% per annum Plant and machinery 6.7% to 33% per annum Freehold land is not depreciated.
IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS An impairment test is performed annually where required and whenever events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may exceed its recoverable amount.
The carrying value is compared against the expected recoverable amount of the asset generally by reference to the present value of the future net cash flows expected to be derived from that asset.
INVENTORIES
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Costs are those incurred in bringing each product to its present location and condition.
In the case of raw materials cost comprises purchase costs including transport costs calculated on a firstin firstout basis.
In the case of work in progress and finished goods cost comprises direct material direct labour plus attributable overheads.
Net realisable value is based on estimated selling price less further costs expected to be incurred to completion and disposal.
TAXATION
Current tax is the tax payable based on taxable profit for the year.
Deferred income taxes are calculated using the liability method on temporary differences.
Deferred tax is generally provided on the difference between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases.
Deferred tax on temporary differences associated with shares in subsidiaries is not provided if reversal of these temporary differences can be controlled by the Group and it is probable that reversal will not occur in the foreseeable future.
In addition tax losses ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  56 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS available to be carried forward as well as other income tax credits to the Group are assessed for recognition as deferred tax assets.
Deferred tax liabilities are provided in full with no discounting.
Deferred tax assets are recognised to the extent that it is probable that the underlying deductible temporary differences will be able to be offset against future taxable income.
Current and deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated at tax rates that are expected to apply to their respective period of realisation provided they are enacted or substantively enacted at the Statement of Financial Position date.
Changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities are recognised in profit or loss as a component of tax expense in the Statement of Comprehensive Income except where they relate to items that are charged or credited directly to equity such as the revaluation of land in which case the related deferred tax is also charged or credited directly to equity.
FOREIGN CURRENCIES Trading transactions denominated in foreign currencies are recorded in sterling at actual rates as at the date of the transaction.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are retranslated at the middle market rates ruling at the Statement of Financial Position date.
Such exchange differences are recognised in the profit or loss for the year.
The assets and liabilities in the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated at the rate of exchange ruling at the Statement of Financial Position date.
Income and expenses are translated at the actual rate.
The exchange differences arising from the retranslation of foreign operations are charged  credited to other comprehensive income and recognised in the Exchange reserve in equity.
On disposal of a foreign operation the cumulative translation differences are reclassified from equity to profit or loss.
REVENUE RECOGNITION Revenue is measured at the fair value of the consideration received or receivable and represents amounts receivable for goods provided in the normal course of business net of discounts and rebates VAT and other salesrelated taxes.
Revenue is recognised when the Group has transferred the significant risks and rewards of ownership to the customer which is generally when the production of goods is complete the customer has accepted title of the goods under contractual shipping arrangements and collectability of the related receivables is reasonably assured.
LEASED ASSETS Operating lease rental payments are charged to profit or loss on a straight line basis over the term of the lease.
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Pension obligations The Group operates both defined benefit and defined contribution pension schemes.
Scheme assets are measured at fair values.
Defined benefit pension scheme liabilities are measured by an independent actuary using the projected unit method and discounted at the current rate of return on high quality corporate bonds of equivalent term and currency to the liability.
The increase in the present value of the liabilities of the Groups defined benefit pension schemes expected to arise from employee service in the year is charged to operating profit.
The scheme was closed to future accrual on 31 December 2015.
The expected return on the schemes assets and the increase during the year in the present value of the schemes liabilities arising from the passage of time are included in other finance income or cost.
Costs of defined contribution pension schemes are charged to the profit or loss in the year they fall due.
The value as at the grant date of options granted to employees is recognised as an employee expense with a corresponding increase in equity over the period in which the employees become unconditionally entitled to the options.
The fair value of the options granted is measured using an option valuation model taking into account the terms and conditions upon which the options were granted.
For cashsettled sharebased payment transactions the liability needs to be remeasured at the end of each reporting period up to the date of settlement with any changes in fair value recognised in the profit or loss.
FINANCIAL ASSETS The Groups financial assets consist of loans and receivables financial assets at fair value through profit or loss and availableforsale financial assets.
Financial assets are assigned to the different categories by management on initial recognition depending on the purpose for which they were acquired.
Loans and receivables are nonderivative financial assets with fixed or determinable payments that are not quoted in an active market.
Trade and other receivables are classified as loans and receivables.
Loans and receivables are measured subsequent to initial recognition at amortised cost using the effective interest method less provision for impairment.
Any change in their value through impairment or reversal of impairment is recognised in the profit or loss.
Provision against trade receivables is made when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all amounts due to it in accordance with the original terms ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  57 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS of those receivables.
The amount of the writedown is determined as the difference between the assets carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows.
Available for sale financial assets are measured at fair value with gains or losses being recognised in other comprehensive income and reported within the available sales reserve within equity.
Where fair value cannot be reliably estimated such assets are reviewed for impairment annually.
Impairment
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and on demand deposits together with other shortterm highly liquid investments that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
The Group considers overdrafts repayable on demand to be an integral part of its cash management activities and these are included in cash and cash equivalents for the purposes of the Cash Flow Statement.
FINANCIAL LIABILITIES The Groups financial liabilities consist of bank borrowings trade and other payables.
Financial liabilities are obligations to pay cash or other financial assets and are recognised when the Group becomes a party to the contractual provisions of the instrument.
Financial liabilities categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are recorded initially at fair value all transaction costs are recognised immediately in the profit or loss.
All other financial liabilities are recorded initially at fair value net of direct issue costs.
Financial liabilities categorised as at fair value through profit or loss are remeasured at each reporting date at fair value with changes in fair value being recognised in the profit or loss.
All other financial liabilities are carried subsequently at amortised cost using the effective interest method with interestrelated charges recognised as an expense in finance cost in the profit or loss.
Finance charges including premiums payable on settlement or redemption and direct issue costs are charged to the profit or loss on an accruals basis using the effective interest method and are added to the carrying amount of the instrument to the extent that they are not settled in the period in which they arise.
Financial liabilities are categorised as at fair value through profit or loss where they are classified as heldfortrading or designated as at fair value through profit or loss on initial recognition.
A financial liability is derecognised only when the obligation is extinguished that is when the obligation is discharged or cancelled or expires.
DISTRIBUTIONS TO SHAREHOLDERS Dividends and other distributions to shareholders are reflected in financial statements when approved by shareholders in a general meeting except for interim dividends which are included in financial statements when paid by the Company.
Accordingly proposed dividends are not included as a liability in the financial statements.
EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Exceptional items are nonrecurring material items which are outside the normal scope of the Groups ordinary activities such as liabilities and costs arising from a fundamental restructuring of the Groups operations.
SIGNIFICANT MANAGEMENT JUDGEMENT IN APPLYING ACCOUNTING POLICIES The following are significant management judgements in applying the accounting policies of the Group that have the most significant impact on the financial statements Deferred Taxation The Group has not made full provision for deferred taxation on the full carrying value of the Groups land and buildings on the basis that the full value of these assets will be recovered through sale and not through use and that indexation will result in no taxable gain arising on disposal.
KEY SOURCES OF ESTIMATION UNCERTAINTY In applying the above accounting policies the Group has made appropriate estimates in a number of areas and the actual outcome may differ from those calculated.
The key sources of estimation uncertainty at the yearend that may have a risk of causing material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year are as follows Fair value on acquisition Judgement and estimates arise in the determination and fair value of intangible and tangible assets and contingent and other liabilities arising when acquiring a business.
The valuation of externally acquired assets such as brands and customer lists require judgement regarding estimated future cash flows arising for those established assets discounted to reflect the time value of money.
Judgement is also used in determining the useful economic life and amortisation periods.
Further information is included in Note 13.
Impairment reviews An impairment test is undertaken where there are indicators of impairment or on an annual basis where intangible assets are determined to have an infinite useful life such as brands and goodwill using a discounted cash flow approach.
Note 13 discloses the assumptions used.
Share based payments The balance is significant due to its judgemental nature and the high level of estimation uncertainty.
The Groups accounting policy on share based payments is shown in note 1 and related disclosures are included in note 6.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  58 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Postretirement benefits The Groups defined benefit pension scheme is assessed annually.
The value in these accounts which has been based on the assumptions of an independent actuary resulted in a deficit of 6.1m 2016 4.5m before deferred taxation.
The size of the deficit is sensitive to the market value of the underlying scheme investments and the actuarial assumptions which include price inflation pension and salary increases the discount rate used in assessing the liabilities mortality rates and other demographic factors.
Further details are included in Note 26.
STANDARDS IN ISSUE BUT NOT YET EFFECTIVE At the date of authorisation of these financial statements certain new standards amendments and interpretations to existing standards have been published by the IASB but are not yet effective and have not been adopted early by the
Management anticipates that all of the relevant pronouncements will be adopted in the Groups accounting policies for the first period beginning after the effective date of the pronouncement.
Information on new standards amendments and interpretations that are expected to be relevant to the Groups financial statements is provided below.
Certain other new standards and interpretations have been issued but are not expected to have a material impact on the Groups financial statements.
IFRS 9 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The IASB have released IFRS 9 Financial Instruments representing the completion of its project to replace IAS 39 Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement.
The new standard introduces extensive changes to IAS 39s guidance on the classification and measurement of financial assets and introduces a new expected credit loss model for the impairment of financial assets.
IFRS 9 also provides new guidance on the application of hedge accounting.
The Groups management have yet to assess the impact of IFRS 9 on these consolidated financial statements.
The new standard is required to be applied for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
IFRS 15 REVENUE FROM CONTRACTS WITH CUSTOMERS IFRS 15 presents new requirements for the recognition of revenue replacing IAS 18 Revenue IAS 11 Construction Contracts and several revenuerelated Interpretations.
The new standard establishes a controlbased revenue recognition model and provides additional guidance in many areas not covered in detail under existing IFRSs including how to account for arrangements with multiple performance obligations variable pricing customer refund rights supplier repurchase options and other common complexities.
IFRS 15 is effective for reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018.
The Groups management have not yet assessed the impact of IFRS 15 on these consolidated financial statements.
IFRS 16 LEASES IFRS 16 represents new requirements for the recognition of operating leases replacing IAS 17 Leases.
The new standard requires that certain operating leases are disclosed within the Statement of Financial Position.
The Groups management have yet to assess the impact of IFRS 16 on these consolidated financial statements.
The new standard is required to be applied for annual reporting periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  59 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 2 SEGMENTAL ANALYSIS The Group is a market leader in the development formulation and supply of personal care and beauty products.
The reportable segments of the Group are aggregated as follows Brands  we leverage our skilled resources to develop and market a growing portfolio of Swallowfield owned and managed brands.
These include organically developed Bagsy MR. and the portfolio of brands included in The Brand Architekts acquisition acquired at the start of this financial year.
This latter acquisition brings critical mass to our owned brands and has therefore changed the segmental analysis for this year.
Manufacturing  the development formulation and production of quality products for many of the worlds leading personal care and beauty brands.
Eliminations and Central Costs.
Other Groupwide activities and expenses including defined benefit pension costs closed defined benefit scheme sharebased payment expenses amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles interest taxation and eliminations of intersegment items are presented within Eliminations and central costs.
This is the basis on which the Group presents its operating results to the Directors which is considered to be the Chief Operating Decision Maker CODM for the purposes of IFRS 8.
No comparative figures are shown as it is only since the acquisition of The Brand Architekts that this segmentation has been adopted.
Prior to this brand performance was not considered to be sufficiently material to be separately reported.
Comparative full year numbers have been presented on the same basis.
Eliminations and Central Brands Manufacturing Costs Total Total 52 weeks ended 24 June 2017 000 000 000 000 000 UK revenue 13630 31102  44732 31868 International revenue 4276 25306  29582 22587 Revenue  External 17906 56408  74314 54455 Revenue  Internal  1572 1572 Total revenue 17906 57980 1572 74314 54455 Underlying profitloss from operations 2910 4822 2115 5617 2015 Charge for sharebased payments   1755 1755 222 Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles   187 187 Exceptional costs   343 343 645 Net borrowing costs   217 217 164 Profitloss before taxation 2910 4822 4617 3115 2274 Tax charge Profitloss for the period 2910 4822 5160 2572 2001 The segmental Income Statement disclosures are measured in accordance with the Groups accounting policies as set out in note 1.
Inter segment revenue earned by manufacturing from sales to brands is determined on normal commercial trading terms as if brands were any other thirdparty customer.
All defined benefit pension costs and sharebased payment expenses are recognised for internal reporting to the CODM as part of Groupwide activities and are included within Eliminations and central costs above.
Other costs such as Group insurance and auditors remuneration which are incurred on a Groupwide basis are recharged by the head office to segments on a reasonable and consistent basis for all periods presented and are included within segment results above.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  60 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS c Principal measures of assets and liabilities The Groups assets and liabilities are managed centrally by the CODM and consequently there is no reconciliation between the Groups assets per the statement of financial position and the segment assets.
The distribution of the Groups external revenue by destination is shown below
Brands Manufacturing Costs Total 52 weeks ended 24 June 2017
22 1227  1249
Geographical segments 52 weeks ended 52 weeks ended 24 June 2017 25 June 2016
44732 31868 Other European Union countries 23012 20577 Rest of the World 6570 2010 74314 54455 b Other Income Statement segmental information The following additional items are included in the measures of underlying profit and loss reported to the CODM and are included within a above In the 52 weeks ended 24 June 2017 the Group had two customers that exceeded 10% of total revenues being 13% and 12% respectively.
In the 52 weeks ended 25 June 2016 the Group had two customers that exceeded 10% of total revenues this being 18% and 19% respectively.
In 2017 the Group had noncurrent assets held overseas of 2229000 2016 1565000.
NOTE 3 EXCEPTIONAL ITEMS Under exceptional Items we have recognised costs associated with The Brand Architekts acquisition which completed on 27 June 2016.
The prior year exceptional item is a noncash curtailment gain arising from the closure of the companys Defined Benefit pension scheme to further accrual.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  61 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 4 PROFIT BEFORE TAXATION 2017 2016 a This is stated after charging crediting Depreciation of property plant and equipment of purchased assets 1249 1152 Amortisation of intangible assets Research and development 1049 920 Foreign exchange losses Operating leases Hire of plant and machinery Rent of buildings Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment b Auditors remuneration Audit services Audit of the Company financial statements Audit of subsidiary undertakings Audit related assurance services Interim review Taxation compliance services Corporation tax compliance Other assurance services iXBRL tagging Merger and acquisition advice Services relating to corporate finance transactions Acquisition of The Brand Architekts Limited c Earnings before interest taxation depreciation and amortisation EBITDA Operating profit before exceptional items 3675 1793 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 1249 1152 Amortisation of intangible assets Amortisation of acquisitionrelated intangibles Loss on disposal of property plant and equipment EBITDA before exceptional operating items 5163 3053 Exceptional operating items EBITDA after exceptional operating items 4820 3698 NOTE 5 STAFF COSTS 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 13528 11575 Social security costs 1511 1180 Other pension costs 15909 13532 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  62 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The average monthly number of employees including executive Directors during the year was All of the 183620 new Options granted under the LTIP on 15 July 2016 have two performance conditions attached to them.
The first 50% of the award is linked to certain share price targets and the remaining 50% is linked to earning per share targets.
To the extent that both of the performance conditions are met at the end of the threeyear performance cycle then the Options can be exercised at nil cost.
Upon vesting half of each award will be made in shares with the balance being made in cash.
The midmarket price of the ordinary shares on 24 June 2017 was 395p 2016 180p and the range during the 52week period to 24 June 2017 was 168.5p to 417.5p 52 weeks to 25 June 2016 108.0p to 207.5p.
The total number of ordinary shares subject to options and which could in the future be issued is 547929.
This represents 3.25% of the issued share capital of the Company which comprised 16865401 Ordinary Shares at the reporting date.
With effect from April 2016 Mr How has taken additional base salary in lieu of company pension contributions.
2017 2016 Number Number
Distribution
Administration
Remuneration in respect of Directors was as follows
Pension Total Total Fees Bonus Benefits Contributions 2017 2016 Executive Directors J M Fletcher M W Warren NonExecutive Directors B M Hynes 56    56 50 E J Beale 28    28 26 F P Berrebi R S McDowell 28    Number of Number of Number of Number Earliest Exercise Shares Shares Shares Lapsed of Shares Exercise Exercise Expiry at June 2016 Awarded in the year at June 2017 Price Date Date in year C G How 113715   113715 95p 61217 51224 J M Fletcher 55702   55702 95p 61217 51224 M W Warren 55702   55702 95p 61217 51224 C G How  46376  46376 Nil 16719 15726 J M Fletcher  22717  22717 Nil 16719 15726 M W Warren  22717  22717 Nil 16719 15726 Total share options 225119 91810  316929 Phantom  cash settled share options C G How 230875   230875 95p 61217 51224 J M Fletcher 113093   113093 95p 61217 51224 M W Warren 113093   113093 95p 61217 51224 C G How  46376  46376 Nil 16719 15726 J M Fletcher  22717  22717 Nil 16719 15726 M W Warren  22717  22717 Nil 16719 15726 Total phantom 457061 91810  548871 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  63 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 6 SHARE BASED EMPLOYEE REMUNERATION Executive and Managers Share Option Scheme The Group operates both approved and unapproved share option schemes.
There have been a number of options granted during the course of the financial year to 24 June 2017 with further details given below The Company has used the QCAIRS option valuer TM based on the BlackScholesMerton based option pricing model to calculate the fair value of the outstanding share options.
This model was developed by The QCA partnered with Independent Remuneration Solutions IRS and City Group Plc.
The development was led by Mr Edward Beale a Director of the Group and at that time Chief Executive of City Group Plc.
Yearended June 2015 awards All of the 225119 share options and 457061 phantom share options granted have a performance condition attached to them linked to certain stretching share price targets ranging from a threshold at 1.80 to the full award at a share price of 2.20 and to the extent that the performance condition is met have an exercise price of 0.95.
The phantom share options do not result in any dilution.
The difference between the share price target achieved and the notional exercise price would become payable in cash.
The phantom options are designed to finance the exercise of the share options and cover the tax liabilities.
The performance conditions are as follows With the percentage of the quantity of shares vesting prorated between these levels.
The performance conditions have exceeded 240p and as a consequence the % awarded will be 120% of the quantity outlined above.
Amount
Number Number of expensed of share phantom Fair in yearended Period of options options Exercise value June 2017 expense Date of grant granted granted price pence 000 restated 5 December 2014  exec share options 225119  95.0p 13p 11 3 years 5 December 2014  exec phantom share options  457061 95.0p 285p 1280 3 years 31 October 2014  managers phantom share options  128000 100.0p 280p 280 3 years 15 July 2016  exec share options 91810  Nil 165p 55 3 years 15 July 2016  exec cashsettled share options  91810 Nil 369p 128 3 years 16 June 2017  managers share options 231000  367.5p 47p 1 3 years Total Options Granted 547929 676871 Charge relating to options granted in the prior year Charge relating to phantoms granted in the prior year Charge relating to options granted in the current year Charge relating to phantoms granted in the current year Charge included in Administration expenses Share price vesting thresholds % awarded Share price below 180p Nil Share price 180p 30% Share price 200p 50% Share price 210p 75% Share price 220p 100% Share price 240p 120% ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  64 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Yearended June 2017 awards All of the 183620 new Options granted under the LTIP on 15 July 2016 have two performance conditions attached to them.
The first 50% of the award is linked to certain share price targets and the remaining 50% is linked to earning per share targets.
To the extent that both of the performance conditions are met at the end of the threeyear performance cycle then the Options can be exercised at nil cost.
Upon vesting half of each award will be made in shares with the balance being made in cash.
The managers share options were issued on 16 June 2017 under a Company Share Option Scheme CSOP and have an exercise price of 367.5p and no performance conditions attached with vesting after a minimum of threeyears and a maximum of tenyears.
The inputs into the BlackScholesMerton based option pricing model to calculate the charge for exec share options granted in the financial year were as follows Volatility is calculated on a consistent basis for each grant of options and is based on the historic annualised standard deviation of continuously compounded rates of return over the three years preceding the date of award.
Detailed in Note 5 is a summary of awards outstanding at the end of the year.
Expected life of option 3 years Volatility of share price 23% Dividend yield 1.8% Riskfree interest rate 1.7% Share price at date of grant Exercise price threshold required to exercise option Nil p Bid price discount 3% Estimated conversion rate 100% Fair value per option NOTE 7 FINANCE INCOME 2017 2016 Dividend income NOTE 8 FINANCE COSTS 2017 2016 Bank loans and overdrafts Net pension scheme costs NOTE 9 TAXATION 2017 2016 a Analysis of tax charge in the year UK corporation tax on profit for the year adjustment in respect of previous years foreign tax double tax relief Total current tax charge Deferred tax current year credit  charge prior year credit effect of tax rate change on opening balance Total deferred tax Tax charge 543 273 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  65 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS b Factors affecting total tax charge for the year The tax assessed on the profit before taxation for the year is lower 2016 lower than the standard rate of UK corporation tax of 19.75% 2016 20%.
The differences are reconciled below c Factors that may affect future tax charges Provision has not been made for deferred taxation on the Groups land and buildings on the basis that the principal location will be sold in the short to medium term and that the majority of its value will therefore be recovered through sale.
Because of this no tax liability is expected to arise and therefore no provision has been made in relation to deferred taxation.
There are potential reductions arising from any Research and Development tax credits when received which may affect future tax charges.
2017 2016 Profit before taxation 3115 2274 Tax at the applicable rate of 19.75% 2016 20% Effect of Adjustment in respect of previous years Adjustment to deferred tax Differences between UK and foreign tax rates Permanent differences and other RandD tax credit Actual tax charge NOTE 10 PAYMENTS TO SHAREHOLDERS 2017 2016 Final dividend paid  2.3p 2016 2.0p per share Interim dividend paid  1.7p 2016 0.8p per share The Directors have recommended the payment of a final dividend of 3.5p per share 2016 2.3p.
NOTE 11 EARNINGS PER SHARE 2017 2016 Basic and Diluted Profit for the year 000 2554 2001 Basic weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year 16834773 11306416 Diluted number of shares 17382702 11531535 Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share Basic earnings per share has been calculated by dividing the profit for each financial year by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue at 24 June 2017 and 25 June 2016 respectively.
There is a difference at June 2017 between the basic net earnings per share and the diluted net earnings per share of 0.5p due to the 547929 share options awarded.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  66 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Adjusted profit for the current year of 2.98m is shown after adding back Exceptional Items of 0.34m and Amortisation of Acquisition Related Intangibles of 0.19m and then deducting a notional tax charge of 0.10m.
Adjusted earnings per share has been calculated by dividing the adjusted profit of 2.98m by the weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue at 24 June 2017 respectively.
The 2016 comparative figures have also been adjusted to a comparable basis.
The Group elected to revalue its Wellington land portfolio only as allowed under the transitional provisions of IFRS.
The revaluation adjustment is based on an independent valuation prepared in April 2005 on the basis of market value assuming existing use to a total of 1.75m historical value 0.79m.
2017 2016 Adjusted earnings per share Adjusted Profit for the year 000 2979 1430 Basic weighted average number of ordinary shares in issue during the year 16834773 11306416 Diluted number of shares 17382702 11531535 Basic earnings per share Diluted earnings per share NOTE 12 PROPERTY PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Freehold Land Plant and and buildings Machinery Total Group Cost At June 2015 7694 27164 34858 Exchange Movements  267 267 Additions  1181 1181 Disposals 84 2128 2212 At June 2016 7610 26484 34094 Exchange Movements  264 264 Additions  1367 1367 Disposals  1984 1984 At June 2017 Depreciation 7610 26131 33741 At June 2015 2705 21410 24115 Exchange Movements  147 147 Provided during the year 201 951 1152 Disposals 84 2088 2172 At June 2016 2822 20420 23242 Exchange Movements  158 158 Additions  36 36 Provided during the year 116 1097 1213 Disposals  1984 1984 At June 2017 2938 19727 22665 Net book value At June 2017 4672 6404 11076 At June 2016 4788 6064 10852 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  67 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS If none of the freehold land and buildings had been revalued they would be restated at the following amounts 2017 2016 Group and Company Historical cost 6272 6272 Accumulated depreciation based on cost 2731 2615 Net book value 3541 3657 Freehold Land Plant and and buildings Machinery Total Company Cost At June 2015 7694 25190 32884 Additions  1032 1032 Transfers to subsidiary Disposals 84 2128 2212 At June 2016 7610 2409 31704 Additions  1207 1207 Disposals  1984 1984 At June 2017 Depreciation 7610 23317 30927 At June 2015 2706 20349 23055 Provided during the year 201 772 973 Transfers to subsidiary Disposals 84 2087 2171 At June 2016 2823 19034 21857 Provided during the year 116 875 991 Transfers to subsidiary Disposals  1984 1984 At June 2017 2939 17925 20864 Net book value At June 2017 4671 5392 10063 At June 2016 4787 5060 9847 NOTE 13 INTANGIBLE ASSETS Research and Brand Customer Software Development Names Relationships Goodwill Total Group Cost At June   1947
Disposals
At June   1929
8  5091 1646 1473 8218
At June 2017 Amortisation 782 75 6015 1746 1473 10091 At June 2015 Provided during the year
At June 2016 Provided during the year
At June 2017 Net book value At June 2017 65 48 6015 1544 1473 9145 At June   1167 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  68 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Research and Brand Customer Software Development Names Relationships Total Company Cost At June  1947
Disposals
At June  1929
Disposals
At June 2017 Amortisation At June 2015 Provided during the year
At June 2016 Provided during the year
At June 2017 Net book value At June  1101 At June  1167 ACQUISITION OF SUBSIDIARY THE BRAND ARCHITEKTS On 27 June 2016 the Group acquired 100% of the issued share capital of The Brand Architekts Ltd.
The total consideration for the acquisition along with the fair value of the identified assets and assumed liabilities is shown below Recognised amounts of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed Fair Value Provisional adjustments 7 Fair Value Book Value January 2017 Tangible assets Fixed assets
2416  2416 Trade and other receivables 3332  3332 Bank and cash balances Trade and other payables 2737  2737 Intangible assets 6737 6737 Sub total 3873 6737 10610
Total Fair Value recognised Net cash paid on acquisition Purchase of subsidiary Contingent consideration Cash on acquisition Net cash paid on acquisition The acquisition consideration was subject to a contingent payment of 1.85m based on a margin performance target for the 12 months immediately following acquisition.
Management can confirm that the margin target was achieved and as such the fair value of the transaction assumed the payment of this deferred consideration in full during July 2017 post the reporting date.
The acquisition costs including due diligence costs that relate to the transaction have been expensed as operating costs in compliance with IFRS3 and shown as exceptional items.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  69 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 14 INVESTMENTS For the 52 weeks ending 24 June 2017 and 25 Junetel Available for Sale Financial Assets
Opening position
Closing position 1235 560 Available for Sale Investments in 2017 2016 Financial Assets Subsidiaries Total Total
Cost
Opening position 560 6235 6795 6625
12083 12083
Closing position 1235 18318 19553 6795 Provision for impairment at June 2016 and June 2017 3578 3578 3578 Net book value at June 2017 1235 14740 15975 3217 The portfolio of brand names value 5.09m is considered to have an indefinite life and is tested for impairment annually.
This is on the basis that there is no foreseeable limit on the period of time over which it is expected to contribute to cash flow.
Customer relationships value 1.65m are amortised on a straightline basis over ten years.
Goodwill of 1.47m has been recognised on acquisition and is attributable to future product launches and assembled workforce at point of acquisition.
IMPAIRMENT TESTING The Brand Architekts acquisition completed within the year and has performed in excess of forecasted expectations and as consequence no impairment testing was deemed necessary at the reporting date.
In the case of The Real Shaving Co brand value 0.92m the recoverable amount of the brand was determined based on value inuse calculations covering a detailed 5year forecast followed by an extrapolation of expected cash flows for the remaining useful life using growth assumptions determined by management.
The present value of the expected cash flows is determined by applying a suitable discount rate reflecting current market assessments of the time value of money and risks specific to the brand.
The rate applied is a pretax 10%.
GROWTH ASSUMPTIONS The growth assumptions reflect the specific initiatives planned by management to grow and develop the brand.
No general or average growth rate has been applied.
DISCOUNT RATES The discount rates reflect appropriate adjustments relating to market risk and specific risk factors.
CASH FLOW ASSUMPTIONS Managements key assumptions include stable profit margins based on past experience in this market.
The Groups management believes that this is the best available input for forecasting this mature sector.
Apart from the considerations in determining the valueinuse of the brand described above management is not currently aware of any other probable changes that would necessitate changes in its key estimates.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  70 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The shares of Swallowfield s. are owned by Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited.
The noncontrolling interest represents the share of earnings within Mr.
Haircare Limited due to Jamie Stevens Media Limited.
The Group has a total shareholding in the Chinese business Shanghai Colour Cosmetics Technology Company Limited SCCTC of 19% that has been designated as available for sale.
Available for sale financial assets are measured at fair value with gains or losses being recognised in other comprehensive income and reported within the available sales reserve within equity.
The estimated fair value of the available for sale financial asset is categorised within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy.
The fair value estimate has been determined using SCCTCs June 2017 net assets and was recognised at a fair value of 1235k with an increase of 675k recognised through other comprehensive income in the year.
No discount factor was applied due to the non marketability of the shares.
The Company owns 100% of the voting rights and ordinary shares of the following principal subsidiary undertakings except as indicated below NOTE 15 INVENTORIES 2017 2016
Raw materials 5143 5026 Work in progress Finished goods and goods for resale 5967 3529 11430 9043 Name of Company Country of Registration Nature of Business Aerosols International Limited England Dormant Atlas Group Limited England Dormant Bagsy Beauty Limited formerly Cosmetics Plus Limited England Dormant Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited England Holding Tru Products Limited England Dormant The Brand Architekts Limited England Trading  owned brand business
Haircare Limited  51% England Trading  joint venture with Jamie Stevens Media Limited Swallowfield s.
Czech Republic Trading  Czech manufacturing facility Swallowfield SARL France Trading  French sales support office Swallowfield Inc.
United States of Trading  USA sales support America office 2017 2016
Raw materials 5143 5026 Work in progress Finished goods and goods for resale 3124 3529 8587 9043 The Group consumed inventories totalling 48.7m during the year 2016 36.2m.
No items are being carried at fair value less cost to sell 2016 NIL.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  71 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 2017 2016 GROUP AND COMPANY Opening balance Impairment loss recognised Amounts recovered Charged to profit and loss Closing balance Ageing of trade receivables 2017 2016
Current
13850 12998 Overdue but less than 90 days More than 90 days overdue 14599 13tel
Current
11048 12998 Overdue but less than 90 days More than 90 days overdue 11321 13794 The amounts owed by Group undertakings relate to intercompany receivables which have been split between current and greater than 1 year based on the anticipated repayment profile of these sums.
The Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other receivables approximates to their fair value.
Detailed below is the movement on the bad and doubtful debt provision for the Group and Company NOTE 16 TRADE AND OTHER RECEIVABLES
COMPANYtel 2016 Trade receivables 14599 13794 11321 13721 Amounts owed by Group undertakings   184 93 Other receivables Prepayments and accrued income 1738 1558 1230 1509 16345 15358 12743 15329 Included within the total aged receivable balance of 14599k 2016 13794k is an amount of nil 2016 nil relating to Group only.
Our policy requires customers to pay us in accordance with agreed payment terms.
Depending on the geographical location our settlement terms are generally due within 30 or 60 days from the end of the month of sale and do not bear any effective interest rate.
All trade receivables are subject to credit risk exposure.
Where the Group identifies a specific concentration of credit risk attached to any individually significant balances these are specifically reviewed for recoverability and suitable provision made having regard to the credit risk identified.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  72 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Directors consider that the carrying value of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Included within accruals and deferred income is an amount of 1850k representing the contingent consideration on the acquisition of The Brand Architekts see Note 13.
The amount due to other payables represents a CID facility that allows a regular drawdown of cash funds in Sterling and foreign currency and which is secured on the book debts of the Company.
This facility carries an interest rate of 1.5% over base and is repayable on demand.
NOTE 20 OBLIGATIONS UNDER LEASES Operating leases At the Statement of Financial Position date the Group and Company had outstanding commitments for future minimum lease payments under noncancellable operating leases which fall due as follows NOTE 17 TRADE AND OTHER PAYABLES
COMPANYtel 2016 Trade payables 11124 12771 9387 12698 Amounts owed to subsidiaries   3053 2872 Other taxes and social security costs 35telAccruals and deferred income 4494 2672 3709 2444 Sharebased payments accrual 1951 254 1951 254 Other payables 5605 4546 5528 4546 23524 20540 23927 23101
OTHER LAND and BUILDINGStel 2016 Within one year 14telIn the second to fifth years inclusive 386 251 1808 1905 In over five years 13  16tel2598 2964 NOTE 18 INTERESTBEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS  AMOUNTS FALLING DUE WITHIN ONE YEAR GROUP AND COMPANY Secured Loans The Directors consider that the carrying value of bank loans and overdrafts approximates to their fair value.
NOTE 19 INTERESTBEARING LOANS AND BORROWINGS  AMOUNTS FALLING DUE AFTER MORE THAN ONE YEAR Loans are repayable by instalments as follows GROUP AND COMPANY Between one and two years Between two and five years The Groups loan facilities are secured by fixed and floating charges over certain of the Groups freehold land and buildings.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  73 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
OTHER LAND and BUILDINGStel 2016 Within one year 13telIn the second to fifth years inclusive 338 251 1301 1300 In over five years 13  16tel1826 2142 NOTE 21 FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The Group uses financial instruments comprising borrowings some cash and cash equivalents and various items such as trade receivables and trade payables that arise directly from its operations.
The main purpose of these financial instruments is to raise finance for the Groups operations.
The Group also has bank accounts denominated in Euros US Dollars Canadian Dollars Czech Koruna and Chinese Renminbi.
The purpose of these accounts is to manage the currency transactions arising from the Groups operations overseas.
The main risks arising from the Groups financial instruments are interest rate risk foreign currency risk and liquidity risk.
The Board reviews and agrees policies for managing each of these risks and they are summarised below.
These policies have remained unchanged from the previous year.
Interest rate risk The Group finances its operations through a mixture of debt and equity.
The Groups loan borrowings bear interest at rates based on the banks base rate.
The Group Statement of Financial Position also includes financial assets in the form of cash at bank and in hand totalling 4057000 2016 798000 which are exposed to floating interest rates based on bank base rates.
A 0.5% increase in bank base rates would reduce pretax profits by 39000 in the period.
A 0.5% decrease would have the opposite effect.
Foreign currency risk The Group is exposed to transactional foreign exchange risk.
The Group seeks to hedge its exposures using bank facilities denominated in Euros US Dollars Canadian Dollars Czech Koruna and Chinese Renminbi and also by buying and selling products in these currencies with the objective of minimising fluctuations in exchange rates on future transactions and cash flows.
Approximately 12% 2016 14% of the Groups sales are invoiced in Euros and 16% 2016 14% in US Dollars.
These sales are calculated in sterling but invoiced in Euros  US Dollars.
The Group policy is to minimise currency exposures on balances for which settlement is not anticipated until a later date through the use of the respective bank facilities.
All other Group sales are denominated in sterling.
At 24 June 2017 there were sums totalling 2423000 2016 670000 held in foreign currency bank accounts.
A 5% weakening of sterling would result in a 154000 increase in reported profits and equity while a 5% strengthening of sterling would result in a 146000 decrease in profits and equity.
Liquidity risk The Group seeks to manage financial risk to ensure sufficient liquidity is available to meet the identifiable needs of the Group and to invest cash assets safely and profitably.
The Groups and Companys liabilities have contractual maturities as summarised below ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  74 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
JUNE 2016
NONCURRENT
Within 6 months 612 months 15 years Over 5 years Loans and receivables 76 76 459 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 17736 17812 76 459
JUNE 2017
NONCURRENT
Within 6 months 612 months 15 years Over 5 years Loans and receivables 289 289 1615 Financial liabilities at amortised cost through profit or loss 13486 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 1850 15625 289 1615
JUNE 2016
NONCURRENT
Within 6 months 612 months 15 years Over 5 years Loans and receivables 76 76 459 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 17631 17707 76 459 Working capital The Groups working capital policy is to fund shortterm movements through excess cash generated from the trading business.
The Group had 13.1m 2016 7.3m undrawn committed borrowing facilities available at June 2017.
The maturity profile of committed bank facilities is regularly reviewed and such facilities are extended or replaced well in advance of their expiry.
Capital maintenance The Groups objectives when managing capital are to safeguard the Groups ability to continue as a going concern so that it can continue to provide returns for shareholders and benefits for other stakeholders to provide an adequate return to shareholders by pricing products and services commensurately with the level of risk and to maintain an optimal capital structure to reduce the cost of capital.
GROUP
JUNE 2017
NONCURRENT
Within 6 months 612 months 15 years Over 5 years Loans and receivables 289 289 1615 Financial liabilities at amortised cost through profit or loss 15472 Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss 1850 17611 289 1615  ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  75 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Group sets the amount of capital in proportion to risk.
The Group manages the capital structure and makes adjustments to it in light of changes in economic conditions and the risk characteristics of the underlying assets.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
Financial assets Financial assets included in the Statement of Financial Position relate to the followings IAS 39 categories
COMPANYtel 2016 Loans and receivables 18664 14598 14484 14534 Available for sale 1235 560 1235 560 19899 15158 15719 15094 The financial assets are included in the Statement of Financial Position within the following headings
COMPANYtel 2016 Noncurrent assets Investments 1235 560 1235 560 Current assets Trade receivables 14599 13794 11321 13721 Other receivables Intercompany receivables   184 93 Cash and cash equivalents 4057 798 2971 714 19899 15158 15719 15094 Financial liabilities Financial liabilities included in the Statement of Financial Position relate to the following IAS 39 categories
COMPANYtel 2016 Current liabilities Borrowings 53telTrade payables 11124 12771 9387 12698 Intercompany payables   3053 2872 Accruals 6445 2926 5660 2698 Other payables 5605 4546 5528 4546 Noncurrent liabilities Borrowings 1559 442 1559 442 25267 20826 25721 23397 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  76 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 22 DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES The movement in deferred tax provisions is analysed as follows
Deferred taxation At June 2015 Recognised in profit or loss Recognised in other comprehensive income Temporary exchange differences At June 2016 Recognised in profit or loss Recognised in other comprehensive income Temporary exchange differences At June 2017 Deferred tax is represented by Capital allowances in advance of depreciation Temporary difference on post retirement benefit obligations Other temporary differences Temporary exchange differences Recognised as Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities
Deferred taxation At June 2015 Recognised in profit or loss Recognised in other comprehensive income At June 2016 Recognised in profit or loss Recognised in other comprehensive income At June 2017 683 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  77 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Deferred tax is represented by Capital allowances in advance of depreciation Temporary difference on post retirement benefit obligations Other temporary differences Recognised as Deferred tax assets Deferred tax liabilities Provision has not been made for deferred taxation on the full carrying value of the Groups land and buildings on the basis that the full value of these assets will not be recovered through use and that indexation will result in no taxable gain arising on disposal.
NOTE 23 SHARE CAPITAL Equity ordinary share capital Authorised share capital 25800000 shares of 5p each Allotted calledup and fully paid ordinary shares at 24 June 2017 and 25 June telOn 28 June 2016 5558985 shares were admitted to trading as part funding of The Brand Architekts Ltd acquisition increasing the number of Ordinary Shares in issue to 16865401 as at 24 June 2017 2016 11306416 Share premium Share premium reserve includes the accumulated premium on the issue of share capital.
Revaluation of investment reserve The Group has a total shareholding in the Chinese business Shanghai Colour Cosmetics Technology Company Limited SCCTC of 19% that has been designated as available for sale.
Available for sale financial assets are measured at fair value with gains or losses being recognised in other comprehensive income and reported within the available sales reserve within equity.
Exchange reserve Exchange differences arising on translation of the foreign controlled entity are recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in a separate reserve within equity.
The cumulative amount is reclassified to profit or loss when the net investment is disposed of.
Pension remeasurement reserve Actuarial remeasurement of scheme liabilities recognised in other comprehensive income and accumulated in a separate reserve within equity.
Retained earnings Retained earnings account includes all current and prior period profits and losses.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  78 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 24 NOTES TO CASH FLOW STATEMENT
Reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents to movement in net debt Increase in cash and cash equivalents Net cash inflow outflow from increase  decrease in borrowings Change in net debt Opening net debt Closing net debt b Analysis of net debt
Closing 2016 Cash Flow Movement Closing 2017 Cash at bank and in hand 798 3199 60 4057 Secured debt facility 4546 1059  5605 Borrowings due within one year 141 393  534 Borrowings due after one year 442 1117  1559 4331 630 60 3641
Reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents to movement in net debt Increase in cash and cash equivalents Net cash inflow  outflow from increase  decrease in borrowings Change in net debt Opening net debt Closing net debt b Analysis of net debt
Closing 2016 Cash Flow Movement Closing 2017 Cash at bank and in hand 714 2206 51 2971 Secured debt facility 4546 982  5528 Borrowings due within one year 141 393  534 Borrowings due after one year 442 1117  1559 4415 286 51 4650 NOTE 25 CAPITAL COMMITMENTS GROUP AND COMPANY Contracted for but not provided 52 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  79 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 26 POST RETIREMENT BENEFITS The Group and Company operates defined contribution pension plans and a defined benefit plan all of which are funded by the payment of contributions to separately administered plans.
The Group and Company operates a funded defined benefit scheme the Scheme in the UK which provides both pensions in retirement and death benefits to members.
Expected future cash flows to and from the Scheme The Scheme is subject to the scheme funding requirements outlined in UK legislation.
The last scheme funding valuation of the Scheme was as at 5 April 2014 and revealed a funding deficit of 1.3m.
The liabilities of the Scheme are based on the current value of expected benefit payment cash flows to members of the Scheme over the next 60 to 80 years.
The average duration of the liabilities is approximately 21 years.
In accordance with the schedule of contributions dated 3 July 2015 the Company is expected to pay contributions to the Scheme to make good any shortfalls in funding and has agreed to pay 108k per annum for 10 years from 18 July 2015 to eliminate the deficit.
The magnitude of such payments will be reviewed following the next scheme funding valuation as at April 2017.
Prior to July 2015 the Company was paying 111.5k per annum.
In addition the Company has agreed to meet the cost of administrative expenses and Pension Protection Fund insurance premiums for the Scheme.
Payments made by the Company to the Scheme and in respect of Scheme liabilities were Company pension contributions Deficit recovery payments Scheme administrative expenses Pension Protection Fund premium
The amounts expensed in the Group Statement of Comprehensive Income were In Operating profit Company pension contributions Scheme administrative expenses Pension Protection Fund premium 24telIn Finance costs Unwinding of notional discount factor
The service cost is charged as follows Cost of sales Commercial and administration
305 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  80 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Accounting Standards require the discount rate to be based on yields on high quality usually AArated corporate bonds of appropriate currency taking into account the term of the relevant pension schemes liabilities.
Corporate bond indices are often used as a proxy to determine the discount rate.
At the reporting date the yields on bonds of all types were lower than they were at June 2016.
This has resulted in lower discount rates being adopted for accounting purposes compared to last year this was coupled by an increase in expectations of long term inflation the combination of these two factors has translated into an increased liability.
Increase in pension and other benefit obligations Decrease in deferred tax Decrease in equity IAS19 Employee Benefits IAS 19 requires a separate valuation of the Scheme on a different basis to the funding valuation referred to above.
The effects of the application of IAS19 on the statement of financial position at June 2017 are The assumptions used in determining the overall expected return on the schemes assets have been set with reference to yields available on corporate bonds.
The principal actuarial assumptions used at the Statement of Financial Position date were as follows Discount rate 2.55% 3.35% Inflation assumption RPI 3.00% 2.90% Inflation assumption CPI 2.00% 1.90% Deferred revaluation for benefits in excess of GMP Employed deferred members 2.50% 2.40% Deferred members 2.00% 1.90% Rate of increase in pensions in payment CPI max 3% 2016 max 3% 1.85% 1.80% RPI max 5% 2016 max 5% 2.95% 2.85% RPI max 2.5% 2016 max 2.5% 2.15% 2.10% Mortality assumptions Life expectancy of male aged 65 now Life expectancy of female aged 65 now Life expectancy of male aged 65 in 20 years Life expectancy of female aged 65 in 20 years The assets in the scheme at the Statement of Financial Position date were as follows
Market
Value
Value
Equities
Property
Index Linked Gilts Corporate Bonds Diversified Growth Funds LDI funds
Fair value of plan assets 20199 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  81 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The actual return on scheme assets was an increase of 3.4m 2016 increase 0.15m.
The scheme assets do not include any of the Companys own financial instruments nor any property occupied by or assets used by the Company.
Amounts recognised in the Statement of Financial Position Present value of funded obligations Fair value of scheme assets
Net liability recognised in the Statement of Financial Position Reconciliation of opening and closing balances of the present value of the defined benefit obligation Benefit obligation at beginning of year Movement in the year Current service cost Finance cost Employee contributions Actuarial losses  financial Actuarial gain  losses  demographic Actuarial gain  experience Net benefits paid out Past service cost Benefit obligation at end of year Reconciliation of opening and closing balance of the fair value of scheme assets Fair value of scheme assets at beginning of year Movement in the year Interest on scheme assets Return on assets excluding interest income Contributions  employer Contributions  employee Benefits paid out Fair value of scheme assets at end of year 20199 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  82 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS History of plan  the history of the plan for the current year and prior years is as followstel 2014 2013 Statement of Financial Position Present value of defined benefit obligation 29438 24694 22970 20922 19931 Fair value of scheme assets 23306 20199 20308 18710 17019 At end of year 6132 4495 2662 2212 2912 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SCHEME AND THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH THE SCHEME a Information about the characteristics the Scheme i.
The Scheme provides pensions in retirement and death benefits to members.
Pension benefits are linked to a members final salary at retirement and their length of service.
As of 31 December 2015 the Scheme closed to future accrual. ii.
The Scheme is a registered scheme under UK legislation and was contracted out of the State Second Pension. iii.
The Scheme is subject to the scheme funding requirements outlined in UK legislation.
The last scheme funding valuation of the Scheme was as at 5 April 2014 and revealed a deficit of 1298000. iv.
The Scheme membership as at 5 April 2014 comprised of 128 active members accruing benefits 171 deferred pensioner members and 118 pensioner members.
Since 31 December 2015 the Scheme has been closed to future accrual with those active members if still employed by the Company transferring to a new category of employed deferred member.
If no longer employed they became a deferred member. v.
The Scheme was established from 1 January 1987 under trust and is governed by the Schemes trust deed and rules dated 19 January 2001.
The Trustees are responsible for the operation and the governance of the Scheme including making decisions regarding the Schemes funding and investment strategy in conjunction with the Company.
The Scheme exposes the Company to actuarial risks such as market investment risk interest rate risk inflation risk and longevity risk.
The small number of Scheme members means that the Scheme and ultimately the Company are exposed to the experience such as life expectancy and takeup of member options of individual members.
The Scheme does not expose the Employer to any unusual Scheme specific or Company specific risks.
There has been no allowance for any amendments curtailments or settlements within this accounting period.
Remeasurement of the net defined benefit liability to be shown in other comprehensive income Net remeasurement  financial Net remeasurement  demographic Net remeasurement  experience Return on assets excluding interest income Deferred taxation Total remeasurement of the net defined benefit liability to be shown in OCI 2160 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  83 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS b Description of assetliability matching strategies The Trustees holds a proportion of the Schemes assets in pooled funds invested in gilts corporate bonds and liability driven investment funds to provide some degree of matching with the Schemes liabilities.
Liability driven investment funds and indexlinked gilts fund are used to provide a degree of price inflation and interest rate matching with the liabilities.
The Schemes investment strategy is to invest broadly 70% in return seeking and 30% in matching assets.
This strategy reflects the Schemes liability profile and the Trustees and Employers attitude to risk.
The plan holds a number of annuity policies which match a portion of pensions in payment.
The value of the liabilities at the reporting date have been estimated by updating the results of the scheme funding valuation as at 5 April 2014 to allow for the passage of time the accrual of new benefits up to 31 December 2015 benefits paid out of the Plan and changes in actuarial assumptions over the period from 5 April 2014 to 24 June 2017.
Such an approach is common for the purposes of accounting disclosures.
It is not expected that these projections will be materially different from a summation of individual calculations at the accounting date although there may be some discrepancy between the actual liabilities for the Plan at the accounting date and those included in the disclosures.
June 2017 Discount rate increase of 0.25% pa Decrease by Rate of RPI inflation increase of 0.25% pa Increase by Mortality 1.5% long term rate Increase by Amount timing and uncertainty of future cash flows a Sensitivity analysis Please note that the results in the disclosures are inherently volatile particularly the figures shown on the statement of financial position.
The results disclosures are dependent on the assumptions chosen by the Directors.
The table below shows the approximate impact of varying the key assumptions adopted as at June 2017 ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  84 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS The Directors participated in the fundraising to support the acquisition of The Brand Architekts Ltd so an additional disclosure has been made to show their interests in the Company as at 19 September 2016 the point of signing the 2016 Report and Accounts.
Mr E J Beales Directors fees have been surrendered to his primary employer City Group PLC to 31 March 2017 and Marshall Monteagle plc since that date.
City Group PLC is 49% owned by Western Selection PLC who have a beneficial interest in 8.9% of the Companys issued share capital at the reporting date.
Directors Fees of 28000 were paid or are payable for the year ended June 2017 2016 26000.
During the year the Group sold finished goods to the value of 76000 2016 59000 to Monteagle International Ltd a subsidiary of Marshall Monteagle plc.
Mr E J Beale is a director of Monteagle International Ltd.
In the year to June 2017 Swallowfield plc sold plant and equipment at a net book value of nil 2016 nil to Swallowfield s. and also purchased goods and services amounting to 2016000 2016 1971000 from the same company.
At the year end the Company had payables due to Swallowfield s. within Trade and other payables see Note 17.
Trade and other payables also includes an amount of 2494000 2016 2494000 in respect of amounts due to dormant subsidiaries see Note 17.
In the year to June 2017 the Company purchased services amounting to 203000 2016 169000 from Swallowfield SARL.
At the 2017 year end the Company had a balance due to Swallowfield SARL amounting to 53000 2016 12000 being disclosed within Trade and other payables see Note 17.
In the year to June 2017 the Company purchased services amounting to 155000 2016 133000 from Swallowfield Inc.
At the 2017 year end the Company had payables due to Swallowfield Inc. within Trade and other payables see Note 17.
In the year to June 2017 the Company sold products to the value of 91000 2016 60000 to MR Haircare Limited a joint venture with Jamie Stevens Media Limited.
At the 2017 year end the Company had payables due from MR Haircare Limited of 37000 2016 93000 being disclosed within Trade and other receivables see Note 16.
In the year to June 2017 MR Haircare Limited made a profit of 116000 2016 loss 79000 and this is reported in the Group results.
In the year to June 2017 the Company sold products to the value of 61000 2016  nil and also operated an intercompany current account with Brand Architekts Limited a wholly owned subsidiary acquired in the year.
At the 2017 year end the Company had payables due from Brand Architekts Limited of 147000 2016  nil being disclosed within Trade and other receivables see Note 16.
In the year to June 2017 Brand Architekts Limited made a profit after tax of 2046000 and this is reported in the Group results.
NOTE 27 RELATED PARTIES Compensation of key management personnel including directors Short term employee benefits Postemployment benefits Directors and their Interests The Directors who served during the year and their interests in the Companys share capital are as follows 24 June 2017 19 September 2016 25 June 2016 Ordinary Shares Ordinary Shares Ordinary Shares B M Hynes 74914 74914 50000 C G How 89977 89977 60000 J M Fletcher 37374 37374 25000 M W Warren 30030 30030 22100 F P Berrebi R S McDowell 344189 344189 71000 E J Beale ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  85 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS NOTE 28 EVENTS POST STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION No significant adjusting events have occurred between the reporting date and the date of authorisation.
FIVE YEAR SUMMARY The following fiveyear summary has been produced to allow improved comparisons to be made between the current results and those of prior years.
In the year to June 2017 the Group purchased finished products for resale amounting to 2041000 2016 4165000 from SCCTC a Chinese manufacturer of cosmetics products in which the Group holds a 19% shareholding.
At the 2017 year end the Group had payables due to SCCTC amounting to 435000 2016 858000 being disclosed within Trade and other payables see Note 17.
During the year Swallowfield plc operated an intercompany loan facility with Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited with the balance at the yearend of 157000 due to Swallowfield Consumer Products Limited 2016 74000 due to Swallowfield plc being disclosed within Trade and other payables see Note 17.
Interest of 3000 2016 11000 was payable on this loan during the year to Swallowfield plc.
Unaudited IFRS audited IFRS audited IFRS audited IFRS audited IFRS audited Financial Year Financial Year Financial Year Financial Year Financial Yeartel 2014 2013 restated Number of weeks in financial year Statement of Comprehensive Income Reported Revenue 74314 54455 49447 50033 48591 Adjustment for 53rd week
74314 54455 49447 49090 48591 Operating profitloss before exceptional items 3675 1793 996 768 449 Exceptional items Operating profitloss after exceptional items 3332 2438 996 402 940 Net interest Profitloss before taxation 3115 2274 814 140 1334
Profitloss attributable to equity shareholders of the parent 2554 2001 746 157 910 Profit attributable to noncontrolling interest Payments to shareholders Statement of Financial Position Noncurrent assets 22544 13643 13061 11467 12073 Net current assets 7619 4500 3511 3718 3307 Total assets less current liabilities 30163 18143 16572 15185 15380 Noncurrent liabilities Loans and lease finance Long term employee benefits 6132 4495 2662 2212 2912 Deferred tax
22065 12792 12924 12560 12009 Net debt 3641 4331 5390 5077 5667
Weighted average number of shares in issue 16834773 11306416 11306416 11306416 11306416 Undiluted earningsloss per share
17% 34% 42% 40% 47% Dividends per share paid Except for revenue where the relevant adjustment has been shown above no material changes would be required to the income statement to adjust the 2014 financial year numbers to a 52week basis.
ANNUAL REPORT and ACCOUNTS 2017  86 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
B M Hynes
C G How
Chief Executive Officer
J M Fletcher Group Sales and Marketing Director M W Warren Group Finance Director F P Berrebi NonExecutive Director R S McDowell NonExecutive Director E J Beale NonExecutive Director
M W Warren FCCA REGISTERED OFFICE Swallowfield House Station Road
Somerset
TA21 8NL
N1Singer Singer Advisory LLP N1 Singer One Bartholomew Lane
EC2N 2AX FINANCIAL PR Alma PR Aldwych House 71  91 Aldwych London WC2B 4HN REGISTERED NUMBER
Computershare Investor Services PLC PO Box 82 The Pavilions Bridgewater Road
BS99 7NH
Grant Thornton UK LLP 5 Benham Road Southampton Science Park
Southampton
SO16 7QJ
Osborne Clarke 2 Temple Back East Temple Quay
BS1 6EG
HSBC Bank plc 3 Rivergate Temple Quay
BS1 6ER WEBSITE ADDRESS site FINANCIAL CALENDAR 2017 Annual General Meeting 9 November 2017 Proposed final dividend payment 8 December 2017 Interim results announcement March 2018 Interim dividend payment May 2018 Announcement of 2018 final results September 2018 2018 Annual General Meeting November 2018
