ANNUAL REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 2017 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Conviviality is a company where the whole is greater than the sum of the parts and that has firm foundations in place from which to grow.
Strategic Report 1 Operational and Financial highlights 2 Chairmans statement 4 Conviviality at a glance
Executive Officers statement 18 Our customers 22 Our suppliers Corporate Governance 42 Board of Directors 44 Corporate governance report 47 Remuneration Committee report Financial Statements Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income
66 Consolidated statement of changes in equity
Notes to the financial statements 26 Our business model 27 Our markets 30 Our strategy 32 Risks and mitigation factors
39 Corporate social responsibility report 58 Directors report 62 Statement of Directors responsibilities 63 Independent auditors report 107 Company balance sheet 108 Company statement of changes in equity
Notes to the Company financial statements 115 Directors secretary and advisors Conviviality has fundamentally restructured and reconfigured the Group building on our unique strength expertise and reach in the UK drinks market to be the drinks and impulse products sectors leading specialist wholesaler and distributor to the On and Off Trade by being the most knowledgeable and inspiring partner for our customers.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Conviviality is unique in our sector.
We provide for our customers access to over 14000 alcohol SKUs and 6400 impulse food and tobacco SKUs.
We serve c.25000 outlets in the On Trade over 700 retail stores trading under the propositions of Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack over 400 independent specialists and are a supplier to the supermarket multiples.
Operational highlights Revenues nearly doubled to 1560m and profits doubled to 60.9m Buying Synergies for FY17 achieved to plan Acquired the Bibendum PLB
May 2016 which is performing in line with our expectations Combined Integration plan ahead of expectations for both Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group
Conviviality Retail Conviviality Direct and Conviviality Trading have all traded strongly with revenues of 378m 1040m and 146m respectively and are in line with expectations Retail LFLs continue to improve to 1.0%
Financial highlights
1560m Increase of 85% from 2016 Adjusted EBITDA Increase of 102% from 2016 Profit before tax m Increase of 147% from 2016 Diluted EPS p Increase of 136% from 2016 Adjusted diluted EPS Increase of 48% from 2016 Includes the full year revenue and profit of Matthew Clark and the revenue and profit of Bibendum PLB Group from the date of acquisition.
Alternative performance measures Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation exceptional items share based payments and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives.
This is reconciled to profit before tax in note 3.
Profit before tax exceptional items amortisation of acquisition intangibles and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives less tax at the effective rate divided by fully diluted weighted average shares in issue.
Retail like for like sales are the retail sales made by Franchisee and Company owned stores that have traded continually during FY16 and FY17 under the same ownership.
2 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chairmans Statement
The culture we have created in the business and the structures that we operate give us huge confidence for our future.
Conviviality is a business whose strength lies in the combined skills and expertise of the enlarged group One Conviviality a business where the whole is greater than the sum of the parts and that has the firm foundations in place from which to grow.
We look back on a year of unprecedented change politically and economically.
Our business has also undergone unprecedented change throughout the past year.
Following the acquisition of Matthew Clark on the 7th October 2015 Conviviality acquired Bibendum PLB Group on 20th May 2016 creating a one stop shop drinks solution for our customers and providing an opportunity to undertake a single integration programme.
This integration has resulted in a full restructuring of the business from a programme to generate significant buying synergies the development of one Group Wine Buying team to the development of the Group Logistics function.
The acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group has enhanced the Group with additional wine expertise access to the premium On Trade particularly in London and significant capability in consumer insight across the alcohol sector.
I am proud that against this backdrop the teams in all of the business units have stayed on track in integrating the business and ensuring that first and foremost our customers see the passion for their success and growth regardless of size of business and continue to benefit from the expertise of the combined group.
As the UK economic and political environment remains uncertain we believe that Conviviality has the flexibility to succeed through our unique model spanning both the On and Off Trade.
The Group is now structured into three Business Units Conviviality Direct wholesaler and distributor to On Trade led by Mark Aylwin Conviviality Retail for Off Trade consumer businesses Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack led by David Robinson and Conviviality Trading an innovative and dynamic approach to sourcing ranging brand building merchandising activation and events led by James Lousada.
Each of the business unit Managing Directors ensures their operation has the best people in the right place to deliver excellent service to customers and drive collaborations and savings across the
The Business Units are supported by the expertise of the Group functions of Logistics Finance Legal IT and Human Resources.
We believe that the recent acquisitions and new structure have resulted in Conviviality being well positioned in our market with a robust business model that provides a unique positioning with both our suppliers and our customers.
The successful delivery of our strategy will depend on having great talent in the business in every area.
We continue to invest significantly in training our colleagues and in addition we strengthen from outside of the Group where appropriate.
In FY17 David Robinson joined us to head up Conviviality Retail and both David and Mark Aylwin Managing Director Conviviality Direct were invited to join the Plc Board.
On behalf of the Board I would like to thank everyone working in our business for their passion commitment and customer focus that has made it possible to deliver our acquisitions to plan while also delivering underlying growth across the business.
David Adams
17 July 2017 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 4 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Conviviality at a glance Conviviality aims to support our customers to achieve profitable growth by providing expertise and insight into the UK Drinks market helping customers to tailor ranges to meet local and national needs.
In turn we provide our suppliers with the opportunity to marry their ranges with the right customers thereby providing distribution and reach to build brands nationwide.
Conviviality Retail The UKs largest franchised offlicence and convenience chain with
Convenience and Wine Rack.
Conviviality Direct
UKs largest independent wholesaler to the On Trade serving c.25000 outlets from national prestige hotel chains to independent food led pubs and restaurants trading through two businesses
Clark and
Conviviality Trading full service drinks brand and wine agency business with national sales and activation capability from traditional On and Off Trade retail to festivals and events.
New products and brands can be developed both with our partner suppliers and also directly by our own teams as we see opportunities emerge across the market.
Dundee
Glasgow
Bellshill
Boldon
Wetherby
Bedford
Park Royal
Southampton
Grantham
Runcorn
Crewe
Didcot
Reading
Birmingham
Bristol
Shepton Mallet
Newcastle underLyme Owned stocked Owned not stocked Third party Conviviality Group Depot locations Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements The UK alcohol market today is worth 40 billion and Conviviality is responsible for around 1 in every 12 of industry sales 8% from a product portfolio ranging from a 35p bottle of soft drink to a 15000 bottle of fine wine.
Conviviality works with 980 suppliers and lists 4902 wines 5400 spirits including 450 gins we additionally have 389 gins in an extended range and an unrivalled range of 250 premium ales 4500 impulse and grocery lines and 1900 tobacco and vaping lines.
Trading Companies Sales Mix % Impulse products and soft drinks Lager beer and cider Experiential and Events EVENT SOLUTIONS BUSINESS
Wine
EandE
Agency
15% 37%
Spirits
14% 29%
ISD
15% 9%
34%
LBC
22% 25% 84% 16% Walker and Wodehouse is one of only a handful of wine merchants to hold a Royal
6 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Chief Executive Officers statement
When Conviviality floated on AIM in July 2013 the business was an alcohol impulse and tobacco wholesaler serving the UKs largest Franchise offlicence and convenience brand Bargain Booze with 616 stores and a turnover of 372m.
During the past four years we have systematically pursued the strategy of taking the core competence of the business the wholesaling of alcohol and extending Convivialitys reach to more consumers across the UK drinks market whenever and wherever they wish to enjoy our products.
We have fundamentally restructured and reconfigured the Group building on our unique strength expertise and reach in the UK drinks market.
We now have the infrastructure and capability within the Group to drive further potential in both the On Trade and the Off Trade markets working with our existing suppliers providing customers with more opportunities to drive profitable growth.
Conviviality is unique in our sector.
We provide our customers with access to over 14000 alcohol SKUs and 6400 impulse food and tobacco SKUs.
We serve c.25000 outlets in the On Trade over 700 retail stores trading under the retail propositions of Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack over 400 independent specialists and we are supplier to the larger multiples.
A key part of our strategy is to deliver a logistics capability that anticipates the future needs of our customers and creates significant differentiation in the market thereby adding significant value to the organisation.
As the retail environment becomes more complex we can leverage Convivialitys expertise in the alcohol and impulse markets to provide our valued customers with the solutions they need from distribution to buying ranging and merchandising and marketing.
As a result of this scale and reach we have unparalleled market access insight and capabilities to support our suppliers in the development of their brands and to help our customers differentiate from their competition by tailoring their offering to meet their target consumer needs by location venue and format.
Conviviality is independent of any major drinks brands and therefore is able to supply an unrestricted selection of products and provide expertise in key categories to customers who value breadth of range whilst offering a compelling route to market for suppliers to access both the On Trade and Off Trade retailers.
It is this scale and reach that has created even stronger ties with our supplier partners.
Increasingly our suppliers are engaging with the full capability of Conviviality from building their brands with our brand agency Catalyst PLB accessing consumers with Elastic and Peppermint in events and experiential marketing to more effective targeting in the On Trade utilising our data and insight through to Off Trade execution in our Franchise retail business.
A recent example was the exclusive On Trade launch of Bud Light for AB InBev across the Conviviality Group.
Diana Hunter Chief Executive Officer Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements This past year has been a transformational year for the service we offer.
We will continue to grow by keeping our people our customers Franchisees and suppliers at the heart of everything we do.
The successful integration of the three businesses working as a cohesive unit and the management teams performance continues to deliver consistent results.
The new internal structure grouped individual brands and businesses together under three distinct Business Units Conviviality Direct wholesaling distributor to On Trade led by Mark Aylwin Conviviality Retail for Off Trade consumer businesses Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack led by David Robinson and Conviviality Trading an innovative and dynamic approach to sourcing ranging brand building merchandising activation and events led by James Lousada.
Each of the business unit Managing Directors ensures their operation has the best people in the right place to deliver excellent service to customers and drive collaborations and savings across the
The business units are supported by the expertise of the Group functions of Logistics Finance Legal IT and Human Resources.
This past year has therefore been a transformational year for the service we offer creating a range of benefits for customers.
It is the nature of the On Trade and Off Trade market that our customers are constantly looking for the same thing as their own consumers great value new and innovative products breadth of choice and excellent service.
Critically we continue to strive to ensure that our customers see our people regularly whether they are a one site restauranteur hotelier or a large national account or a Franchisee so that our customers may enjoy the relationships and service support they value from us.
All of our businesses were initiated and built on personal relationships.
These relationships remain at the heart of how we will continue to do business.
Bibendums first ever On Trade customer was Michelinstarred Odettes in Primrose Hill and it continues to be a valued customer over 30 years on.
Matthew
Clark has been a partner to JD Wetherspoons for over 20 years and a distributor of Martell for 198 years.
In our Franchise business we have 133 Franchisees who have worked with the group for over 10 years.
Our On Trade Off Trade and franchised customers still expect  and still get an outstanding portfolio of products that they can tailor to their own customers tastes and needs as well as the support they value to help them develop their own business moving forward.
For each of them business and growth opportunities can come from a number of sources.
It can be from our expanding catalogue of products or markets for example Matthew Clarks extended spirits range giving customers access to niche and small parcel spirits or Bibendums limited release wine collection offering something rare or interesting from suppliers they already value and equally Franchisees benefit from new and exclusive launches from the Group as well as access to the extensive range of spirits now available to them.
It can also be in how we serve them and where their own vision sees potential.
Our
Peppermint have unparalleled expertise in bringing new and old products to life.
We  and our suppliers  have seen excellent sales growth in a range of products that has been supported by our teams and their combined expertise from across Conviviality.
We will continue to grow by keeping our people our customers Franchisees and suppliers at the heart of everything we do.
Everyone who works for Conviviality from Glasgow to Southampton and Bristol to Crewe from shop to depot to office knows it is critical that we keep finding new ways to improve our customer service and deliver excellence.
As we focus our investment in the services customers value so we will see our online services grow in the past year the number of customers using our digital platform has increased by 20% year on year 8 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 to 4645 ensuring more accuracy in customer ordering better ordering history to assist with forecasting and in turn greater efficiency for both our customers and Conviviality.
48% of customers using our digital platform do so daily indicating increasing engagement with the brand and assortment.
Our commitment to customers can be seen in the accolades they have awarded us.
In 2016 Bibendum won the Compass Supplier Award for Implementation for the successful execution of a wine culture across the Compass Group and is currently listed as Mitchells and Butlers 1 wine supplier and in 2017 Matthew Clark was Drinks Supplier of the Year in Restaurant Magazine Readers Choice Awards for the third year running.
More recently Conviviality Retail has been awarded Grocer Gold  Drinks Retailer of the Year for the second consecutive year.
Conviviality Trading was recognised by Stonegate for Innovation of the Year with the launch of Gancia Leggero a skinny Prosecco.
Results
An important aspect of our business model is its flexibility protecting our earnings through periods of significant change in our organisation and a competitive external environment.
We have continued to deliver against our objectives set out at flotation in July 2013 and are pleased to report profits ahead of expectations during a year where we have significantly transformed our business.
For the 52 weeks to 30 April 2017 revenue was up 85% to 1560m reflecting the benefit of the Bibendum PLB Group acquisition on 20 May 2016 as such Adjusted EBITDA was up 102% to 60.9m and Adjusted profit before tax up 111% to 45.8m demonstrating the significant strength of the combined group.
Adjusted fully diluted EPS was up 48% to 21.0 pence.
The recent acquisitions resulted in an increase of net debt however at year end this was 95.7m which is below consensus expectations.
The full year dividend is up 33% to 12.6 pence in line with our progressive dividend policy and reflecting a strong return to our shareholders.
Outlook
The Companys focus for the nearterm is on continuing to deliver against our stated strategy and meet the expectations of our stakeholders customers suppliers and our people.
The greatest asset from all of our acquisitions has been our people and we continue to work hard to ensure that their skills and talent are utilised to the benefit of our customers and suppliers.
Our presence in the market through our different specialist businesses provides us with unique insight into both our market and consumers from the widest of perspectives.
We are already successfully leveraging this insight to ensure that our customers have the right product range and support to help them grow.
Furthermore we are continuing to look at new ways of maintaining our unique position and broadening the ways in which our customers our supplier partners and the Group can benefit.
We are excited by the future potential for growth across the Group as we continue to explore these opportunities.
Chief Executive Officers statement
Continued
Alternate performance measures  see page 1 for further explanation Profit before tax exceptional items amortisation of acquisition intangibles and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Full Service Drinks Distributor Wine Focused
Franchised
Retail
EVENT SOLUTIONS BUSINESS
Business
Events and
Group Support Logistics Finance Legal IT and Human Resources The new internal organisational structure groups individual brands and businesses together under three distinct business units Conviviality Direct wholesaler and distributor to the On Trade Conviviality Retail Off Trade consumer businesses Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack and Conviviality Trading an innovative and dynamic approach to sourcing ranging brand building merchandising activation and events.
The business units are supported by the expertise of the Group functions of Logistics Finance Legal IT and Human Resources.
10 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Conviviality Direct The UKs largest independent wholesaler to the On Trade serving c.25000 outlets from national prestige hotel chains to independent food led pubs and restaurants trading through two businesses namely Matthew Clark and Bibendum.
Since the acquisition of Bibendum Conviviality Direct revenues have increased 6.4% to 1040m corresponding prior period To date average sales per outlet have increased 4.8% to 43700 and we welcomed 235 new customers in the year.
The number of Bibendum Wine customers buying all categories has increased from 5% to 12% a strong indication that our customers value the increased choice and service offering of our model.
As an example during the past year spirits have grown in the Bibendum regional business by 43.7% and National business by 21% as customers appreciate the wider choice now on offer through Conviviality
Conviviality Direct affords a range of over 14000 alcohol lines to over 11000 customers offering a onestop solution to hotels restaurants bars and venues for their alcohol needs delivering consistent service nationwide next day.
Conviviality Direct has a national sales force through the Bibendum and Matthew Clark brands of over 300 employees based across Scotland England and Wales and London and the South East ensuring excellent service to its Independent Free Trade customers and National Account customers.
The sales team have up to date information on industry sales trends new product information and pricing and are able to recommend the right mix of products to customers to help them optimise their offer to their consumers.
Convivialitys nationwide distribution network of 16 depots means customers benefit from a nationwide next day delivery service and timed delivery slots.
A key part of the Conviviality Direct strategy is to focus on growth in key cities specifically focused on existing customers identifying with the Bibendum and Matthew Clark propositions and their ability to utilise the brands to meet all of their drinks purchasing needs.
The Caring Group of restaurants the Ivy collection Le Caprice for example Prezzo and Searcys have all chosen to work with Conviviality Direct to enable them to access the extensive range service and solutions the Group offers.
At the same time as attracting new customers our existing customers have continued to value a long standing relationship with us.
Stonegate has worked with us for 9 years and we continue to enjoy supporting their business and JD Wetherspoons have worked with Matthew Clark from having 8 pubs in their portfolio to over 900 pubs to date.
We continue to work closely with our customers to understand their current and future needs ensuring that we are at the fore front of customer service.
Furthermore 770 customers have recognised the opportunity to improve order accuracy and efficiency by moving onto our digital platform.
4645 customers now engage with the digital platform and order value per customer is 13% higher than customers who place orders via the contact centre.
Chief Executive Officers statement
Continued
Mark Aylwin Managing Director Conviviality Direct
Communicating the unique Conviviality Direct proposition clearly to target customers and strategic partners in the on trade Strengthening the position as a centre of expertise in wine and be at the forefront of range innovation particularly in World Beers and spirits in the dynamic drinks sector Leveraging scale and reach to become the most competitive wholesaler in the drinks market Growing the number of food led outlets served and the mix of products across each outlet Growing share in major cities and inner urban areas through a superior service proposition Developing the tools and capabilities to ensure we provide the most valueadding customer service in the market Opposite A selection of wine lists designed by Conviviality Direct.
Revenue for the corresponding prior period is calculated as revenue for the 52 week period ended 1 May 2016 plus revenue for businesses acquired in both the current period and the prior period assuming those businesses were part of the Group from the start of the prior period.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements 12 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 David Robinson Managing Director Conviviality Retail Conviviality Retail The UKs largest franchised offlicence and convenience chain with 352 Franchisees and more than 700 retail stores trading primarily under the fascia of Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack.
In line with our programme to focus on the underlying quality of retail stores we continue to see low levels of store closures to 63 in total which include the closure of small CTN confectionary tobacco newsagent stores which no longer serve the Off licence or Convenience proposition.
Whilst net store numbers are in line with the prior year the quality of the outlets opening is significantly improved with retail sales per new outlet opening up 29.8% versus last year.
Sales of multisite Franchisees outperform the total estate by 2.1% like for like.
We saw 39 Franchisees join the Group a strong indication of the benefits of our model to independent business people.
Our core model is predicated by Franchisee loyalty and commitment to upholding the values of our brands.
This combined with the high standards that we set are helping to deliver our differentiated local customer experience.
We have some of the highest levels of loyalty in the sector with the percentage of sales of goods by our Franchisees that are purchased from the Group at 91%.
It is also pleasing that Wine Rack continues to perform well and during 2016 we opened one new Wine Rack in Epsom.
Like for like performance in Wine Rack is 1.4% reflecting the importance of a specialist Wine and Spirits proposition on the high street.
Conviviality Retail continues to grow a national store estate with a differentiated consumer proposition that responds to consumer needs and market trends.
The strategy aims to consolidate Conviviality Retails position as the UKs leading drinks led convenience retailer.
The business has three fundamental sources of advantage Drinks Heritage and Expertise Approximately 50% of sales are from beer wine and spirits categories producing a category mix that is unique in the sector.
Convivialitys unrivalled category expertise in the drinks sector allows Franchisees to benefit from a differentiated proposition and from the footfall and margin benefits of a compelling range and assortment.
It is this drinks heritage and expertise that underpins and differentiates our three key retail brands.
In particular the business will continue to develop the Select Convenience proposition to ensure that it is at the heart of local convenience in the communities in which it trades.
Further development of the Vape proposition is being rolled out across the estate and is now in 249 stores.
Vape products are marginenhancing and protect against the decline in tobacco sales.
We are already seeing average sales of 220 per store per week and margin benefit to Franchisees of approximately 5000 per store per year.
Sourcing and Distribution Scale As part of the Conviviality Group the business has significantly benefited from its scale advantages in buying and distribution whilst remaining a largely standalone business operating out of its own offices with a dedicated and experienced management team.
Distribution is managed inhouse by the Conviviality Group logistics operation primarily on dedicated branded vehicles with stores typically choosing to receive two or sometimes three deliveries per week.
Service levels are very high compared to our competitors in the sector with over 99% of deliveries received on time and with complete orders.
The transformation of the Conviviality logistics network will allow Conviviality Retail to benefit from the Groups scale through lower delivery costs.
Conviviality Retail can leverage its scale position to source advantageously and provide consistent value to Franchisees.
Offering good value to consumers through reliable lowpricing and compelling promotions is core to the Bargain Booze model.
Locally Embedded Franchise Model Conviviality Retail allows independent retailers to deliver superior returns via
Strengthen the relationship with Franchisees and attract new Franchisees to the group Strengthen the Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack brands Deliver new core systems improved capabilities and a efficient model that supports our growth ambition Build the growth management engine that allows us to effectively and profitably scale the retail estate Leverage our capabilities into new propositions
Chief Executive Officers statement
Continued
Alternate performance measures  see page 1 for further explanation Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements a simple turnkey solution that leverages strong business fundamentals and a scalable back office the Franchisee proposition is the core of Conviviality Retails success.
Franchisees access a distinct drinksled consumer offer supported by dedicated support managers regular and deep engagement at senior level and a reward package that is unique in the sector including accessing the Franchisee Incentive Plan under which shares in Conviviality Plc are awarded based on compliance and performance.
Franchisees own or hold options over 3m shares in Conviviality Plc.
The Companys 352 Franchisees are local people employing local people and are passionate about their customers and the communities in which they trade.
Our Franchisees make a real difference in their local communities through a relentless focus on meeting consumer needs and providing a unique customer experience.
To reinforce the three fundamental sources of advantage Conviviality Retail has made an investment in upgrading its retail systems.
The new core operating system ERP will be introduced during the Autumn of 2017 and the rollout of new EPOS to all stores is already in progress.
The new solutions will enable business efficiencies futureproof the Franchisee proposition and accelerate the strategic direction to invest in a growing mix of multisite Franchisees.
14 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 James Lousada Managing Director Conviviality Trading
Become the market leader and centre of expertise in Wine sourcing ranging merchandising and activation providing its key customers with unrivalled service to meet their customer needs by format and location.
Develop a one stop service for drinks brands leveraging distribution sales agency marketing and event capabilities To be at the forefront of range innovation in the dynamic drinks sector To become recognised as the Suppliers strategic partner of choice
Chief Executive Officers statement
Continued
Conviviality Trading A full service drinks brand and wine agency business with national sales and activation capability from traditional On and Off Trade retail to festivals and events.
New products and brands can be developed both with our partner suppliers and also directly by our own teams as we see trends and opportunities emerge across the market.
Within Conviviality Trading Catalyst PLB brings together PLB Instil and Catalyst Brands three specialist brand agency businesses each with significant expertise in their respective categories.
The brand agency business enhances the marketing capability and sales reach of the business and gives partner suppliers and brand owners unparalleled market coverage.
In addition Conviviality Trading is also responsible for the development and growth of new business areas including Peppermint a specialist in outdoor events and festivals and Elastic a brand activation agency that provides support and insight to many of Convivialitys branded supply base.
Within Catalyst PLB the team represent over 25 brands across drinks categories in the UK drinks market.
This area of the business not only represents large suppliers and brands as a drinks agency but is also a consolidator of wine suppliers managing the supply of wine to the Off Trade including high street retailers specialists and supermarkets.
Conviviality Trading has skills and capabilities in consumer insight sourcing ranging and supply that can add significant value to its customers by offering a onestop shop reducing the complexity of the wine category in large multiple national chains.
We have already seen new strategic relationships established.
In April 2016 the Catalyst business started working with global spirits business Beam
The team won the distribution rights for Larios Gin and Sauza Tequila.
Larios is the leading gin in Spain and Catalyst were tasked with launching the brand in the UK.
In the first year working together the Catalyst team built distribution for Larios in over 1700 accounts and grew the volume significantly.
In January 2017 two of the largest Chilean wine producers transferred their Off Trade business to Conviviality Santa Rita with brands including Santa Rita Vina Carmen and Sur Andino and Luis Felipe Edwards a privately owned wine group founded in 1976 by Luis Felipe Edwards Senior with brands including Luis Felipe Edwards Dona Bernada Marea and Cien.
Conviviality also has the ability to develop its own brands opening up opportunities where gaps in the market exist to create and build brands that directly meet our customers and their consumers needs.
In 2017 we launched two new brands Rolling Calf spiced spirit capitalising on the trend for dark spirits and cocktails already distributed to customers in the On T rade and due to launch in the Off T rade during Winter 2017 and Whipstitch cider which has been launched specifically for festival customers and received positive response from customers when trialled at the Isle of Wight Festival in June 2017.
Building our partners brands across the UK market means accessing the consumer wherever they are buying and consuming products whether that be in pubs bars and restaurants in supermarkets convenience stores online and also in the emerging third space.
This includes nontraditional areas like outdoor events pop ups and festivals.
Through Peppermint a specialist in outdoor events and festivals we deliver this promise.
This year Peppermint will be operating at over 35 events.
Sales increased by 46% over the corresponding prior period.
For events owners Peppermint Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Whipstitch Festival Cider and Rolling Calf Spiced Spirit two of Convivialitys latest brand innovations provides a complete service solution including full bar and food service management as well as ATM operation and Click and Collect.
Furthermore Elastic our brand activation agency which provides activation and brand building expertise to many of Convivialitys branded supply base saw sales grow strongly.
Elastic has completed work for eight new branded suppliers in addition to the continued strong partnerships with businesses such as ABInBev and Heineken cementing our positioning as one of the UKs leading experiential drinks agencies.
16 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 A Group Wide approach to efficiencies With the greater scale of the Group there is the potential to realise lower costs through buying distribution and improved organisational efficiency.
The Integration plan set out at the acquisition of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group is ahead of plan with good progress being demonstrated against the stated synergy benefits in FY18 Buying 8m Bibendum PLB 4m and Logistics between 1m and 1.5m.
The key benefit areas of the integration are detailed as follows
The Beer Lager Spirits and Soft Drinks buying teams across Conviviality Direct and Conviviality Retail work collaboratively to ensure that the opportunities for both the business and the suppliers are maximised.
This approach has been key particularly for new product launches such as Bud Light.
This approach by the Buying teams has also resulted in the stated buying synergies set out at the acquisition of Matthew Clark being achieved for this financial year which is a demonstration of the quality of the buying team and the support of the enlarged group by our supply base.
Group Wine Buying A Group Wine Buying team was established shortly after the purchase of Bibendum PLB Group.
The team is led by Andrew Shaw Group Wine Buying Director and is responsible for the selection and purchasing of the full assortment of wines sparking wines and Champagne.
Our Wine buying teams have long standing relationships with our producers and with our customers giving them the unique ability to marry customers needs with producers wines.
Across the Group we have 430 suppliers 310 of which are exclusive to Conviviality.
These exclusives cover over 3000 of the 4902 SKUs available for our customers.
Already we have seen Conviviality Retail Franchisees benefit from the ability to sell over 54000 bottles of wines that are exclusive to Conviviality.
In addition with the increased scale and buying volumes of the Group there is significant opportunity to address costs within the supply chain to release synergy benefits.
As a result we expect to generate additional buying benefits of 2 million during FY19.
Chief Executive Officers statement
Continued
All figures are indicative based on a typical bottle of wine and do not include Compulsay Tendering.
Average price for a bottle of wine in the UK.
Total Margin Excise Duty
Inbound Logistics Dry Goods
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements IT Systems and Organisation During the year we have undertaken a programme to align the ERP systems across the Group.
We are implementing the same ERP system as is used in Matthew Clark and applying it to both the Bibendum business and the Conviviality Retail business.
Once the system implementations are complete at the end of Autumn 2017 we will have the opportunity to realise back office synergies drive further improvements for customers and improve the ways of working across the Group.
The enlarged Group employs 2640 people across 16 depots and 4 support offices and regional sales teams as such there is significant talent in the organisation.
By bringing the respective teams in the businesses closer together we are seeing clear opportunities to drive greater efficiencies develop talent across the business and drive operational savings.
During 2016 10% of our people took the opportunity to develop their careers further across the Group.
We expect additional organisational synergy benefits of 1.0m to be realised in FY19.
Trading for the 9 weeks ended 2 July 2017 The Company and its businesses are trading in line with expectations.
Conviviality Direct continues to trade strongly with sales 9% above last year.
It is particularly pleasing to see the continued improvement and confidence of Conviviality Retail with LFL sales 0.5% with Wine Rack up 4.0%.
Finally Conviviality Trading is 7.6% above last year demonstrating its customers recognising the expertise and support of the agency business and additionally with the Events business increasing the number of events this year versus last year by 27% to 140.
Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
Group Logistics The logistics operation is a key strength and differentiator for Conviviality .
Conviviality serves our customers through our network of 11 depots 5 stockless outbases and 3 depots operated by our logistics partners.
During May 2016 we transferred the leadership of these depots from regional management to the Group Logistics function thereby enabling consistent standards and best practice to be applied across the Group.
Since the transition Telematics has been introduced to all vehicles delivering a 3.9% MPG saving and Paragon route planning software is in the process of being rolled out across all depots.
There are over 1000 of our people working in our depots and delivering to our customers under the leadership of Nigel Basey Group Logistics Director.
We have strengthened the capability of the team through training and development and delivered changes to support the efficient growth of the Conviviality business.
During the year we closed both Y ork and Shefford depots and opened new depots in Wetherby and Bedford providing greater capacity to serve our customers and a better working environment for our people.
We took the decision to close the Dundee depot to enable customers to order from the full assortment available at Glasgow delivered to customers via a stockless outbase.
During this period the logistics team supported the service to over 100 festivals and the growth of the Conviviality Direct and Conviviality Retail businesses.
Looking ahead the team are confirming the plans for the Group logistics strategy whereby we continue to focus on delighting customers and growing the business and in doing so achieve a greater level of efficiency.
Through the continued efficiency actions being undertaken we expect to deliver 1.2m of distribution synergies in FY18 rising to 1.5m in FY19.
Alternate performance measures  see page 1 for further explanation 18 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our customers Success for our customers and our Franchisees is key to the Conviviality operating model.
By standing in the shoes of our customers and understanding and anticipating their needs the team are able to deliver solutions to ensure their success JD Wetherspoons Our two companies have had a working relationship for over 25 years.
Be it business marriage or friendship in a relationship lasting this many years both parties evolve and constantly adapt.
Sometimes you choose to compromise and at other times you stand your ground.
The important thing is that both parties have a common understanding of each others objectives and communication is fluid.
In our time working with Matthew Clark our company has grown from less than 100 pubs to over 900.
At each stage of our development we have received a reliable and appropriate service in terms of product range distribution and management support.
Whether it be through the complete supply chain management of our house wine Coldwater Creek to the supply and distribution of the UKs most popular vodka brand Smirnoff the end result for our Managers is the same.
The lorry turns up when it should the driver puts the delivery away and there are very few errors.
Reducing the increasingly complex task of sourcing and delivering wines and spirits for Wetherspoons to such simplicity has been in my view a real accomplishment.
Which is why 25 or so years into our relationship despite the obvious quarrels and squabbles that one would naturally expect over so many years we are still together.
John Hutson
Chief Executive Officer JD Wetherspoons
Private Landlord and Dark Star Brewery Operations Winning Wine PubBar of the year last year at the Great British Pub awards was down to the great working partnership I have with
Wine value has a part to play of course but Bibendums knowledge and understanding of the wine trade is second to none.
We are able to sell great wines and sell them well.
The premium level bottles that we offer by the glass are truly outstanding and loved by our customers I know a lot of operators are suspicious of wine reps and salespeople.
More fool them.
The
Bibendum team has always had my best interest at heart.
Hence why they are the sole supplier for The Red Lion and Sun The Wenlock Arms and the growing Dark Star Brewery pub estate.
The Red Lion and Sun is a National Finalist for Best Wine Pub again this year  testament to the quality of our range.
Heath Ball Owner The Red Lion and Sun and The Wenlock Arms Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Ginger Pig We started using Bibendum wine about 10 years ago as part of three wine suppliers.
We have always found them very professional innovative and hard working.
They have a fantastic wine portfolio which always keeps pace with the latest trends and they employ energetic knowledgeable people who really care about my business.
They offer excellent staff training as well as creative marketing and design ideas.
They support us with wine dinners and also offer educational trips to vineyards which allow staff to really appreciate where wine comes from and how it is produced.
In 2013 we decided to use Bibendum as our sole supplier for wine and spirits and have not looked back.
I would recommend them to anyone looking for a top quality wine supplier.
Ben McKellar Owner Gingerman Group Revolution Bars Group plc I have worked with Matthew Clark for over 25 years and over that time I have experienced firsthand an incredible transformative business that has evolved into a marketleading proposition and a true partner.
Relationships have always been the core strength of the business.
This is matched by an unrivalled portfolio of premium products that I believe gives Matthew Clark the edge to deliver a unique offering on a national scale.
Matthew Clark delivers the best service of any of our key partnerships and continues to improve efficiencies year after year making our operations run smoother with the least amount of distraction to our teams and consumers.
Matthew Clark is the gatekeeper and broker to many of our branded relationships constantly working collaboratively with our internal teams to assist on constant range reviews across all primary drinks categories and helping in delivering our drinks retail strategy in both range and innovation.
Revolution Bars Group plc has worked in partnership with Matthew Clark for the past seven years and over that period both of our businesses have grown exponentially.
Myles Doran Commercial Director Revolution Bars Group plc 20 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our customers
I started with Bargain Booze in 2006.
Within three years Id taken on four Franchises.
I now have 37  many of which Ive taken on in the past year.
This is a fast paced business with fast paced opportunity.
Ive seen particularly rapid change over the past year.
Conviviality Retail has brought some excellent people on board who are making a big impact on the business.
Ive also seen the benefits come through of being in the enlarged Conviviality Group  from a sharper focus on consumer insights to instore wine training.
Theres still much to do but the team knows exactly whats needed to drive the business forward.
Its an exciting time to be part of it.
Phil Dickson Multiple Franchisee Bargain Booze Select Convenience and Wine Rack I came on board with Bargain Booze in 2011 having seen the success my brother had made of his Bargain Booze Franchise.
Before that I was an independent retailer which was a really hard slog.
Making the move from independent retailing to Bargain Booze has revolutionised my operation.
All the time I used to spend sourcing stock and working on the back office is now freed up so I can focus on great retailing building relationships and growing profit.
People know the Bargain Booze name and were seen as part of the community  that makes all the difference.
I now have four stores with two more in the pipeline.
With Bargain Booze you can invest in the future.
You can also share ideas with the Conviviality Retail team and other Bargain Booze Franchisees at regular Franchisee sessions  its like being in an extended network of entrepreneurs.
Chandrakumar Veluppilla Multiple Franchisee Bargain Booze and Select Convenience Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements I never intended to stay long with Bargain
I was doing a makeup course at college and joined Bargain Booze as a shop assistant to save up some money to go travelling to
That was 15 years ago and Im still here.
I fell in love with the business.
I rapidly progressed from shop assistant to store manager.
Five years ago when the Franchise owners were looking for a buyer I jumped at the chance and Ive never looked back.
That store continues to thrive and Ive now acquired two more stores in the past year.
The Bargain Booze model has been key to me realising my ambitions.
In my newest store Im trialling more premium wines and gins on the back of Bargain Booze insight into the catchment area.
Anything I need to make my business successful Bargain Booze is always at the end of the phone.
Two of my sites have rival stores just a stones throw away.
But customers come into my Bargain Booze stores because they know theyll get not just great prices but great customer service from staff who know what theyre talking about  thats priceless.
Lia Rutter Multiple Franchisee Bargain Booze and Select Convenience I was a global finance business partner for Unilever for eight years overseeing a budget of 500m and leading a big team.
Despite having this high profile role I had a yearning to set up my own business.
Id always had a big interest in the off licence trade ever since working for Victoria Wines back when I was managing five stores at the age of 21.
Ive watched the development of Bargain Booze over the years  from one store in Crewe to over 700 under Conviviality and with the acquisition of Matthew Clark and Bibendum it was clear that this was a business that was really going place.
Ive recently taken on my first three stores in Buxton Otley and Garforth.
Joining a Franchise business takes away the risk of setting up on your own.
Bargain Booze has provided everything I need to get started and Ive built up a strong relationship with the team.
Im keen to build my portfolio further. feel like the future is full of promise.
Tony Townsend Multiple Franchisee Bargain Booze 22 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our suppliers We provide our suppliers with data and insight into the UK drinks market working alongside them as partners to identify the right routes to market for their brands and products and through our extensive customer base access to the UK drinks consumer Spy Valley Wines As a new business in its infancy and understanding the enormous value and importance of a rock solid relationship with our market partners we were delighted to engage with Bibendum in 2001.
We have been market partners for coming up 16 years and the relationship has endured and strengthened.
We have experienced a very positive transition to trading with Conviviality as it has become clear that under Diana Hunter and her excellent team the spirit drive and innovation grows even stronger.
As General Manager of Spy Valley Wines in Marlborough New Zealand I promote and strongly believe in a network of business relationships that are first and foremost a network of friends.
When I visited the UK in March of this year the familiar and friendly characters made me feel at home.
I was treated like family by the wonderful staff at Conviviality however they maintain their professionalism and commitment to our brand at all times.
I respect this a lot in a market partner.
We are a family business committed to sustainability and the next generation.
We are always looking for growth and opportunities and are very grateful we can do this in the UK alongside BibendumConviviality.
Amanda Johnson General Manager Spy Valley Wines Eden Mill As a premium spirits brand we were looking for a distribution partner who could take our brand to the next level in its evolution.
Conviviality has provided strategic insight trade and market understanding and commercial capability which were all important aspects for us at this time.
These attributes have complemented the basics of market access in our first year of trading partnership resulting in listings in many iconic targets such as John Lewis retail chain Harvey Nichols Hilton Hotels and Macdonald Hotels and many top end premium On Trade stockists.
Convivialitys creative input into our marketing and sponsorship execution plans for the year ahead and support tools to deliver these at events such as Henley Regatta or Scottish Rugby is a huge benefit to our company at this stage of our growth curve.
Working with the Conviviality team we are confident that we have a robust deliverable shared plan which will help both businesses achieve their mutual goals.
Paul Miller Owner and Founder Eden Mill Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Laura Catena Although I am the fourth generation of my family making wine I came to winemaking as my second profession.
My first was as a Doctor of Medicine because I dreamed of a life in serving others and did not initially imagine that I could do this while making wine.
When I joined my father in the 1990s in his mission to elevate Argentine wine I came to the realization that we were changing lives one bottle at a time.
When I was a child rural Mendoza was a very poor area where life was extremely hard and many were moving to the cities in search of opportunity.
Today rural Mendoza is thriving you can tell by the beautiful gardens well painted adobe homes and thriving small towns where everything from healthcare to education have improved dramatically.
And in addition our noble Argentine Malbec brings daily joy to wine drinkers all over the world Salud From the beginning when my father presented the wines of Catena to Bibendum in 1991 we have felt that Bibendum and now Conviviality are our partner in every new adventure.
And most importantly that they believe in our dream to make Argentine wines that can stand with the best of the world.
When we came to Bibendum with the Adrianna single parcel wines before we had received two 100 point ratings Bibendum gave us its full support and today the UK is our number one market for these wines in the world.
More recently my father and I decided that we should try to bring the miracle of Mendoza to other more impoverished provinces in Argentina and to their undiscovered high altitude terroirs.
Our partners at Conviviality wholeheartedly embraced our vision and helped us to launch the project from the storytelling to the choice of varieties to the packaging.
And that is how UK became the first export market in the world for these extraordinary regional wines Altaland and Pasarisa from Salta La Rioja Argentina and
I must admit that at first we were a bit worried about working with a larger company but the various divisions of Conviviality have been able to focus on our different brands and terroir concepts in a way that has made each one of them stronger.
Most importantly the team at Conviviality shares our vision that we are preserving the farming traditions of Argentina and the world and I honestly believe that in the end they believe in our dream as much as we do.
Dr.
Laura Catena General Director Bodega Catena Zapata 24 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our suppliers
Hatch Mansfield The last 12 months have flown by It was last year at the London Wine Fair that the astonishing news of the acquisition of Bibendum by Conviviality was announced.
Hot on the heels of the Matthew Clark acquisition I think much of the trade was shocked and also sceptical about the possibility of bringing all the cultures together to create a strong and enduring business.
As a supplier of Matthew Clark for many years in fact in the case of Louis Jadot 61 years We were both excited and concerned there were varied cultures varied purchasing philosophies and as with all acquisitions lots of potential upsides along with lots of chances to reduce stakeholder value.
The master stroke was that there was only 3% overlap between the Bibendum account base and the Matthew Clark one so in Conviviality Direct there was little chance of cannibalisation.
The other piece of genius was the very early segmentation in to three divisions with one wine purchasing team.
This gave a strong platform for each to work on and focus on its on channel specific objectives.
The Hatch philosophy has always been one of working via a selective route to market to ensure that as little cross distributor disruption occurs as is possible.
On top of this we layer a large team who work with the sales team in generating sales either by utilising our strategic partnerships or by simply helping knock on doors In retail we try to segment and tailor our product proposition to meet the demographics of the specific channel we are on shelf in.
No retailer wants dust on a wine bottle so its all about relevance to target market.
Fortunately these philosophies found deep favour in the enlarged Conviviality business and as such the last 12 months have allowed us very good growth.
Clearly an organisation with scale provides opportunities if you can clearly align to the destination they are trying to get to.
Conviviality works well for us in this respect as we believe our portfolio that Conviviality represent should help them influence every drinking occasion.
Currently Conviviality are set apart from others by a combination of factors namely scale channel clarity and a collaborative approach.
If you align to this the ability to use insight to create a joint forensic approach to new business acquisition then it is hard to see why success will not come.
With scale comes data with data comes complexity.
However as I see it currently Conviviality are asking the data the right questions to help us all find the right answers.
Success looks different in different peoples eyes.
From the perspective of Hatch Mansfield success is continued growth in relevant distribution with a rate of sale that makes the distribution work for the on and off trade retailers.
Working as we do with shared objectives to Director level and clarity of what we are both good at allows us to outperform a declining market.
A recent example of this is the work we have piloted with email offers.
We identify who we want to target we then create the compelling offer and communication as well as the pull mechanic and we then go to market.
Interestingly
Hatch and Conviviality are learning organisations we then looked at what went right and what went wrong reworked the communication tried again and achieved superb results.
However lets not forget the people relationships in this industry are critical.
We work on a one to one basis with targeted outcomes and a shared prize but alongside that we actually have huge respect for the people and all those involved with Conviviality we like to do business with you.
Mark Calver Commercial Director Hatch Mansfield Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements AB InBev Americas favourite beer brand Bud Light officially landed in the UK in March 2017.
Its no over statement to say that this was one of our biggest ever UK launches.
In fact it was probably the biggest beer launch the UK has seen in the past twenty years.
Our ambitions were high.
We knew from our research that 60% of UK consumers were already aware of Bud Light and we were frequently asked by our fans to bring it to the UK.
Our challenge was to gain the maximum amount of reach and impact to capitalise on the opportunity to drive growth in the category and in particular attract the next generation of 1824 year olds.
Conviviality provided a route to the whole UK market right across the On Trade and Off Trade.
Scale and reach were matched with marketing expertise and a team of people who were committed to our success.
They translated our brand strategy into a high impact marketing campaign to drive On Trade listings and consumer excitement across the Off Trade.
The results speak for themselves.
We secured over 700 Bud Light installs in just a few months and were set to achieve 10% share of the Standard Lager Market in the On trade by 2018.
Across retail Bargain Booze was the first to market with instore takeovers across its 700 retail stores.
Conviviality understood our needs and delivered for us at scale and pace.
They were true partners in achieving success.
Andre Amaral Finamore Bud Light Brand Manager Launch highlights Over 700 Bud Light installs across the On Trade within 16 weeks of launch Bargain Booze first retailer to market with instore takeovers across 700retail stores Bud Light set to achieve 10% share of the Standard Lager Market in the On Trade by 2018 26 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our business model An important aspect of our business model is its flexibility protecting our earnings through periods of significant change in our organisation and competitive environment EVENT SOLUTIONS BUSINESS Wine producers and suppliers Our strategic goal is to be the drinks and impulse sectors leading specialist wholesaler and distributor to the On and Off Trade by being the most knowledgeable and inspiring partner for our customers.
Our aim is to influence every consumer drinking occasion providing knowledge and insight to our customers enabling them to tailor range and assortment to meet consumer needs by format venue and location.
Drink suppliers Our customers Tobacco and convenience suppliers Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Retail Market Split by Channel and Category Market by channel 51bn Market by broad category Alcohol Retail by Detailed Category 40bn On Trade The overall On Trade market comprises 115400 outlets and is worth 29bn at retail Over the past year there has been a continuation in the trend towards foodled missions with a 3% increase in the number of foodled pubs 320 openings and 5% fewer barsclubs 880 closures A growing feature of the market is a blurring of the traditional divisions between outlet types with the growth of restaurant bars such as Turtle Bay restaurants that change their theme or style between different mealtimes Our markets The Markets that Conviviality trades in continue to be exciting and full of opportunity such as The Breakfast Club restaurant concepts that pop up in closed units such as Farang and outdoor or street food offerings such as Dumpling Shack.
Market growth is concentrated in these nontraditional venues which are more likely to be owned and operated independently Change in licensed premises 2016  2017 % Sport  Social Club 0% Restaurant 2% Wine Led Pub 3% Bar  Club 5% Food Led Pub 3% Hotel 0% Other 3% Source CGA On Trade outlet database The On Trade drinks distribution market is estimated to be worth 7.4bn.
Conviviality Direct share of value is estimated to be 14% Off Trade The Off T rade market includes supermarkets convenience stores discounters drinks specialists online pureplays and independent shops and in total is worth 23bn at retail The major channel trends are those towards convenience stores and ecommerce.
As a consequence of consumers increasing tendency to split missions and shop little and often the growth of the convenience sector continues.
Although the large supermarkets have slowed their rollouts with only c.80 new convenience format sites in 2016 compared with c.750 in the preceding 3 years the total value of the market continues to grow and is expected to reach 47bn by 2022 a growth rate of 3.3% per annum higher than that expected of the overall grocery market Among convenience stores c.15k 30% are part of symbol groups and c.19k 40% are independent retailers these are the retailers that Conviviality Retail aims to attract The UK retail drinks market is valued at 51bn of which 40bn is alcoholic drinks.
In general consumers can either choose to purchase drinks in the On Trade for consumption on the premises in restaurants hotels pubs bars nightclubs and event venues which accounts for 56% of spend or in the Off Trade for consumption at home or elsewhere supermarkets offlicences online retailers and other retail shops which accounts for the remaining 44% There are 115400 outlets in the On Trade in total of which c.25000 are served by Conviviality.
Off Trade Total Drinks Retail On Trade 51bn 29bn 56% 22.5bn 44%
Alcohol 10.7bn 21% 40.3bn 79%
Wine
5%
Perry
7%
Wine
22%
25%
40% 28 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our markets to join the Group as Franchisees.
A trend driving the convenience sector is the resurgence of consumer interest in participating in community life and shopping locally and this is reflected in our Franchisees embeddedness in their local communities.
Conviviality Retail is the only national chain of drinksled convenience stores giving it a clear point of difference in the convenience market.
IGD convenience market size and forecast 2015  2022 Consumer and Category Trends Two of the most important trends in the market are premiumisation and hyperconvenience.
Premiumisation
Consumers have an increasing desire for more choice and quality creating a mix shift towards more premium products.
Over the last 12 months consumers have continued to spend more on wine with Conviviality Retails store fascias including both Bargain Booze and Wine Rack performing ahead of this trend.
Sales of wine priced over 9 increased 7% across the Off Trade with an 18% increase for Conviviality Retail stores category.
UK volume imports of premium spirits grew by 10% between 2015 and 2016 with Conviviality Directs premium spirit sales rising c.40% in FY17.
This trend is reflected in the successes of premium products recently promoted in Conviviality Retail for example Ciroc vodka which retails for 29.99 at standard price and less on promotion now represents a 5x greater proportion of our total vodka sales than last year.
Consumers increasing willingness to try more premium products has driven the artisan and craft movements across the food and drink sector.
These trends are evidenced with the significant growth in gin which has now surpassed vodka as the UKs number one spirit.
In the last twelve months gin sales have increased 15% across the on and Off Trades with 1 in 3 consumers now picking gin as a favourite Conviviality are leading the gin trend having outgrown the market with groupwide gin sales growth of c.20% in FY17.
The trend for premiumisation has also translated into growth in cocktails with an increase in the proportion of On Trade outlets serving these drinks to almost 30% Over the last year the greatest rise in demand was for the Pornstar Martini which now has a market share of 8% As one of the key ingredients of this cocktail the increased demand has partly driven the sales growth of flavoured vodka with Conviviality Direct selling c.15% more flavoured vodka this year than last year.
As standard ales and lager volumes fall premium lager and ale have seen value growth of 6% and 10% respectively Over 1 in 4 beer drinkers pick craft beer as their favourite beer and 1 in 5 of all consumers have tried a craft ale in the last 3 months Conviviality Retails craft beer sales have increased by almost 40% over the past year with a range of over 40 SKUs now available to
Hyperconvenience
Consumers are fuelling a second wave of convenience expecting outcomes that are especially convenient to them.
This continues to support Conviviality Retails strategy to grow through drinksled convenience.
Furthermore the trend for ultimate convenience is demonstrated in more overt mission splitting where consumers choices of shops depend on the specific shopping missions they are undertaking and the growth of apps into the On Trade as well as the Off Trade.
The
Bargain Booze App continues to see usage of c.65000 and customers using the app spend almost twice as much as the average customer.
Our customers and partners are also finding success through apps weekly visits to the Bargain Booze facebook page website and App were up 216% to 79000.
Since its launch in March 2017 the JD Wetherspoons attable ordering app has been downloaded over 22000 times.
March 2017 the JD Wetherspoons attable ordering app has been downloaded over 22000 times.
Conviviality
Retail is extending its investment in the digital space working to increase engagement at a local level.
Conviviality market modelling using data from CGA Nielsen and WSTA
Conviviality market modelling using data from WSTA and CGA
Conviviality market modelling using data from CGA Conviviality market modelling using data from Nielsen and WSTA
IGD
WSTA
IWSR
WSTA
Conviviality Taste Test 2017
CGA
CGA
Conviviality Taste Test 2017 Convenience Other Channels 178bn 180bn 185bn 213bn 141bn 142bn 145bn 166bn 37.1bn 20.8% 38bn 21.1% 40bn 21.6% 47.1bn 22.1% 3.3% CAGR 2.9% CAGR Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Source Canadean KAM Media Internal survey Biggest Category 50% of Value 36% of all sales in pubs are wine spirits The average person travels to their primary pubbar % of UK population visiting once a week or more
Restaurant
Night club
Sporting event 79% of UK adults drink alcohol 48% of UK adults drink spirits 34% Biggest Category 42% of Value 57% of alcoholrelated shopping trips are mainly to buy alcohol.
Alcohol acts as the PROMPT to make other purchases.
Drink shoppers buy more items 43% of UK adults drink at home twice a week or more 57% Walk to the shop
Alcohol shopper Average shopper 3.0 30 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Our strategy The Conviviality goal is to be the drinks and impulse products sectors leading specialist wholesaler and distributor to the On Trade and Off Trade by being the most knowledgeable and inspiring partner for our customers
We have restructured the business into three distinct business units with expertise in anticipating and understanding their specific customer needs.
The business unit mission is to ensure that customers have the support they need to select the right products from our extensive ranges to directly fulfil their target customer needs.
As Conviviality customers they have the assurance of our compelling delivery proposition through our nationwide logistics network.
By working with over 980 suppliers and brand owners across an assortment of over 18000 SKUs Conviviality can offer its customers and Franchisees the right assortment to meet their consumer needs by format outlet and region.
The enlarged Group is independent of major drinks brands enabling it to supply an unrestricted selection of products to customers who value breadth of range offering a compelling route for suppliers to access both on and Off Trade retailers.
By serving outlets spanning retail outdoor events pubs clubs premium restaurants hotels and bars this reach provides Conviviality with unique access to emerging trends in the UK market and significant insight into UK consumers drinking habits.
Looking ahead Conviviality is focused on ensuring that we anticipate the requirements of our customers and to support this we have invested in ERP systems Digital platforms and EPOS systems to ensure that we not only deliver outstanding service everyday but we stay ahead of our customers future needs supporting their profitable growth.
Already the greater scale of the enlarged Group provides the potential to realise lower costs through the implementation of a consistent ERP system across the Group that will unlock operational benefits through streamlined back office processes.
In the year ahead we will start to set out plans to improve our processes maximising efficiency in doing so we will remove the inevitable duplication that existed within the three businesses.
We will further strengthen our capability growing our businesses organically in both the Franchise business and in the On T rade in addition to complementary strategic acquisitions where and when they provide value creation for the Group and our shareholders.
Teamwork
Maximising Returns For our customers Franchisees suppliers and investors by consistently delivering against all of our targets and metrics Succeeding Together Building a strong community and providing our people and our partners with great opportunities and re wards for their achievements Delighting Customers and Partners We touch every drinking occasion and support our customers through choice convenience and value
Agility
Customer Focus and Excellence
STRATEGIC GOAL To be the drinks and impulse sectors leading independent distributor to hotels restaurants bars events and retail outlets.
We aspire to be the most knowledgeable and inspiring partner to all of our customers.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Together
Succeeding together building a strong community and providing our people and our partners with great opportunities and rewards for their achievement.
Progress
As a result of the acquisition of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group Conviviality now employs over 2600 people.
All key leadership roles have been recruited with the team in place new and existing team members successfully working together.
With process streamlining we continue to develop and promote our people into roles across the organisation.
In the past year 249 employees have changed roles across the group.
Conviviality offers career development opportunities for all employees across the Group in the Franchise business through to the On Trade wholesale business as well as career opportunities across logistics marketing buying and finance.
This benefits Conviviality by retaining a motivated and talented workforce that is flexible to new opportunities.
Looking ahead Conviviality has put in place an organisational structure that leverages the benefit of the enlarged Group.
Conviviality will continue to grow and develop talent from within ensuring we create a motivating and sustainable future for our employees.
We continue to invest in the skills and capabilities of our people and ensure that our customers and suppliers receive the expertise and support they have come to expect from Conviviality people.
Maximising
Returns
Maximising returns for our customers Franchisees suppliers and investors by consistently delivering against our targets and metrics and balancing the delivery of excellence every day with long term sustainable growth.
Progress
We have built a business model that creates a natural hedge against the challenging economic environment we span all the consumer segments of the UK drinks market.
Through the diverse nature of our customer base we cover both drinking in the home and drinking out of the home missions.
Conviviality has a unique service proposition for customers as solution provider and one stop shop for all drinks purchasing needs.
This enables our customers to create efficiencies within their own businesses by increasingly accessing more of the Conviviality offer to simplify their operation and remove supply chain duplication.
Looking ahead As we continue to stand in the shoes of our customers we recognise the need to help them drive greater efficiencies and meet their future customer needs and trends.
The development of our digital platform is a key driver of efficiency for our customers there has been a 20% growth year on year in the number of customers using our platform.
In the year ahead we will make this available to Bibendum customers.
Our customers benefit from more efficient and more accurate order processes and in turn Conviviality benefits from greater engagement in the product range and assortment.
Nearly half of our existing customers view the site daily with an average of 15 page views per session and we have seen a significant increase in average order size versus the traditional ordering methods.
Delighting Customers and Partners Delighting our consumers in every drinking occasion on and offpremises through choice convenience and great value.
Progress
The enlarged Group now has access to 4902 SKUs of wine 3800 lager beer and cider 5400 spirits 877 soft drinks 4500 impulse and grocery SKUs and 1900 tobacco products.
Increasingly Convivialitys suppliers value the access to route to market benefits the data and insight and brand building capability across the Group engaging at a deeper level than they previously would have found possible pre acquisition.
This extensive assortment enables each of the Groups customers to access household name brands as well as exclusive ranges and own labels to directly meet their target consumer needs by format and venue and addressing regional variances.
The
Groups customer support team with the support of expert buyers and menu designers and merchandisers can help customers and Franchisees select the right range and assortment and in doing so manage their pricing and mix.
Looking ahead Delivering daily consistent and excellent service to our customers is core to our business.
The strong relationships with our suppliers and the expertise we have within the enlarged Group will result in our customers being able to access the widest assortment to meet their needs as well as expertise and market advice.
Conviviality will continue to work with brand owners maximising distribution potential across all drinking occasions in home and out of the home across a deeper product portfolio.
Our strategy is to deliver a logistics capability that anticipates the future needs of our customers and creates significant differentiation in the market thereby adding significant value to the organisation.
Each of Convivialitys business units has clear strategies that individually and collectively deliver against the strategic themes below and ensure the achievement of the Groups goal.
32 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risks and mitigation factors Franchisee retention and quality Markets and competition Risk and description Mitigation factors Level The alcohol wholesale market remains competitive with several companies seeking to grow organically and via acquisition to leverage the benefits of scale.
The convenience retail market remains competitive with several larger companies seeking to expand.
The market is starting to consolidate as companies seek to leverage the benefits of scale and independents find it increasingly hard to compete.
The discounters reputation for price leadership is firmly established with consumers.
The possible emergence of larger alcohol wholesale competitors and the continued growth of the discounters may impact on the development of future revenue streams.
Retaining Franchisees and improving the overall quality of Franchisees is fundamental to the Groups future growth.
Failure to retain Franchisees could result in a reduction in the number of stores through higher store closures and fewer store openings as the Groups ability to attract new Franchisees may diminish.
The quality of the Groups Franchisees are a key driver of sales growth brand reputation and reputation with end consumers.
Any failure to maintain or improve Franchisee quality could result in lower sales per store with a consequential effect on profitability of both the Franchisee and the
Conviviality Direct has a strong position in the alcohol wholesale market providing customers with a broad range of wines spirits beers and soft drinks available for next day delivery.
Conviviality offers its suppliers unrivalled access to the UK alcohol market enabling the development of strategic supply relationships.
Convivialitys ability to connect suppliers and customers creates the opportunity to leverage scale providing even broader choice and better value for our customers.
Conviviality Retail has a unique proposition as off licence led convenience stores providing a compelling combination of a value and choice of our 14000 alcohol range with 60% on promotion at any one time.
The extensive alcohol range and significantly improved impulse and grocery ranges provides consumers the choice they demand.
Franchisee engagement remains strong with the combination of the Franchisee Incentive Plan and cash incentives providing Franchisees the opportunity to earn up to an extra 17800 per annum.
The Group continues to provide high levels of training and support for Franchisees and is working in an increasingly collaborative way to launch new services such as the new EPOS Till system.
The continued focus on improving store standards has resulted in significantly tougher standards and it is very pleasing that 262 achieved the Gold standard.
Flat
Conviviality has a natural hedge to changes in consumer drinking habits by giving access to both the drink at home and drink out of home markets.
The risk of consolidation in the convenience sector is increasing the risk that stronger competitors will emerge.
Decreasing
Franchisee engagement and quality continues to improve.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Other legal and regulatory Britains exit from the EU Minimum unit pricing Risk and description Mitigation factors Level There is a risk that new and existing legal and regulatory requirements could impact revenue and costs.
The Alcohol Wholeslaer Registration Scheme came into force in June 2017.
Failure to maintain registration would significantley disrupt the business.
Britains exit from the EU in March 2019 creates significant uncertainty and could result in changes to import tariffs and delays in importing goods from the EU.
Minimum unit pricing could be introduced in England and Wales if it proves an effective way to reduce excessive drinking in Scotland.
The Group is on the approved list of registered wholesalers.
The Group continues to monitor regulatory and legal developments to determine its strategic and competitive response and ensure compliance with its obligations.
The Group is a member of the Association of Convenience Stores and Wines and Spirits Trading Association through which gives the Group insight and access to current legislator thinking and debate.
The UK governments position is that suitable trade deals can be struck within the two year exit period however there are very few historical precedents of trade deals agreed this quickly.
The insertion of a border with the EU however could be disruptive with the possibility of delays as HMRC scale up processes and systems.
Leading groups such as the British Beer and Pub Association BBPA and the Association of Licensed Multiple Retailers ALMR are campaigning on behalf of our industry to ensure concerns are voiced and disruption caused by Brexit is minimised.
Minimum unit pricing continues to be debated within the UK government.
In Scotland where the legislation was passed in 2012 the implementation has now been approved after being held up by repeated legal challenges.
In April 2017 in their review on the 2003 Licensing Act the House of Lords Committee recommended that if the implementation in Scotland was found to be effective in reducing excessive drinking then the policy should be rolled out in England and Wales.
Flat
Alcohol legislation remains on the political agenda and we continue to monitor.
Increasing
The level of drinks imported to the UK is broadly similar to that exported and as such the impact on the drinks industry is likely to be lower.
Increasing
The products likely to be impacted by Minimum Unit Pricing represent only 4% of the Groups sales.
34 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Risks and mitigation factors
Reliance on key suppliers Reliance on key personnel Reliance on key customers Risk and description Mitigation factors Level The Group relies upon certain key suppliers.
A breakdown in its relationships could result in short term disruption to the Groups business.
The Group has a relatively small leadership team and the loss of any key individual could impact on the Groups future performance.
The Group relies upon certain key customers.
The loss of a key customer could result in lower sales with a consequential impact on profitability.
Conviviality has a broad range of suppliers and following the acquisitions of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group has leveraged its reach into the UK alcohol market to further strengthen its supplier relationships.
Joint business plans have been agreed with many key suppliers with regular review meetings and biannual conferences taking place.
Robust contractual arrangements are maintained with key suppliers and the Group continually reassesses the strategic value of its supply relationship and the potential to utilise alternative sources.
High quality Managing Directors run each business unit and are supported by the expertise of Group functions led by the Chief Financial Officer the Group People Director and the Group Logistics Director.
A clear succession plan is in place for each executive.
A senior leadership team has been established comprising approximately 50 leaders from across all parts of
The Group has introduced a consistent remuneration policy and launched a Long Term Incentive Plan.
The enlarged Group provides enhanced opportunities for advancement.
The Group works closely with its key customers to provide outstanding choice value and service.
The
Group is utilising its enlarged scale to further improve the proposition for all customers.
Robust contractual arrangements are maintained with key customers and the Group continually reassesses its customer relationships.
Flat
The Group has a broad range of suppliers offering them unrivalled access to the UK alcohol market.
Decreasing
The senior leadership team is far stronger.
Flat
The strength of the Groups year.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Business integration Tobacco demand Data security and IT reliability The Group is in the process of integrating Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group to delivery buying distribution revenue and organisational synergies.
Failure to implement the integration plan effectively could result in lower synergies and result in short term disruption to the Groups business.
The UK government and health industry continue to discourage smoking and on 20 May 2016 plain packaging was introduced.
Whilst tobacco sales do not make a significant contribution to the Groups profits tobacco remains a key driver of footfall into Conviviality Retails stores.
The Group relies on its IT infrastructure and in particular its EPOS warehouse management and ERP systems to service its customers.
Cyber security risk is increasing.
A major breach or malfunction of these systems would cause significant disruption to the Group and its performance.
The Group is executing a robust and wellresourced plan to integrate Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group and create three customer facing business units Conviviality Direct Conviviality Retail and Conviviality Trading supported by a number of group support functions.
The integration is on track and the Groups Change Board continues to lead the change program and meets monthly to review progress risks and to ensure adequate resources are available.
Convivialitys reliance on tobacco sales has substantially reduced with tobacco sales mix falling from 30% in the year ending April 2015 to 7% in the year ending 30 April 2017.
The Groups reputation for value has mitigated the impact of the introduction of plain packaging with like for like tobacco sales down only 1.2%.
Recent growth in the electronic cigarettes and Vape products provides a new revenue stream with stronger margins.
The Group is nearing completion of significant IT projects to implement new systems into Conviviality Retail and expand Matthew Clarks systems to Bibendum Wine.
A Group IT Director has been appointed to oversee all systems development as Conviviality continues to implement its systems convergence strategy.
Decreasing
The integration is progressing well and each business unit continues to trade strongly.
Flat
Tobacco sales are a low proportion of total sales and the impact of plain packaging is offset by the growth in electronic cigarettes and Vape products.
Flat
Improved
Loss of a key operating system or a major health and safety incident The Group operates from offices in Crewe Bristol and London and 16 distribution centres throughout the UK.
The loss of a key operating site could seriously disrupt business activity.
A disaster recovery plan is in place to enable a proactive and effective response if a site should be severely impacted.
A detailed review of the plan will be undertaken in the next 12 months.
There are regular and robust risk assessments to identify and mitigate business interruption risks in the distribution centres.
The Board considers health and safety at each meeting.
Flat
Health and safety is a key priority.
Risk and description Mitigation factors Level 36 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Financial review
A strong financial performance
Following the acquisitions of Matthew Clark on 7 October 2015 and Bibendum PLB Group on 20 May 2016 sales grew 85% to 1560m FY16 841m and adjusted EBITDA increased 102% to Adjusted profit before tax increased by 111% to 45.8m FY16 21.7m and adjusted fully diluted earnings per share increased 48% to 21.0 pence FY16 14.2 pence.
Profit before tax increased 147% to 22.5m FY16 9.1m and fully diluted earnings per share increased 136% to 10.4 pence FY16 4.4 pence.
Net debt at 30 April 2017 was 95.7m 1 May 2016 86.1m with leverage falling to 1.6 times adjusted EBITDA 1 May 2016 2.2 times.
Revenue
Revenue increased by 85% to 1560m FY16 841m due to the full year impact of acquiring Matthew Clark the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group and organic growth of 5.8% with each business unit growing strongly.
Conviviality Direct generated sales of 1040m in the 52 weeks ending 30 April 2017.
This represents an increase of 6.4% on the corresponding prior period with sales per outlet increasing by 4.8% and the number of outlets served increasing by 1.5%.
The
Matthew Clark and the Bibendum Wine sales teams are working well together and customers are recognising the benefits of sourcing from a single supplier that offers great choice service and value.
Conviviality Retails sales increased 6.1% over the corresponding prior period primarily due to a 10.7% increase in the number of average stores trading during the year FY17703 FY16635 due to a Franchisee acquiring a large parcel of stores in the final quarter of FY16.
This resulted in lower sales per store in FY17 and as the Franchisee closed or sold a number of the smaller underperforming stores the number of closures increased to At 30 April 2017 the Group operated 713 stores 1 May 2016 716 with 43 stores opening and 17 acquisitions in the year.
Sales improved during the year with like for like sales 0.5% in the second half compared to 1.7% in the first half.
In the financial year like for like sales were 1.0%.
Conviviality T rading sales increased 1.0% over the corresponding prior period as strong growth in Events was partly offset by lower sales in the Agency business as the business evolves from high volume lower margin sales to higher margin lower volume sales.
Adjusted EBITDA Adjusted EBITDA increased 102% to 60.9m FY16 30.2m as sales growth of 85% and a 1.3% point improvement in gross profit margin percentage increased gross profit by 105% to Andrew Humphreys Chief Financial Officer Includes the full year revenue and profit of Matthew Clark and the revenue and profit of Bibendum PLB Group from the date of acquisition.
Alternative performance measures Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation exceptional items share based payments and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives.
This is reconciled to profit before tax in note 3.
Profit before tax exceptional items amortisation of acquisition intangibles and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives less tax at the effective rate divided by fully diluted weighted average shares in issue.
Retail like for like sales are the retail sales made by Franchisee and Company owned stores that have traded continually during FY16 and FY17 under the same ownership.
Profit before tax exceptional items amortisation of acquisition intangibles and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives.
Revenue for the corresponding prior period is calculated as revenue for the 52 week period ended 1 May 2016 plus revenue for businesses acquired in both the current period and the prior period assuming those businesses were part of the Group from the start of the prior period.
Adjusted profit before tax with the nonexceptional effective tax rate applied.
Adjusted proft after tax divided by basic weighted average shares in issue.
Adjusted EBITDA plus movement in working capital less capital expenditure interest and tax paid.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements This was partly offset by an increase in operating costs excluding exceptional items depreciation amortisation share based payment charges and fair value movement on foreign currency contracts of 106% to 146.2m FY16 71.0m due to the full year impact of the acquisition of Matthew Clark in October 2015 and the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group in May 2016.
Gross margin percentage improved to 13.3% FY16 12.0% primarily due to buying synergies of 6.0m 0.4% point increase and the acquisitions of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group 0.4% point increase.
Profit before tax Group profit before tax increased by 13.4m to 2016 9.1m primarily due to the 30.7m increase in Adjusted EBITDA offset by higher finance costs depreciation and amortisation including the amortisation of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group acquisition intangibles an increase in share based charges and an adverse fair value adjustment on foreign exchange contracts of 3.3m.
Net finance costs increased by 2.7m primarily due to interest on term loans drawn down to fund the acquisitions of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group amortisation of banking arrangement fees and increased utilisation of working capital facilities.
Depreciation and amortisation excluding amorisation of acqusition intangibles increased by 3.3m reflecting a full year charge from the acquisition of Matthew Clark the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group and our recent investment in IT systems and stores.
Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group acquisition intangible assets include the Matthew Clark and Bibendum Wine brands and customer bases total net book value 60.0m.
The brands are being amortised over 10 years and the customer base over their expected life of between 5 and 6.5 years giving an amortisation charge in the year of 10.0m.
Share based charges increased by 0.7m due to the continued investment in the Franchise Incentive Plan and management share options to ensure both Franchisees and management are aligned with the Groups objectives and rewarded based on the performance of the Group.
Exceptional items of 10.0m primarily comprises professional fees relating to the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group of 1.6m and costs to integrate and restructure the Group following the acquisitions of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group of 8.7m.
The integration of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group with Conviviality Retail was completed as a single project to make the integration more efficient and reduce costs.
A significant amount of work was undertaken in FY17 to create three customer facing business units Conviviality Direct Conviviality Retail and Conviviality Trading plus group support functions Logistics Finance IT Legal and Human Resources.
The Group is now operating within this structure which facilitates the delivery of buying logistics and organisational synergies whilst ensuring the Group is well positioned to continue to drive organic sales growth.
Conviviality owns 61% of Peppermint Events and is committed to acquire the remaining 39% in the year ending April 2020 or April 2021 based on EBITDA in the year ending April 2019 or April 2020.
The timing of the final earnout will depend on whether Peppermint Events exceeds an EBITDA target that has been set for the year ending 2019.
If the target is not met the earnout moves to the year ending 2020.
The EBITDA targets set at the date of acquisition resulted in a contingent consideration of 6.2m and a liability was established for this amount.
Reflecting current market conditions the estimated contingent consideration has decreased by 3.4m.
This has been recorded as exceptional income.
Adjusted profit before tax increased 111% to 45.8m FY16 21.7m as Adjusted EBITDA of 60.9m was offset by net finance charges of 5.2m depreciation and amortisation excluding amortisation of acquisition intangibles of 7.4m and share based charges of 2.4m.
Tax
The tax charge of 4.0m represents tax on Group profit before tax and exceptional items of 6.1m offset by a tax credit tax on exceptional items of 2.1m.
The effective tax rate on Group profit before tax and exceptional items is 18.8% due to movements in deferred tax.
The tax credit on exceptional items is 20.9% due to disallowable transaction costs on the acquisition of Bibendum PLB
Earnings per share Profit after tax increased 249% to 18.5m FY16 5.3m and the basic weighted average number of shares increased 48% to 170.1m FY16 115.3m following the placing of 15.6m new shares with institutional investors to raise gross proceeds of c.
32.0m to part fund the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group.
This resulted in basic EPS increasing 135% to 10.8 pence FY16 4.6 pence.
Fully diluted weighted average shares increased 48% to 177.0m FY16 119.4m resulting in fully diluted EPS increasing 136% to 10.4 pence FY16 4.4 pence.
Adjusted profit after tax increased 119% to 37.2m FY16 17.0m resulting in adjusted basic EPS increasing 49% to 21.9 pence FY16 14.7 pence and adjusted fully diluted increasing 48% to 21.0 pence FY16 14.2 pence.
38 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Key performance indicators
1560m Increase of 85% from 2016 Diluted EPS p Increase of 136% from 2016 Profit before tax m Increase of 147% from 2016 Free cash flow Increase of 349% from 2016 Adjusted EBITDA Increase of 102% from 2016 Adjusted diluted EPS Increase of 48% from 2016 Cash flow and funding The Group is strongly cash generative with free cash flow increasing by 349% to 51.2m FY16 11.4m as adjusted tax payments of 8.3m.
Capital expenditure includes a continued investment in stores of 6.0m and the development of IT systems including a new EPOS till system the implementation of JD Edwards ERP system into Bibendum Wine and Conviviality Retail and the implementation of warehouse management systems and logistics planning tools of This is offset by the proceeds from the sale of assets of 6.3m primarily the sale and leaseback of the Shefford depot.
Net debt increased by 9.6m as free cash flow of 51.2m was offset by a net cash outflow on the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group of 28.6m the acquisition of KMD Enterprises for cash consideration of 4.0m restructuring and integration costs of 8.7m and dividend payments of The consideration for Bibendum PLB Group was 39.7m which together with 19.1m of debt acquired and acquisition costs of 1.6m resulted in a total investment of 60.4m.
This investment was funded by proceeds from the issue of new ordinary shares of 31.8m generating a net cash out flow of 28.6m.
At 30 April 2017 the Groups net debt totalled 95.7m 1 May 2016 86.1m and comprised 95.8m of term loans and 10.7m drawn down under the Groups working capital facilities less cash of 10.4m and unamortised banking arrangement fees.
The bank facilities include a leverage and an interest cover covenant.
The leverage covenant requires debt excluding any amounts drawn down on under the Groups invoice discounting facility to be less than 2.5 times the last 12 months adjusted
The interest cover covenant requires adjusted to be at least four times net finance charges.
At the measurement date of 30 April 2017 leverage was 1.6 and interest cover was 11.5.
Dividend
Conviviality has a progressive dividend policy and aims to increase dividend cover based on fully diluted adjusted EPS to two times by the year ending April 2020.
In line with this policy a final dividend of 8.4 pence per share is proposed.
Subject to shareholder approval at the Annual General Meeting the final dividend will be paid on 5 October 2017 to shareholders on the register on 8 September 2017.
This increases the total dividend for the year by 33% to 12.6 pence per share FY16 9.5 pence per share and increases dividend cover to 1.7 times FY16 1.5 times.
Andrew Humphreys Chief Financial Officer 17 July 2017
Financial review
Continued
Alternative performance measures Includes the full year revenue and profit of Matthew Clark and the revenue and profit of Bibendum PLB Group from the date of acquisition.
Earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation exceptional items share based payments and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives.
This is reconciled to profit before tax in note 3.
Profit before tax exceptional items amortisation of acquisition intangibles and fair value of foreign exchange derivatives less tax at the effective rate divided by fully diluted weighted average shares in issue.
Adjusted EBITDA plus movement in working capital less capital expenditure interest and tax paid.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Corporate social responsibility report A Values based approach to sustainability We see it as our responsibility to offer our talented and committed people sustainable and worthwhile employment where they can grow and thrive in a safe and secure environment.
The Group takes its responsibilities as a business in its community seriously creating sustainable employment within the industry for local communities across the UK.
Several members of our senior leadership team play important roles with trade organisations and charities so that as well as running our business they represent the interests of our customers and our industry to the trade bodies who influence Government.
They will harness their access to these opinion formers and decision makers to lobby on behalf of our small business customers for fair and equitable treatment.
We will fundamentally remain committed to sustainable growth for all our stakeholders customers Franchisees suppliers our people.
Our culture and our values It is through our people that our suppliers and customers see our business its talent and its potential.
Organisationally we have very purposefully lowered the centre of gravity to empower our people closest to the customer so they can focus on delighting our customers.
We have put in place Employee Forums across all of our depots and support centres ensuring we listen to the views of our people and make any changes necessary to improve how we work.
Our values are driven from our people across all of our business and they underpin how we work together to deliver our strategic goals.
In the last year we have launched the values across the entire Group and we now see our values in action across every one of our ten depots and eight outbases our four support centres as well as our retail outlets and our teams operating out on location with customers work that we will continue to embed.
We have appointed Values Champions a group of 33 employees who help us bring the values to life and champion the spirit of One Conviviality.
On 2 May 2017 the Values Champions created a celebratory event that took place in every one of our support centres and depots to launch the start of the financial year as One Conviviality.
The values champions continue to work at the heart of the business to help make Conviviality a great place to work for everyone.
Conviviality believes in treating all employees fairly and equitably and is a champion of equal opportunities.
As such having brought together three large businesses a key element of our integration activity has to be to ensure all roles across the organisation are paid fairly and equitably across the group and relative to the external market.
This full benchmarking and alignment exercise on pay is complete and has been communicated to all employees as part of the pay review process.
A further benefit of the benchmarking exercise into roles and pay is that we now have a robust database that enables us to understand the diversity of our workforce.
Our workforce balance is split 1805 male and 876 female and whilst theres only a small pay differential between male and female employees of 2.5% we remain committed to ensuring we have equal pay for equal roles with performance being the only differentiator on pay.
We recognise and reward positive behaviours and the performance of our people through our annual performance review process where every employee in the organisation has the opportunity to discuss their performance and their future career development with their line manager.
Our culture and values
Agility
Teamwork
Customer focus and excellence 40 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate social responsibility report
Apprenticeships
Apprenticeships provide an opportunity for us to develop and grow our talent locally.
We have three apprentices across Group and we have two colleagues who have completed their two year apprentice programme and have secured roles within the business.
Apprenticeship programmes are not just a way for us to find great people they also strengthen our links with the communities where we operate.
Apprentices across the Group
Our commitment to training and developing our people is part of what makes Conviviality special.
We encourage employees to take professional qualifications for example in Finance HR Logistics and Marketing.
We have 17 team members completing AAT ACCA or CIMA qualifications.
We also provide training and development in business and management skills as well as job skills at all levels.
During the past year 84 employees took the WSET Wine and Spirits Education Trust courses as part of their career development.
In addition more than 1103 of our customers employees also took WSET courses led by our expert and award winning trainers.
Community
Charitable Giving We believe that our businesses and our people play an important role in the communities where we trade.
All Conviviality businesses support charities as well as encourage and involve their people in charitable giving and in volunteering.
During the last year more than 22 charities benefited from the support of Conviviality and over 37373 was donated.
Conviviality specifically supports Cheshire Community Foundation and The Rainbow Trust which benefited through the year from 14049 between them.
Through the charity matching scheme for volunteering in Matthew Clark over 80 employees undertook activities for charity and 6000 was matched by the Company to the charity of their choice.
For example eight employees from Direct and Trading took part in a sailing regatta which raised 1000 for Brain Cancer and Team Margot.
Conviviality further support our people in volunteering by allowing a paid day off for every employee to fundraise for charity.
The number of charities that benefited from the support of Conviviality Responsible Retailing and Drinking Responsible retailing and drinking is an important part of how we do business.
In line with this we contribute 23288 annually to the Drinkaware Trust.
We support the WSTA with two members of the team acting as Trustees as well as contributing 56860 annually.
We also support the Benevolent the drinks industry charity again with a member of the team acting as a trustee as well as contributing 33500 above our fundraising activity.
Gas Emissions Conviviality Plc operates a core of 307 commercial vehicles ranging from 3.5 to 40 tonnes.
The business continues to invest in fuel efficient vehicles with vehicles fitted with the new engine.
The residual vehicles are fitted with years.
In addition of our delivery fleet have been fitted with telematics systems that monitors the efficiency of drivers and to ensure our vehicles are being operated as optimally as possible.
Conviviality understands that technology is only one part of the drive towards reducing carbon emissions and to that end we are investing in driver behaviour training and are introducing the Smith Systems on road training that will provide our transport colleagues the tools to improve fuel efficiency as well as improving safety and awareness in changing environments.
Conviviality has trained 20 instructors that are located across the distribution centres and to date has 140 qualified drivers in the new techniques.
Our culture and values
Agility
Teamwork
Customer focus and excellence Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Energy Efficiency Conviviality is fully compliant with the ESOS regulations.
Energy efficiency initiatives are in place across the business and have continued to reduce overall energy consumption by 5.4%.
This is demonstrated with the commissioning of two new distribution centres both of which have high performance rigid thermoset insulation thermal conductivity as well as being BREAM very good rating.
Conviviality has PIR activated lighting systems in place helping to reduce energy usage versus the prior year.
The business is registered with the Carbon Trust.
Waste and Recycling Conviviality continues to work hard in reducing waste across the business.
Our business has decreased waste sent to landfill by 13.66% with an increase of 8% of waste diverted from landfill.
All our depots have recycling facilities for cardboard and plastic and all mixed waste is sent directly to a Materials Recycling Facility so limiting the amount we send to landfill.
The eleven depots that are operated by Conviviality are accredited to the 18001 Occupational Health and Safety standard.
Four of depots have achieved the ISO 14001 standard which relates to environmental management and one depot has been accredited with the British Retail Counsel food safety standard.
The Strategic Report as set out on pages 1 to 41 has been approved by the Board.
By order of the Board Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
17 July 2017 42 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Board of Directors A Strong leadership team committed to driving growth Andrew Humphreys Chief Financial Officer David Adams
David joined the Board in July 2013.
David is an experienced Plc director who has served in both executive and nonexecutive capacities in the retail industry.
Past roles include Finance Director and Deputy CEO at House of Fraser Chairman of Jessops Plc and Moss Bros Plc and NonExecutive Director of HMV.
Chairman of the Nomination Committee Acting Chair of the Remuneration Committee and member of the Audit
David is currently Chairman of Ecovision Ltd and Park Cameras Ltd.
In addition he holds Plc Non Executive Director roles at Halfords Hornby Fever Tree Drinks Elegant Hotels and Thinksmart and is a trustee of Walk the walk a breast cancer charity.
Diana joined the Board in February 2013.
Diana has over 25 years retail experience.
Prior to leading Conviviality Diana held senior roles at Waitrose including Director of Store Development and latterly Convenience Stores
Diana began her career at J Sainsbury plc where for over 13 years she held numerous senior roles.
Diana is not a member of any of the Board committees.
Diana is on the board of the Downing Strategic Investment Trust and the WSTA Wine and Spirit Trade Association.
Diana is also a Trustee of The Benevolent the drinks industry charity.
Andrew joined the Board in June 2014.
Andrew joined from Direct Wines where he held the position of Chief Financial Officer having previously held senior finance roles in the retail sector at Shop Direct Group and Carphone Warehouse Group plc.
Andrew is not a member of any of the Board committees.
Andrew has no external appointments.
Mark joined the Board in May 2016.
Jennifer Laing joined the Board on 9 May 2016 and resigned 30 April 2017 Mark joined from Booker Group PLC where he was Managing Director of Booker Direct.
Mark has over 35 years experience in the food and drinks industry and has served on the boards of Booker and Blueheath plc.
Mark is not a member of any Board committees.
Mark has no external appointments.
Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
Mark Aylwin Managing Director Conviviality Direct Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Ian Jones NonExecutive Director Martin Newman NonExecutive Director Martin joined the Board in February 2014.
Martins previous roles have included Head of Ecommerce for Burberry Group plc and Ted Baker plc Interim Director of Ecommerce for Pentland Brands plc as well as Head of Marketing for Harrods home shopping division.
Member of the Nomination and Remuneration
Martin is currently CEO of strategic multichannel consultancy Practicology and is a NonExecutive of White Stuff Limited.
Steve joined the Board in February 2014.
Steve has significant public company experience having been on the board of Headlam Group plc since 1991 where he has helped develop the business from its origin as a company with revenues of 21m to where it is today.
He served on the board of Synergy Health Plc as NonExecutive Chairman for eight years between 2002 and 2010.
Chairman of the Audit Committee and member of the Nomination and Remuneration
Steve Wilson is Chief Executive of Headlam Group plc.
Headlam is Europes largest floor coverings distributor and is listed on the London Stock Exchanges Main
Ian joined the Board in May 2015.
Ian was previously at Homebase Ltd where he was Retail Director for nine years.
During this period Ian was also Distribution and Supply Chain Director for five years.
Ian took a central role in repositioning Homebase as a home enhancement retailer and was responsible for 340 stores and 18000 retail personnel.
Ian is a member of the Remuneration Committee.
Ian Jones is a member of the Retail Advisory Committee for Marie Curie.
David joined the Board in August 2016.
David joined from Home Retail Group where he was Chief Operating Officer of
David has over 20 years retail experience and has held operating board positions over the last 10 years at Homebase and
David is not a member of any Board committees.
David has no external appointments.
Steve Wilson NonExecutive Director David Robinson Managing Director Conviviality Retail 44 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Corporate governance report Strong leadership team committed to driving growth As an AIMquoted company the Group is not required to produce a corporate governance report nor comply with the requirements of the UK Corporate Governance Code.
However the Directors are committed to providing information on an open basis and present their Corporate Governance Report below The Board of Directors The Board currently comprises one Non Executive Chairman one NonExecutive senior independent Director two independant NonExecutive Directors and four Executive Directors who are the Chief Executive the Chief Financial Officer the Managing Director of Conviviality Direct and the Managing Director of Conviviality Retail.
The NonExecutive Directors demonstrate a range of experience and sufficient calibre to bring independent judgement on issues of strategy financial performance resources and standards of conduct which are vital to the success of the Group.
The Board meets at regular intervals and is responsible for setting corporate strategy approving the annual budget reviewing financial performance agreeing the renewal of and any new bankingtreasury facilities approving major items of capital expenditure and reviewing and approving acquisitions.
The
Board is provided with appropriate information in advance of Board meetings to enable it to discharge its duties effectively.
The Chairman ensures that the Directors are able to take independent professional advice as required at the Companys expense.
The number of meetings of the Board and the attendance of Directors is set out to the right.
Number of meetings attended in FY17 D A R Adams 88 D Hunter 88 C A Humphreys 88 M T Aylwin 88 M D Newman 88 S G Wilson 78 I M W Jones D P Robinson appointed 1 August 2016 55 J C E Laing resigned 30 April 2017 Renumeration committee The Remuneration Committee is comprised of David Adams as Chairman Steve Wilson Martin Newman and Ian Jones.
The Committees policy and the details of each Directors remuneration are clearly explained in its report on pages 54 and in note 5 to the accounts.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements retiring Director shall if willing be deemed to have been reappointed unless it is expressly resolved not to fill the vacancy or a resolution for the reappointment of the Director is put to the meeting and lost.
Internal control The Board is responsible for establishing and maintaining the Groups system of internal control and for reviewing its effectiveness.
The system is designed to manage rather than eliminate the risk of failure to achieve the Groups strategic objectives and can only provide reasonable and not absolute assurance against material misstatement or loss.
The Board has overall responsibility for the Group and there is a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved for decision by the Board.
Each year the Board approves the annual budget.
Key risk areas are identified reviewed and monitored.
Performance is monitored against budget relevant action is taken throughout the year and quarterly rolling forecasts are prepared.
The reports reviewed by the Board include reports on operational as well as financial issues.
Capital and development expenditure is regulated by a budgetary process and authorisation levels.
For expenditure beyond specified levels detailed written proposals have to be submitted to the Board for approval.
Reviews are carried out after the purchase is complete.
The Board requires management to explain any major deviations from authorised capital proposals and to seek further sanction from the Board.
Due diligence work is carried out if a business is to be acquired.
Where the management of operational risk requires outside advice this is sought from expert consultants and the Group receives this in the areas of employment law and health and safety management.
The Board has reviewed the effectiveness of the Groups system of internal controls and has considered the need for an internal audit function.
At this stage the Board has decided that an internal audit function is not required as the Groups internal controls system in place is appropriate.
The Board will keep this under review.
The Board also reviews the Groups arrangements for its employees raising concerns in confidence about possible Audit committee The Audit Committee is comprised of Steve Wilson as Chairman and David Adams.
The meetings are also attended by invitation by the other Directors.
The Audit Committee has met on two occasions during the year and once since year end.
The Audit Committee has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Group is properly measured and reported on and for reviewing reports from the Groups auditors relating to the Groups accounting and financial reporting in all cases having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The Board has established a Risk Committee for which the Chairman is the Group Chief Financial Officer.
The Risk Committee identifies evaluates and manages risks faced by the
The Chairman of the Risk Committee reports the outcome of the Risk Committee meetings to the Plc Board.
The Audit Committee also oversees the relationship with the external auditors including approval of remuneration levels approval of terms of engagement and assessment of their independence and objectivity.
In so doing they take into account UK professional and regulatory requirements and the relationship with the auditors as a whole including the provision of nonaudit services.
KPMG LLP have been auditors to the Group since November 2015.
Nomination committee The Nomination Committee is comprised of David Adams as Chairman Ian Jones Steve Wilson and Martin Newman.
The Committee identifies and nominates for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies when they arise.
The Committee meets at least once a year.
At each AGM of the Company the articles of the Company require onethird of the Directors or the number nearest to but not exceeding onethird when the number of Directors is not a multiple of three to retire from office.
Each such Director may if eligible offer themselves for reelection.
The Company has adopted best practice by having all its directors stand for re appointment at each AGM.
If the Company at the meeting at which a Director retires does not fill the vacancy the 46 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 wrongdoing in financial reporting or other matters.
The Board ensures that such arrangements allow for independent investigation and followup action.
Board composition Relationship with shareholders Communication with shareholders is given high priority.
There is regular dialogue with major andor institutional shareholders including presentations after the Companys announcements of the halfyear and fullyear results in February and July respectively.
Presentations are also made to analysts at those times to present the Groups results and report on developments.
This assists with the promotion of knowledge of the Group in the investment marketplace and with shareholders.
The financial statements include a review of the business and future developments.
These financial statements and other corporate news relating to the Group are also available on the Groups website.
Following the halfyear and yearend presentations of results the Executive Directors report to the Board on the feedback received from analysts and shareholders.
In addition the Companys Nominated Advisor produces a feedback report from those meetings which is made available to all Directors.
The
Executive Directors also report to the Board on any meetings with shareholders or institutional investors that may take place at other times of the year.
Corporate governance report
The Board encourages shareholder participation at its Annual General Meeting where shareholders can be updated on the Groups activities and plans.
Going concern The Groups business activities together with the factors likely to affect its future development performance and position are set out in the Strategic report.
The financial position of the Group its cash flows liquidity position and borrowing facilities are described within the Financial Review section of the Strategic report also.
In addition note 18 to the financial statements includes the Groups objectives and policies of its financial risk management and details of its financial instruments and hedging activities and its exposure to credit risk and liquidity risk.
The Directors have prepared cash flow forecasts for the period until April 2019.
Based on these the Directors confirm that there are sufficient cash reserves to fund the business for the period under review and believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risk successfully.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Andrew Humphreys Chief Financial Officer 17 July 2017
Non  Executive
Female
Executive
7 1 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
Remuneration Committee report
Remuneration Committee Chairmans Letter Dear Shareholders In my role as acting Chair of the Remuneration Committee I am pleased to present on behalf of the Board the Remuneration Committees report for the year ended 30 April 2017.
Following
Jennifer Laing stepping down from the role and the Board during the year we are undertaking a search for a replacement.
To continue to improve the transparency of our reporting this year we have set out our remuneration report in the style of a main market listed company this includes a Remuneration Policy report describing the principles behind our approach to Directors Remuneration and an Annual Report setting out how the policy has been implemented in this past year and outlining our approach to the year ahead.
As an AIM listed company we are not required to submit either section of our report to a vote at the upcoming AGM.
However we are committed to consulting with our shareholders as evidenced by the consultations we have undertaken in this and in previous years.
As disclosed in last years report following the transformational acquisitions of Matthew Clark and Bibendum PLB Group the Committee sought to establish a clear Remuneration framework for directors.
During this year we have reviewed that framework and engaged in consultation with our major shareholders holding around 60% of the share capital of the business on two topics  executive bonus deferral and the introduction of an extra level of potential LTIP awarded in return for exceptional performance.
Feedback from the consultation exercise was taken into account in our approach going forward in these two areas of remuneration.
The key changes in the annual bonus deferral arrangements are a mandatory deferral of 25% of any bonus earned the opportunity to defer up to 100% at the executives discretion the introduction of an extra allocation of shares as an incentive to do so and the introduction of a three year holding period.
For the Long Term Incentive Plan we have introduced a super stretch target with a 20% higher award potential taking the CEO award to a potential 150% of base salary and other executive directors to 120%.
A two year holding period has been introduced on top of the three year vesting period.
Full details of Annual Bonus and Long Term Incentive Plans are outlined in the report.
No retrospective changes were made as part of these amendments.
We believe the changes made will act as a strong incentive for our talented executive team encourage greater retention and give greater alignment to shareholder interests.
We hope you find this report both clear and informative.
David Adams Acting Chair of the Remuneration Committee 17 July 2017 48 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee report
Continued
Remuneration Committee Membership The primary role of the Committee is to Determine and agree with the Board the framework of remuneration for the group of executives within its remit Ensure that effective performance management systems are in place to assess the performance of the executives and the company Set the remuneration for the Plc directors selected senior management and the company
Oversee the implementation and operation of shortterm and longterm incentive arrangements for senior management Monitor the overall cost of remuneration structures for the Plc directors selected senior management and the company Chairman and Agree the policy for authorising claims for expenses from the Chairman and Plc directors.
Remuneration Committee activities during the year were as follows Benchmarked executive directors total remuneration vs.
Determined executive directors salary increases for FY18 Reviewed and approved salary increases for other senior management for FY18 Reviewed and approved executive directors performance against annual objectives for FY17 and determined bonuses payable Determined executive directors annual bonus objectives for FY18 including opportunities and performance measures weightings and targets Determined executive directors longterm incentives for FY18 including opportunities and performance measures weightings and targets Conducted a detailed review of executive incentives and consulted with major shareholders on proposed refinements Prepared the Directors Remuneration Report.
The Committees terms of reference are set out on the Companys website.
During the year the Committee consisted of 5 NonExecutive Directors Jennifer Laing Remuneration Committee Chair was appointed on 9 May 2016 and stepped down from the Board on 30 April 2017.
She attended 4 out of 5 meetings during the year.
David Adams Company Chairman and acting Committee Chair attended 5 out of 5 meetings during the year.
Martin Newman attended 3 out of 5 meetings during the year.
Steve Wilson attended 3 out of 5 meetings during the year.
Ian Jones attended 4 out of 5 meetings during the year.
The Board undertakes an annual evaluation of the Committees performance to ensure continued ability to independently and objectively review remuneration at the Group with support from its advisers.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Annual Bonus Purpose Operation Opportunity Performance Metrics To focus management on delivery of annual business priorities which tie into the longterm strategic objectives of the Company.
Performance measures targets and weightings are set at the start of the year.
At the end of the year the Remuneration Committee determines the extent to which targets have been achieved.
At least 25% of any bonus earned must be delivered in shares deferred for three years.
Participants may voluntarily defer up to the remaining 75% of the bonus in shares and earn an uplift of 25% on voluntarily deferred shares subject to continued employment and satisfaction of a performance underpin over the deferral period to promote takeup and longterm executive share ownership.
Dividends will accrue on shares over the deferral period.
Malus on deferred shares and clawback on any bonus paid provisions apply in the event of serious financial misstatement miscalculation or gross misconduct for a period of two years following bonus payment.
The maximum annual bonus opportunity for executive directors is up to 100% of salary in cash or 118.75% if the bonus is deferred fully in shares for three years and the conditions for receiving the uplift are satisfied.
Detailed and weighted role specific measures are established annually for each Executive Director.
Performance on a linear basis from Threshold to Stretch with reference to these measures will determine actual Annual Bonus awards.
No Bonus is payable for performance below
With reference to the maximum Annual Bonus award opportunity for each Executive Director as a percentage of salary 100% of maximum is payable for the achievement of Stretch performance 60% of maximum for T arget performance and 30% for Threshold performance.
Performance is measured annually against a combination of financial measures and personal and strategic objectives.
Financial measures may include but are not limited to earnings per share free cash flow revenue EBITDA net debt etc.
Measures will be weighted appropriately each year according to business priorities.
Personal and strategic objectives are set annually to reinforce the Groups strategic plan.
Overall payout under the annual bonus may be subject to additional underpins determined by the Committee at the start of the financial year.
Vesting of the uplift shares on voluntarily deferral is subject to continued employment and satisfaction of a performance underpin determined by the Committee.
For the first cycle the underpin is the LTIP Threshold EPS requirement for the relevant 3year period.
The Committee has discretion in exceptional circumstances to adjust the formulaic bonus outcomes within the plan limits to ensure alignment of pay with performance and ensure fairness to both shareholders and participants.
Any such adjustments would be fully explained in the Directors
Remuneration Report.
Advisors
During the year the Committee appointed Kepler a brand of Mercer Kepler part of the MMC group of companies to provide independent advice on executive remuneration matters.
Kepler was appointed by the Committee following a competitive selection process through which the Committee has satisfied itself that Keplers advice is objective and independent.
Kepler is a signatory to the Code of Conduct for Remuneration Consultants in the UK details of which can be found on the Remuneration Consulting Groups website at site Services provided by Kepler included advice on remuneration packages for executives and assistance with a review of their incentive arrangements drafting the Directors Remuneration Report as well as other adhoc advice related to remuneration.
The Committee evaluates the support provided by Kepler annually and is comfortable that they do not have any connections with Conviviality that may impair their independence.
Other than advice on remuneration no other services were provided by Kepler or any other part of the MMC group of companies to the Group.
Directors remuneration policy In this section of the report we outline the policy for directors remuneration at Conviviality Plc.
The Committee has sought to establish a remuneration framework that is strongly aligned to the interests of shareholders and the needs values and strategy of the Group.
The framework recognises the Companys need to recruit retain and appropriately incentivise high calibre colleagues to deliver the strategy set by the Board.
50 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Base salary
Long Term Incentive Plan
Purpose Operation Opportunity Performance Metrics To recognise the individuals skills and experience and to provide a competitive base reward that helps us attract and retain a high calibre executive team to execute our strategy.
To provide appropriately competitive market benefits.
To drive sustained longterm performance that supports the creation of shareholder value.
To provide an opportunity for executives to build up income on retirement.
Base salaries are reviewed annually taking into account individual performance experience market competitiveness and average increases across the Group.
Benefits typically consist of a car allowance or provision of driver as appropriate life assurance and private medical insurance.
Other benefits may be offered including but not limited to travel relocation and employee shares schemes.
Under the longterm incentive plan LTIP annual awards of shares or nilcost options may be made to participants.
Award levels and performance conditions are reviewed before each award cycle to ensure they remain appropriate.
Awards made under the LTIP will have a performance period of at least three years.
Any vested shares will be subject to an additional holding period of up to two years.
Dividends will accrue over the vesting period and any holding period but will only be paid on shares which vest.
Nilcost options may be exercised between the date of vesting and within 10 years of the date of grant.
Malus and clawback provisions apply for a period of two years following LTIP vesting.
All Executives are either members of the pension scheme or receive a cash allowance in lieu of pension.
It is anticipated that percentage salary increases will generally be in line with employees across the Group.
Increases may be above this level if there is a material increase in the scale scope market rate or responsibilities of the role.
Benefits vary by role and individual circumstances eligibility and cost is reviewed periodically.
Awards under the LTIP may be up to 250% of salary in exceptional circumstances.
Annual awards will normally be 150% of salary for the CEO and 120% of salary for other executive directors.
No LTIP will vest for performance below Threshold 25% of maximum will vest at Threshold 50% at Target 83.3% at Stretch and 100% at SuperStretch with straight line vesting between each.
Details of the EPS targets to be used in the FY18  FY20 LTIP grants are included on page 57.
Executive directors receive a pension contribution of up to 15% of salary or an equivalent cash allowance.
Individual and business performance are considerations in setting base salary.
None
Vesting of LTIP awards is subject to continued employment and performance against metrics defined by the Committee at the start of each award cycle.
Overall vesting under the LTIP may be subject to additional underpins determined by the Committee prior to the grant of each award.
For FY18 the LTIP will be based on EPS growth.
Vesting is also subject to the Committee being satisfied that the recorded EPS outcome reflects underlying business performance taking into account factors including the Companys TSR performance.
Details of the targets to be used in future LTIP grants are included in the Annual Report on Remuneration on page 55.
None
Remuneration Committee report
Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Notes to the policy table Shareholding guidelines Executive directors are expected to build up a shareholding of 100% of salary 200% of salary for the CEO within five years of appointment or the introduction of this guideline whichever is later to help align executive shareholders interests.
Details of executive directors current shareholdings are provided in the Annual Report on Remuneration.
Legacy schemes The Committee will honour the payment of any outstanding schemes to executive directors which were granted prior to the implementation of this policy or before the director joined the Board including but not limited to the following legacy schemes for current executive directors Joint Share Ownership JSOP In respect of vested options granted by Conviviality Plc in respect of shares which are held by Bargain Booze EBT Trustees Limited EBT a wholly owned subsidiary of the Group such shares were made subject of a Joint Share Ownership JSOP arrangement whereby the applicable executive and the EBT jointly own the relevant shares with certain rights accruing to the relevant executive including the right to dividends declared on such shares.
This arrangement applies to 896809 shares held by the EBT of which 826809 are jointly held by Diana Hunter and 70000 are jointly held by Andrew Humphreys.
No further joint share ownership arrangements are anticipated to be made to executive directors.
Employee Share Option Plan ESOP Prior to the introduction of the LTIP awards were made under the ESOP to executive directors.
Awards were subject to performance and continued employment.
Andrew Humphreys has three ESOP awards that are outstanding performance targets for which have been met in full and which are due to vest in September 2017.
Following the introduction of the LTIP no further awards are anticipated to be made to executive directors under the ESOP.
Performance measure selection and approach to target setting The measures used under the annual bonus plan are selected annually to reflect business priorities.
Financial targets are set with reference to market expectations and internal budgets.
The Committee selected Earnings Per Share EPS for the LTIP and the uplift on voluntary bonus deferral as it is wellaligned with shareholders interests and can be translated into measures which provide good lineofsight to all LTIP participants.
The discretionary underpin on LTIP vesting which takes into account factors including the Companys TSR performance further reinforces alignment with shareholders.
EPS targets are reviewed in advance of grant and take account of a number of internal and external reference points including Conviviality plcs strategic plan and broker forecasts.
Remuneration policy for other employees Convivialitys approach to annual salary reviews is consistent across the Group with consideration given to the level of accountability experience individual performance plus salary comparisons internally and externally.
Over 2000 employees are eligible to participate in an annual bonus scheme with similar metrics to those used for the executive directors.
Approximately 40 Senior Managers are eligible to participate in the LTIP.
Performance conditions are broadly consistent for all participants.
The Company has now extended the invitation to all employees with more than 6 months service to participate in a Share Incentive Plan SIP.
There are 3 elements to this plan Partnership Shares whereby employees can use pretax salary to purchase shares Matching Shares whereby Partnership Shares are matched for free by the Company Performance Shares whereby employees can receive shares through an annual scheme based on Company performance.
52 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee report
Continued
Service contracts and treatment for leavers and change of control Executive Director service contracts including arrangements for early termination are carefully considered by the Committee.
Each of the executive directors has a rolling service contract requiring 12 months notice of termination on either side.
Such contracts contain no specific provision for compensation for loss of office other than an obligation to pay for any notice period waived by the Company where pay is defined as salary only.
Each of the executive directors has agreed to confidentiality undertakings without limitation as to time and have agreed to non compete nonsolicitation and nondealing restrictive covenants that apply for a period consistent with individual notice periods following termination of employment with the Group.
The Company may reimburse reasonable legal costs in connection with a termination of employment if the Committee considers it appropriate.
Executive Director service contracts are available to view at the Companys registered office.
When considering exit payments the Committee reviews incentive outcomes to ensure they are fair to both shareholders and participants.
On leaving current year annual bonus and unvested LTIP awards normally lapse unless a participant is considered a good leaver in which case bonuses andor unvested LTIP awards will be paid only to the extent that performance conditions set at the beginning of the period have been met.
Any resulting incentive payments will be pro rated for time served during the year.
Deferred bonus shares paid in respect of a previous year would normally be released at the end of the normal deferral period.
Any dividends and uplift shares on voluntary deferral would normally lapse unless the individual is a good leaver in which case the dividends and uplift shares would vest at the usual time subject to performance and time prorating with Committee discretion to treat otherwise.
The Committee retains discretion to accelerate vesting in exceptional circumstances e. has been met at that time.
In the event of a change of control awards may alternatively be exchanged for new equivalent awards in the acquirer if appropriate.
The final treatment of any award remains subject to the Committees discretion.
Date of
D Hunter 1 February 2013 C A Humphreys 16 June 2014 M T Aylwin 9 May 2016 D P Robinson 1 August 2016 Good leaver is defined as a participant ceasing to be employed by the Group by reason of death ill health injury disability retirement in agreement with the Company transfer of his office or employment outside the Group or for any other reason if the Committee so decides Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements External Appointments With the approval of the Board in each case and subject to the overriding requirements of the Group executive directors may accept external appointments as nonexecutive directors of other companies and retain any fees received.
NonExecutive Director remuneration Subject to annual reelection by shareholders NonExecutive Directors are appointed for an initial term of 3 years.
Subsequent terms of 3 years may be granted.
The appointment and re appointment and the remuneration of NonExecutive Directors are matters reserved for the full
The appointments are terminable by either party with one months written notice with the exception of the Chairman for whom it is three months.
The NonExecutive Directors are not eligible to participate in the Companys performance related bonus plan longterm incentive plans or pension arrangements.
Full terms and conditions for each of the NonExecutive Directors are available at the companys registered office during normal business hours and will be available at the AGM prior to the meeting and during the meeting.
Details of the policy on fees paid to our NonExecutive Directors are set out in the table at the bottom of Page 55.
Date of NonExecutive Director
D A R Adams 30 July 2013 J C E Laing 9 May 2016 M D Newman 1 February 2014 S G Wilson 1 February 2014 I M W Jones 11 May 2015
Function Operation Opportunity Performance Metrics To attract and retain Non Executive Directors of the highest calibre with broad commercial and other experience relevant to the
Fee levels are reviewed annually with any adjustments typically effective 1 May in the year following review.
The fees paid to the Chairman are determined by the Committee whilst the fees of the NonExecutive Directors are determined by the Board excluding the NED or group of NEDs whose fees are being determined.
Additional fees may be paid for additional responsibilities such as acting as Senior Independent Director and as Chairman of any of the Boards
Fee levels are benchmarked against similar roles at comparable companies.
Time commitment and responsibility are taken into account when reviewing fee levels.
NonExecutive Director fee increases are applied in line with the outcome of the annual fee review.
NonExecutive Directors do not participate in any incentive schemes 54 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee report
Continued
Annual Report on Remuneration
Single total figure of remuneration for Executive Directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each Executive Director of the company for the financial year ended 30 April 2017 and the previous year representing payments received in respect of the period for which each individual was a director of the company.
Diana Hunter Andrew Humphreys Mark Aylwin David Robinson FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 Salary 45tel375  304 Taxable benefits Annual bonus Longterm incentives Pension benefit Total 96tel677  606 After joining the Group in January 2016 Mark Aylwin was appointed as an Executive Director on 9 May 2016.
The remuneration in the table above refers to Mark Aylwins salary and benefits from 1 May 2016.
David Robinson joined the Group on 1 July 2016 and was appointed as an Executive Director on 1 August 2016.
The remuneration in the table above refers to David Robinsons salary and benefits from 1 July 2016.
Taxable benefits for FY17 and FY16 consist primarily of car allowance of 11600 p. time in office.
Other benefits included access to a company driver primarily for Diana Hunter private health care and life assurance.
Annual bonus payments for performance during FY17 were received by all Executive Directors details are included in Incentive outcomes for FY17 below.
As bonuses were in excess of 50% of maximum opportunity 50% of FY17 bonuses were deferred into shares for 1 year.
Details for FY16 bonuses are provided in last years Remuneration Committee report.
No LTIP awards were due to vest in FY17.
Pension contributions or payments in lieu of pension contributions in FY17 were 15% of salary for all executive directors 12% for Diana Hunter and none for Andrew Humphreys in FY16.
Incentive outcomes for FY17 Annual Bonus Executive directors annual bonuses for FY17 were based on a combination of financial performance delivery of synergies and personal objectives.
Maximum annual bonus opportunities were 100% of salary for the CEO 85% of salary for the CFO and 75% of salary for other executive directors.
For the FY17 bonus no bonus is payable for achieving below Threshold 30% is payable for achieving Threshold increasing on a straightline basis to 60% of bonus for achieving Target and 100% for achieving Maximum.
Any bonus payment is contingent on achieving threshold EPS performance.
Executive directors bonuses were based 50% on financial measures 25% on tailored objectives linked to the delivery of synergies and 25% on personal objectives.
Financial measures included EPS and free cash flow based on performance during FY17 the Committee determined that 95% of this element of the bonus would be paid.
Subsequently executive directors bonus payments as a percentage of maximum opportunity were 95% for Diana Hunter 95% of salary 76% for Andrew Humphreys 65% of salary 82% for Mark Aylwin 62% of salary and 88% for David Robinson 66% of salary.
As described in last years Remuneration Report as FY17 bonuses exceeded 50% of maximum executive directors are required to defer 50% of their bonus into shares for 1 year.
Remuneration Committee report
Continued
Annual Report on Remuneration
Single total figure of remuneration for Executive Directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each Executive Director of the company for the financial year ended 30 April 2017 and the previous year representing payments received in respect of the period for which each individual was a director of the company.
Diana Hunter Andrew Humphreys Mark Aylwin David Robinson FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 Salary 45tel375  304 Taxable benefits Annual bonus Longterm incentives Pension benefit Total 96tel677  606 After joining the Group in January 2016 Mark Aylwin was appointed as an Executive Director on 9 May 2016.
The remuneration in the table above refers to Mark Aylwins salary and benefits from 1 May 2016.
David Robinson joined the Group on 1 July 2016 and was appointed as an Executive Director on 1 August 2016.
The remuneration in the table above refers to David Robinsons salary and benefits from 1 July 2016.
Taxable benefits for FY17 and FY16 consist primarily of car allowance of 11600 p. time in office.
Other benefits included access to a company driver primarily for Diana Hunter private health care and life assurance.
Annual bonus payments for performance during FY17 were received by all Executive Directors details are included in Incentive outcomes for FY17 below.
As bonuses were in excess of 50% of maximum opportunity 50% of FY17 bonuses were deferred into shares for 1 year.
Details for FY16 bonuses are provided in last years Remuneration Committee report.
No LTIP awards were due to vest in FY17.
Pension contributions or payments in lieu of pension contributions in FY17 were 15% of salary for all executive directors 12% for Diana Hunter and none for Andrew Humphreys in FY16.
Incentive outcomes for FY17 Annual Bonus Executive directors annual bonuses for FY17 were based on a combination of financial performance delivery of synergies and personal objectives.
Maximum annual bonus opportunities were 100% of salary for the CEO 85% of salary for the CFO and 75% of salary for other executive directors.
For the FY17 bonus no bonus is payable for achieving below Threshold 30% is payable for achieving Threshold increasing on a straightline basis to 60% of bonus for achieving Target and 100% for achieving Maximum.
Any bonus payment is contingent on achieving threshold EPS performance.
Executive directors bonuses were based 50% on financial measures 25% on tailored objectives linked to the delivery of synergies and 25% on personal objectives.
Financial measures included EPS and free cash flow based on performance during FY17 the Committee determined that 95% of this element of the bonus would be paid.
Subsequently executive directors bonus payments as a percentage of maximum opportunity were 95% for Diana Hunter 95% of salary 76% for Andrew Humphreys 65% of salary 82% for Mark Aylwin 62% of salary and 88% for David Robinson 66% of salary.
As described in last years Remuneration Report as FY17 bonuses exceeded 50% of maximum executive directors are required to defer 50% of their bonus into shares for 1 year.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements End of Type of Date of  of Face % vest at performance Executive Director award award shares value Threshold period D Hunter Nilcost option 24 August 2016 502232 1125000 30% 1 May 2019 C A Humphreys Nilcost option 24 August 2016 133929 300000 30% 1 May 2019 M T Aylwin Nilcost option 24 August 2016 167411 375000 30% 1 May 2019 D P Robinson Nilcost option 24 August 2016 162946 365000 30% 1 May 2019 Based on share price over three trading days immediately preceding date of grant of 2.24.
Face value based on equivalent award size of 250% of salary for Diana Hunter and 100% of salary for all other executive directors.
Longterm incentive LTIP As outlined in last years remuneration report awards were granted to executive directors and members of the senior management team.
These awards were made in August 2016 and the performance period ends in May 2019.
Scheme interests awarded in FY17 Details of the awards made to executive directors are outlined in the table below Single total figure of remuneration for NonExecutive Directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each Non Executive Director of the company for the financial year ended 30 April 2017 and the previous year representing payments received in respect of the period for which each individual was a director of the company.
The NonExecutive Directors fees remain unchanged for the period from 1 May 2017.
Exit payments made in the year No exit payments were made during the year.
Payments to past directors No payments were made to past directors during the year.
David Adams Martin Newman Steve Wilson Ian Jones Jennifer Laing FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 Base fee Additional fees
Jennifer Laing joined the Board on 9 May 2016 and stepped down from the Board on 30 April 2017.
Additional fees of 5000 are paid for undertaking each of the roles of Senior Independent Director and Chair of the Audit Committee Steve Wilson and Chair of the Remuneration Committee Jennifer Laing.
End of Type of Date of  of Face % vest at performance Executive Director award award shares value Threshold period D Hunter Nilcost option 24 August 2016 502232 1125000 30% 1 May 2019 C A Humphreys Nilcost option 24 August 2016 133929 300000 30% 1 May 2019 M T Aylwin Nilcost option 24 August 2016 167411 375000 30% 1 May 2019 D P Robinson Nilcost option 24 August 2016 162946 365000 30% 1 May 2019 Based on share price over three trading days immediately preceding date of grant of 2.24.
Face value based on equivalent award size of 250% of salary for Diana Hunter and 100% of salary for all other executive directors.
Longterm incentive LTIP As outlined in last years remuneration report awards were granted to executive directors and members of the senior management team.
These awards were made in August 2016 and the performance period ends in May 2019.
Scheme interests awarded in FY17 Details of the awards made to executive directors are outlined in the table below Single total figure of remuneration for NonExecutive Directors The table below sets out a single figure for the total remuneration received by each Non Executive Director of the company for the financial year ended 30 April 2017 and the previous year representing payments received in respect of the period for which each individual was a director of the company.
The NonExecutive Directors fees remain unchanged for the period from 1 May 2017.
Exit payments made in the year No exit payments were made during the year.
Payments to past directors No payments were made to past directors during the year.
David Adams Martin Newman Steve Wilson Ian Jones Jennifer Laing FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 FY17 FY16 Base fee Additional fees
Jennifer Laing joined the Board on 9 May 2016 and stepped down from the Board on 30 April 2017.
Additional fees of 5000 are paid for undertaking each of the roles of Senior Independent Director and Chair of the Audit Committee Steve Wilson and Chair of the Remuneration Committee Jennifer Laing.
56 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Remuneration Committee report
Continued
Implementation of Executive Directors remuneration policy for FY18 Base salary Base salaries are reviewed annually with reference to salary levels for similar roles of comparable size and complexity in the market taking into account the individual contribution of each executive director.
On this basis the Committee approved the following base salary increases for FY18.
Percentage
Executive Director FY17 base salary FY18 base salary increase D Hunter 450000 456750 1.5% C A Humphreys 300000 304500 1.5% M T Aylwin 375000 380625 1.5% D P Robinson 365000 370475 1.5% Pension and Benefits Executive Directors will continue to receive a pension contribution of 15% of salary or an equivalent cash allowance.
In addition Executive Directors are eligible for a car or equivalent allowance private medical insurance and life assurance.
Annual Bonus For FY18 executive directors annual bonus opportunities as a % of salary are unchanged.
Performance will be measured 50% against financial measures including sales EBITDA EPS free cash flow and net debt.
For Diana Hunter and Andrew Humphreys financial measures will be based on Group targets and for Mark Aylwin and David Robinson they will be based on an equal combination of Group and relevant Business Unit targets.
25% of awards will be based on individual targets focused on ensuring the future performance and delivery of the change programme and the remaining 25% will be based on personal objectives.
The overall payout of the bonus will continue to be subject to achieving Threshold EPS for the Group.
For FY18 a change is being made to bonus deferral arrangements 25% of any bonuses paid in respect of FY18 will be mandatorily deferred in shares for three years.
Executive directors may voluntarily choose to defer up to the remaining 75% in shares and earn a 25% uplift on voluntarily deferred shares subject to continued employment and achievement of the LTIP Threshold EPS for the Group for the relevant 3year period see below for details.
Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP A grant will be made by the Autumn of 2017 to approximately 40 Senior Managers in total including the four executive directors.
As described earlier in this Report the Committee reviewed the maximum longterm incentive opportunity available to executive directors in normal circumstances and determined to increase this by 20% to a typical award of 150% of salary for the CEO and 120% of salary for the other executive directors for additional performance.
In order to receive the additional 20% uplift executive directors will be required to achieve a superstretch EPS requirement to ensure that the overall cost to the company is more than funded through the higher performance required for the award.
Awards will vest after three years in accordance with the performance conditions outlined in the table below and the Committee being satisfied that TSR performance has been satisfactory over the period.
To ensure that the increase in award size is funded through higher performance the Committee has introduced a new superstretch performance level for maximum vesting of awards.
No award will vest below Threshold performance and vesting will increase on a straight line basis between defined levels of performance.
Any vested awards will be subject to an additional twoyear holding period.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements % of LTIP Earnings vesting Vesting schedule per share % of superstretch
26.49p 25%
28.01p 50%
31.65p 83%
35.76p 100%
Directors interests A table setting out the beneficial interests of the Directors in the share capital of the Company as at 30 April 2017 is set out below.
Since 30 April 2017 there have been no changes in the Directors interests in shares.
Date of Number at Number at appointment 30 April 1 May
D Hunter 1 February 2013 2829294 826809 D A R Adams 30 July 2013 58163 33163 M D Newman 1 February 2014 34164 18933 S G Wilson 1 February 2014 125000 100000 C A Humphreys 16 June 2014 101468 92666 I M W Jones 11 May 2015 17317 M T Aylwin 9 May 2016 133170 J C E Laing 9 May 2016 30 April 2017 11401 D P Robinson 1 August 2016 20393 3330370 1071571 Directors interests for Diana Hunter Andrew Humphreys and Mark Aylwin include vested but unexercised options The Directors interests in share options are as follows
Number average Exercise Number Number forfeited Number market
Date of exercise Expiry p per 1 May during during during exercise at 30 Director Grant date date share 2016 the year the year the year pence April 2017 D Hunter 26022013 31072013 25022023 2.7 826809     826809 31072013 31072016 30072023 100.0 2001000     2001000 C A Humphreys 18092014 18092017 17092024 170.5 263929     263929 18092014 18092015 17092024 0.0 70000     70000 08092015 09092018 07092025 155.0 149517     149517 M T Aylwin 04012016 04012017 04012026 0.01 60000 60000    60000 D P Robinson 01072016 01072017 01072026 0.01      36667 The executive directors have also been granted awards under the LTIP as described on page 55.
58 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Directors report The Directors present their report and consolidated financial statements for the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017
The Directors present their Report and Consolidated Financial Statements for the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017.
Date of appointment Director resignationtel 2016 2017 D Hunter 1 February 2013 C A Humphreys 16 June 2014 D A R Adams 30 July 2013 M Newman 1 February 2014 S G Wilson 1 February 2014 I M W Jones 11 May 2015 M T Aylwin 9 May 2016 J C E Laing 9 May 2016 30 April 2017 D P Robinson 1 July 2016 Insurance cover is in force in respect of the personal liabilities which may be incurred by Directors of the Company in the course of their service with the Group as permitted by the Companies Act 2006.
Share listing The Companys ordinary shares were admitted to and traded on AIM a market operated by the London Stock Exchange with effect from 31 July 2013.
On 20 May 2016 the Company issued 15609757 new ordinary shares at 2.05 to raise 32m gross.
The proceeds from the issue of such shares was used to partfund the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group on 20 May 2016.
As at 30 April 2017 the Companys share capital was 172642934 ordinary shares of 0.0002 each.
Further information regarding the Companys share capital is set out in note 21 to the consolidated financial statements.
Capital structure The acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group Limited on 20 May 2016 resulted in a significant change in the Groups capital structure.
As at the 30 April 2017 the Group had term loans of 95.8m and working capital facilities of 160.0m.
At 30 April 2017 the amount drawn down against the working capital facilities totaled 10.7m.
The term loans and the working capital facilities are provided by a bank syndicate comprising RBS HSBC and Barclays.
Additional details of these facilities are provided in note 17 of the consolidated financial statements.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
The Directors acknowledge the importance of the principles set out in the UK Corporate Governance Code 2012.
The UK Corporate Governance Code 2012 is not compulsory for AIMquoted companies and has not been complied with.
However the Directors apply the principles as considered appropriate given the size and nature of the Company in accordance with the UK Corporate Governance Code 2012 and the QCA Corporate Governance Code for Small and MidSize Quoted Companies 2013.
On 9 May 2016 the Board was further strengthened by the appointment of Mark Aylwin Jennifer Laing and on 1 July 2016 by the appointment of David Robinson.
Jennifer Laing resigned during the period and ceased to be a director on 30 April 2017 and a replacement is currently being sought.
The Company intends to operate with nine Directors of which four are Executive Directors and five will be Non Executive Directors.
The Board reflects a blend of different experience and backgrounds see Directors profiles on pages 42 and 43 and meets every 6 weeks to consider strategy performance and the effectiveness of internal controls amongst other things.
At each AGM of the Company the Companys articles of association require that onethird of the Directors or the number nearest to but not exceeding onethird when the number of Directors is not a multiple of three shall retire from office and stand for reappointment by shareholders however the Company has elected to adopt best practice and have all directors stand for reappointment at each annual general meeting.
If the Company at the meeting at which a Director retires does not fill the vacancy the retiring Director shall if willing be deemed to have been reappointed unless it is expressly resolved not to fill the vacancy or a resolution for the reappointment of the Director is put to the meeting and lost.
The Audit Committee is chaired by Steve Wilson and has primary responsibility for monitoring the quality of internal controls ensuring that the financial performance of the Group is properly measured and reported on and reviewing reports from the Companys auditor relating to the Groups accounting and internal controls in all cases having due regard to the interests of the shareholders.
The
Committee meets at least twice a year with David Adams being the other Audit Committee member.
The Audit Committee has established a Risk Committee chaired by the Group Chief Financial Officer to manage the Groups risks and report to the Plc Board.
The Nomination Committee is chaired by David Adams and identifies and nominates for the approval of the Board candidates to fill Board vacancies as and when they arise.
The
Committee meets at least once a year with Ian Jones Steve Wilson and Martin Newman being the other Committee members.
The Remuneration Committee was chaired by Jennifer Laing from 12 September 2017 until her resignation on 30 April 2017 at which point David Adams became acting Chairman of the Remuneration Committee.
The Remuneration Committee reviews the performance of the Executive Directors and determines their terms and conditions of service including their remuneration and the grant of options having due regard to the interests of shareholders.
The
Committee meets at least once a year with Ian Jones Martin Newman and Steve Wilson being the other Committee members.
Executive Directors are invited to attend Committee meetings as required from time to time.
The Directors understand the importance of complying with the AIM Rules relating to Directors dealings and have established a share dealing code which is appropriate for an AIMquoted company.
Control environment The Directors are responsible for the internal controls of the Group and have established a framework intended to provide reasonable but not absolute assurance against material financial misstatement or loss.
An annual budget is prepared against which specific objectives and targets are set.
This budget is reviewed and approved by the Board on a regular basis with trading activity monitored weekly and internal management accounts prepared and reviewed monthly with comparisons against the latest plan and prior year.
The Group will continue to review and develop operating documentation and controls as the business develops.
60 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Health and safety The Group is committed to high standards in health safety and environmental performance.
It is the Groups policy to abide by all laws directives and regulations relevant to its operations and to act in a manner so as to minimise the effects of its operations on the environment.
The Group seeks to provide safe places and systems of work plant and machinery and handling of materials and ensures appropriate information instruction and training is in place.
The Group has procedures relating to the appropriate reporting and monitoring of accidents incidents and dangerous occurrences and employees are encouraged to identify and report on any potential policy breach to ensure preventative actions are taken to avoid any unsafe work practices.
Emphasis is placed on all employees having a responsibility to maintain a safe working environment.
Financial risk management Financial risk is managed through a formal quarterly update by the Board and informally on an ongoing basis.
The key risks relating to the Group are outlined in more detail in note 18 to the consolidated financial statements.
Regulatory
The Groups Risk Committee is responsible for monitoring controlling and ensuring all regulatory obligations are complied with on an ongoing basis.
Responsible retailing The Group acknowledges that alcohol misuse and underage drinking are issues causing real concern.
The Group takes these matters very seriously and is committed to the responsible retailing of alcohol in order to mitigate their impact.
The Group is a supporter of Drinkaware the government sponsored trust that promotes responsible drinking and in addition the Group operates the Challenge 25 scheme to ensure that minors are not able to purchase alcohol in our stores.
Responsible retailing is reenforced through awareness training for both our employees and Franchisees.
We insist on high levels of training for Franchisees and regular store audits.
We believe that our independent Franchisee retailers take their responsibilities very seriously and through their excellent local community links are in a strong position to exercise responsible retailing effectively.
Directors report Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Substantial shareholdings At 30 June 2017 the Company had been notified of the following interests of over 3% of the issued unused share capital Number Percentage of shares of shareholding Old Mutual 14935192 8.65 River and Mercantile Asset Managment 12423213 7.19 Octopus Investments Limited 11549287 6.69 Premier Asset Management 9542500 5.52 AXA SA 9439676 5.47 Hargreave Hale Ltd Stockbrokers 8186615 4.74 Miton Group plc 7507144 4.35 Close Brothers Group 7421068 4.30 Unicorn Asset Managment Limited 6950000 4.02 Jupiter Investment Managment Holdings 5492000 3.18 Janus Henderson Group plc 5182467 3.00 Future developments Future developments are included in the Chief Executive Officers Statement on pages 6 to 17.
The Directors Report as set out on pages 58 to 61 has been approved by the Board.
By order of the Board Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
17 July 2017 62 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Statement of Directors responsibilities In respect of the Annual Report the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the financial statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report the Strategic Report the Directors Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare Group and parent company financial statements for each financial year.
As required by the AIM rules of the London Stock Exchange they are required to prepare Group financial statements in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards IFRS as adopted by the European Union and applicable law and have elected to prepare parent company financial statements on the same basis.
Under company law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and the parent company and of their profit or loss that period.
In preparing each of the Group and parent company financial statements the Directors are required to Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently Make judgments and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent State whether they have been prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Group and the parent company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to show and explain the parent companys transactions and disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the parent company and enable them to ensure that the financial statements comply with the Companies Act 2006.
They are also responsible for taking such steps as are reasonably open to them to safeguard the assets of the Group and to prevent and detect fraud and other irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the corporate and financial information including on the companys web site.
Legislation in the UK governing the preparation and dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
By order of the Board Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
17 July 2017 Auditor and disclosure of information to auditor Each Director in office at the date of approval of this report has confirmed that So far as heshe is aware there is no relevant audit information of which the Companys auditors are unaware and Heshe has taken all reasonable steps that heshe ought to have taken as a Director in order to make himselfherself aware of any relevant audit information and to establish that the Companys auditors are aware of that information.
In accordance with Section 489 of the Companies Act 2006 a resolution will be proposed at the AGM that KPMG LLP will be reappointed as auditors.
By order of the Board Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
17 July 2017 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Independent auditors report To the members of Conviviality Plc We have audited the financial statements of Conviviality Plc for the year ended 30 April 2017 as set out on pages 64 to 113.
The financial reporting framework that has been applied in their preparation is applicable law and International Financial Reporting Standards IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as regards the parent company financial statements as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006.
This report is made solely to the Companys members as a body in accordance with Chapter 3 of Part 16 of the Companies Act 2006.
Our audit work has been undertaken so that we might state to the Companys members those matters we are required to state to them in an auditors report and for no other purpose.
To the fullest extent permitted by law we do not accept or assume responsibility to anyone other than the Company and the Companys members as a body for our audit work for this report or for the opinions we have formed.
Respective responsibilities of Directors and auditor As explained more fully in the Directors responsibilities statement on page 62 the Directors are responsible for the preparation of the financial statements and for being satisfied that they give a true and fair view.
Our
Auditing UK and Ireland.
Those standards require us to comply with the Auditing Practices Boards Ethical Standards for Auditors.
Scope of the audit of the financial statements A description of the scope of an audit of financial statements is provided on the Financial Reporting Councils website at www. rc. auditscopeukprivate.
Opinion of the financial statements In our opinion The financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of the Groups and of the parent companys affairs as at 30 April 2017 and of the Groups profit for the year then ended The Group financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU The parent company financial statements have been properly prepared in accordance with IFRSs as adopted by the EU and as applied in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act 2006 and The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Companies Act 2006.
Opinion on other matters prescribed by the Companies Act 2006 In our opinion the information given in the Strategic report and the Directors report for the financial period for which the financial statements are prepared is consistent with the financial statements.
Matters on which we are required to report by exception We have nothing to report in respect of the following matters where the Companies Act 2006 requires us to report to you if in our opinion Adequate accounting records have not been kept by the parent company or returns adequate for our audit have not been received from branches not visited by us or The parent company financial statements are not in agreement with the accounting records and returns or Certain disclosures of Directors remuneration specified by law are not made or We have not received all the information and explanations we require for our audit.
Nicola Quayle Senior Statutory Auditor for and on behalf of KPMG LLP Statutory Auditor Chartered Accountants 1 St Peters Square Manchester M2 3AE 17 July 2017 64 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income For the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017 2016 For the 53 weeks ended 1 May 2016
Before Exceptional Before Exceptional exceptional items exceptional items Restated items note 4b Total items note 4b Totalteltel
Continuing operations Revenue 2 and 3 1560081  1560081 841021  841021 Cost of sales 1353012  1353012 739831  739831 Gross profit 207069  207069 101190  101190 Operating expenses 4 169369 9788 179157 79753 9855 89608 Operating profit 4 37700 9788 27912 21437 9855 11582 Finance income 6 62  62 24  24 Finance expense 6 5283 229 5512 2526  2526 Profit before income tax 32479 10017 22462 18935 9855 9080 Income tax 7 6105 2089 4016 4159 349 3810 Profit for the financial period 26374 7928 18446 14776 9506 5270 Other comprehensive income Items that may be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss Cashflow hedges Effective portion of changes in fair value Tax on effective portion of changes in fair value Other comprehensive income net of tax Total comprehensive income 25956 7928 18028 14690 9506 5184 Earnings per ordinary share Basic 8 Diluted 8 The results for the financial period are derived from continuing operations.
All of the profit for the financial period and total comprehensive income are attributable to the owners of the parent in both the current year and the prior year.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Consolidated statement of financial position As at 30 April 2017
2017 2016 Note 000 000 Noncurrent assets Property plant and equipment 10 17610 15249 Goodwill 11 210994 177491 Intangible assets 12 73861 66158 Deferred taxation asset 19 6051 3198 Trade and other receivables 14 11579 6424 Total noncurrent assets 320095 268520 Current assets Inventories 13 93840 61825 Trade and other receivables 14 220699 151928 Cash and cash equivalents 15 10424 9540
356 1236 Total current assets 325319 224529 Total assets 645414 493049 Current liabilities Trade and other payables 16 299210 183253 Borrowings 17 24651 28137
Current taxation payable 1759 2815 Provisions 20 1015 449 Total current liabilities 328550 214654 Noncurrent liabilities
Borrowings 17 81519 67510 Deferred taxation liability 19 10524 11165 Trade and other payables 16 2859 6159 Provisions 20 5517 10736 Total noncurrent liabilities 101027 95570 Total liabilities 429577 310224 Net assets 215837 182825 Shareholders equity Share capital 21 78 75 Share premium 22 196142 164342 Share based payment and other reserves 22 5311 3847 Retained earnings 14306 14561 Total equity 215837 182825 These financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 17 July 2017.
Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
Conviviality Plc Company registration number  66 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Consolidated statement of changes in equity For the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017
Share Share payment Other Retained Total capital premium reserve reserves earnings equity
Balance as at 26 April 2015 57 34020 2028 26 16611 52690 Profit for the financial period 5270 5270 Cash flow hedge reserve for interest rate swap 22    86  86 Total comprehensive income for the period 86 5270 5184 Transactions with owners Issue of new ordinary shares 21 18 130322    130340 Transfer of sharebased payment charge Dividends 9     7414 7414 Sharebased payment charge 27   1661   1661 Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge 19   364   364 Total transactions with owners 18 130322 1931  7320 124951 Balance as at 1 May 2016 75 164342 3959 112 14561 182825 Profit for the financial period 18446 18446 Cashflow hedge reserve for interest rate swap 22    522  522 Deferred tax on interest rate swap 19 and 22    104  104 Total comprehensive income for the period 418 18446 18028 Transactions with owners Issue of new ordinary shares 21 3 31800    31803 Transfer of sharebased payment charge 22   1213  1213 Dividends 9     19914 19914 Disposal of shares in Employee Benefit Trust Sharebased payment charge 27   2724   2724 Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge 19   249   249 Total transactions with owners 3 31800 1760 122 18701 14984 Balance as at 30 April 2017 78 196142 5719 408 14306 215837 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Consolidated statement of cash flows For the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017
2017 2016 Note 000 000 Cash flows from operating activities Cash generated from operations 23 78276 27250 Interest paid 5348 2898 Income tax paid 8251 2524 Net cash generated from operating activities 64677 21828 Cash flows from investing activities Purchases of property plant and equipment 10 10090 7710 Purchases of intangible assets 12 9668 4158 Proceeds from sale of property plant and equipment 6338 240 Interest received Purchase of subsidiary undertakings net of cash acquired 28 43526 200412 Net debt and debt like items on purchase of subsidiary undertaking 28 19147 11085 Exceptional costs relating to acquisition and integration of subsidiary undertakings 9788 8956 Purchase of other business combinations 11 and 28 396 796 Proceeds from sale of other business combinations 28  195 Net cash used in investing activities 86215 232669 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid 9 19914 7414 Repayments of borrowings 19589 16230 Proceeds from sale of shares 21 31803 130340 Proceeds from sale of shares held by Employee Benefit Trust 22 122 Proceeds from term loans 30000 80000 Net cash proceeds from financing activities 22422 219156 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents 884 8315 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 9540 1203 Effect of movements in exchange rates of cash held Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period 15 10424 9540 68 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements General Information The principal activity of Conviviality Plc the Company and its subsidiaries together the Group or Conviviality is that of wholesale of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionery to the UK OnTrade and OffTrade markets.
The Company is incorporated and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The address of its registered office is Weston Road Crewe Cheshire CW1 6BP.
The registered number of the Company is .
The financial information presented is for the 52 week period ended 30 April 2017 and the 53 week period ended 1 May 2016.
The consolidated financial information is presented in sterling which is also the functional currency of the parent company and has been rounded to the nearest thousand 000.
Accounting Policies The principal accounting policies applied in the preparation of the consolidated financial information are set out below.
These policies have been consistently applied to all periods presented unless otherwise stated.
Basis of preparation The Consolidated Financial Statements for the 52 week period ended 30 April 2017 have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS and with those parts of the Companies Act 2006 applicable to companies reporting under IFRS.
The consolidated financial information has been prepared on a going concern basis and under the historical cost convention.
The Directors have prepared cash flow forecasts for the period until April 2019.
Based on these the Directors confirm that there are sufficient cash reserves and available working capital facilities to fund the business for the period under review and believe that the Group is well placed to manage its business risk successfully.
The Group is forecasted to be cash generative going forward.
For this reason they continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the financial statements.
Restatements
On 7 October 2015 the Group acquired the entire issued share capital of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited.
As of 1 May 2016 management had not finalised the fair value assessment of certain of Matthew Clarks assets and liabilities and as a result the 2016 results reflected the provisional assessment of the fair values as at the acquisition date.
During the period ended 30 April 2017 management identified an additional fair value adjustment.
A provision of 5824000 was identified with a corresponding deferred tax asset of 1779000.
This generated additional goodwill of 4045000.
The balance sheet and applicable notes have been restated to reflect the above changes.
Further details are given in note 28 Business
In addition management have changed the classification of retrospective sales rebates listing fees and franchise fees in the income statement.
In the prior period retrospective sales rebates of 22056000 were treated as a cost of sale.
Management now believe it is more appropriate to recognise these rebates as a reduction to revenue.
In the prior period listing fees of 3443000 were recognised within cost of sales management now believe it is more appropriate to recognise these fees within revenue.
Franchise fees of 2024000 were previously recognised as other operating income these have been reclassified as revenue.
The prior year comparative income statement and applicable notes have also been restated to reflect the above changes.
The classification of cash and cash equivalents in the cash flow statement has been amended to exclude the receivables financing facility.
The impact of the change is to increase the cash and cash equivalents reported in the prior period by 20255000 and to decrease the repayment of borrowings by 20255000.
The prior year comparative cash flow statement and applicable notes have been restated to reflect these changes.
There is no change in net debt as a result of the restatement.
Basis of consolidation The financial information comprises a consolidation of the financial information of Conviviality Plc and all its subsidiaries.
The financial period ends of all Group entities are coterminous.
Subsidiaries are all entities to which the Group is exposed or has rights to variable returns from its involvement with the subsidiary and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the subsidiary.
Subsidiaries are fully consolidated from the date on which control is transferred to the Group.
They are deconsolidated from the date that control ceases.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting Policies continued Basis of consolidation continued Intercompany transactions balances and unrealised gains on transactions between Group companies are eliminated.
Unrealised losses are also eliminated except to the extent they provide evidence of impairment of the asset transferred.
The Group operates an Employee Benefit Trust EBT and a Franchisee Incentive Trust FIT for the purposes of acquiring shares to fund share awards made to employees and Franchisees respectively.
The assets and liabilities of these trusts have been included in the consolidated financial information.
The cost of purchasing own shares held by the EBT and FIT are accounted for in other reserves.
Business combinations The acquisition of subsidiaries and businesses are accounted for using the acquisition method.
The cost of acquisition is measured at the aggregate of the fair values at the date of exchange of assets given liabilities incurred or assumed and equity instruments issued.
Identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed are recognised at the fair values at the acquisition date.
The excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the Groups share of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill.
Acquisition costs are expensed to the income statement and are included within exceptional items.
Any contingent consideration payable is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date.
Subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognised in the income statement.
Critical accounting estimates and assumptions The preparation of financial information in conformity with IFRSs requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Although these estimates are based on managements best knowledge of the amount event or actions actual events ultimately may differ from those estimates.
Estimates and judgements are continually evaluated and are based on historical experience and other factors including expectations of future events that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
The Group makes certain estimates and assumptions concerning the future.
The resulting accounting estimates will by definition seldom equal the related actual results.
The areas involving a higher degree of judgement or complexity or areas where assumptions and estimates are significant to the consolidated financial information are considered to relate to a.
Carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets Determining whether goodwill is impaired requires an estimation of the value in use of the cash generating units CGU to which goodwill has been allocated.
The value in use calculation requires management to estimate the future cash flows expected to arise from the CGU and a suitable discount rate in order to calculate present value.
The estimation of the timing and value of underlying projected cash flows and selection of appropriate discount rates involves management judgement.
Subsequent changes to these estimates or judgements may impact the carrying value of the goodwill which as at 30 April 2017 was 210994000 note 11.
Other intangible assets including brand names and customer bases have been valued at fair value using the relief from royalty valuation method for brand names and the mutliperiod excess earnings MEEM valuation method for customer bases.
The estimation of royalty rates future cashflows and customer attrition rates required for these methods involves management judgement. b.
Impairment of trade receivables The assessments undertaken in recognising provisions and contingencies have been made in accordance with IAS 39.
A provision for the impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all outstanding amounts in full due to the receivables being classified as bad or there are indications that the collection is doubtful.
The amount of any loss is recognised in the income statement within cost of sales.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against cost of sales in the income statement.
The gross amount of trade receivables at 30 April 2017 was 186962000 and the associated provision was 2779000 note 14.
70 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting Policies continued Critical accounting estimates and assumptions continued c.
Share options The estimation of sharebased payment costs requires the selection of an appropriate valuation model BlackScholes pricing model consideration as to the inputs necessary for the valuation model chosen and the estimation of the number of awards that will ultimately vest.
The key assumptions are on expected life of share options volatility of share price the risk free yield to maturity and expected dividend yield.
The total charge for equity and cash settled share based payments for the financial period was 2923000 note 27. d.
Provisions and contingent consideration The recognition and measurement of provisions and contingent consideration require management judgement to assess the likelihood and magnitude of the future outflow of resources and payments of consideration. e.
Acquisition accounting and fair values Acquisition accounting and fair value adjustments require management judgement to assess the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities and contingent liabilities assumed to ensure they are recognised at the fair values at the acquisition date. f.
Classification of exceptional items The classification of items as exceptional requires management judgement to assess whether the particular items which by virtue of their scale and nature are appropriate to be separately classified as exceptional items within the income statement.
Segment reporting Operating segments are reported in a manner consistent with the internal reporting provided to the chief operating decisionmaker CODM.
The CODM who is responsible for allocating resources and assessing performance of operating segments has been identified as the Chief Executive Officer.
Foreign currency translation a.
Functional and presentation currency Items included in the financial information of each of the Groups entities are measured using the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates the functional currency.
The consolidated financial information is presented in Sterling which is the Companys and its subsidiaries functional and presentation currency. b.
Transactions and balances Foreign currency transactions are translated into the functional currency using the exchange rates prevailing at the dates of the transactions.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies at the reporting date are translated at the exchange rate ruling at that date.
Foreign exchange gains and losses arising on translation are recognised in the income statement for the period except for differences arising on qualifying cash flow hedges which are recognised directly in other comprehensive income.
Nonmonetary assets and liabilities that are measured in terms of historical cost in a foreign currency are translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction.
Non monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies that are stated at fair value are retranslated to the functional currency at foreign exchange rates ruling at the dates the fair value was determined.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting Policies continued
Revenue relates to the wholesale supply of goods in the UK to the OnTrade and OffTrade markets and is recognised when the significant risks and benefits of ownership of the product has been transferred to the buyer.
Revenue is the total amount receivable by the Group for goods supplied excluding VAT.
Revenue is recognised net of discounts and retrospective rebates to customers.
Wholesale revenue is recognised on delivery of the product to the customer.
Retail revenue generated by company owned stores is recognised at the point of sale to the customer.
Events revenue is generated through the operation of temporary bars at events and is recognised as the event occurs.
Fees for the provision of continuing services to Franchisees e.
IT support marketing training etc. recognised as revenue in the consolidated income statement as the services are rendered.
Initial fees are recognised as revenue when performance of all the initial services and other obligations required of the franchisor have been substantially accomplished.
Cost of sales Cost of sales represent the cost to the Group of the product sold.
It consists of all external costs incurred in procuring goods for resale and delivering them to the distribution warehouses together with any adjustments to inventory and any bad debt expense.
Supplier income Supplier incentives rebates and discounts collectively known as supplier income are recognised on an accruals basis as they are earned for each relevant supplier contract within cost of sales.
The accrued value at the reporting date is included in accrued income.
The most common types of supplier income which the Group receives are Retrospective discounts typically based on an agreed sum per item sold on promotion for a period Fixed amounts agreed with suppliers to support specific promotions Supplier rebates typically based on sales targets on an annual calendar year basis Operating costs Operating costs consist of distribution costs administrative expenses head office costs and the costs associated with running corporately owned stores.
Financing income and expenses Financing expenses comprise interest payable and finance leases recognised in the consolidated income statement account using the effective interest method.
Financing income comprises interest receivable on funds invested.
Interest income and interest payable is recognised in the consolidated income statement as it accrues using the effective interest method.
Property plant and equipment Items of property plant and equipment are stated at historic purchase cost less accumulated depreciation and any provision for impairment.
Cost includes the original purchase price of the asset and the costs attributable to bringing the asset into working condition for its intended use.
Land is deemed to have an infinite life and is not depreciated.
Depreciation is recognised on a straightline basis to write down the cost less estimated residual value of buildings plant and equipment and motor vehicles.
The following useful lives are applied Leasehold buildings Shorter of lease term and 50 years Plant and equipment 2 to 15 years Motor vehicles 3 years The assets residual values and useful lives are reviewed and adjusted if appropriate at each reporting date.
72 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting Policies continued Property plant and equipment continued Leases in which the Group assumes substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the leased asset are classified as finance leases.
Where land and buildings are held under leases the accounting treatment of the land is considered separately from that of the buildings.
Leased assets acquired by way of finance lease are stated at an amount equal to the lower of their fair value and the present value of the minimum lease payments at inception of the lease less accumulated depreciation and less accumulated impairment losses.
Intangible assets a.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the cost of an acquisition over the fair value of the Groups share of the net identifiable assets of the acquired subsidiary or businesses at the date of acquisition.
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may be impaired and is carried at cost less accumulated impairment losses.
Goodwill is allocated to CGUs for the purpose of impairment testing.
A CGU is identified at the lowest aggregation of assets that generate largely independent cash inflows and that which is reviewed by management for monitoring and managing the business.
The Groups CGUs are Bargain Booze Wine Rack Matthew Clark Holdings Peppermint Events Bibendum PLB Group and KMD Enterprises.
If the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than the carrying amount an impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the unit and then to the other assets of the unit pro rata on the basis of the carrying amount of each asset in the unit.
The recoverable amount is the higher of an asset or CGUs fair value less costs of disposal and its value in use.
Any impairment is recognised immediately in the income statement and is not reversed.
Gains and losses on the disposal of an entity include the carrying amount of goodwill relating to the entity sold.
Goodwill arising on acquisitions before the date of transition to IFRS has been retained at the previous UK GAAP amounts subject to being tested for impairment at that date. b.
Other intangible assets Brand names and customer base Brand names and customer bases acquired in a business combination that qualify for separate recognition are recognised as intangible assets at their fair values.
The fair values have been calculated using the relief from royalty method for brand names and the multiperiod excess earnings method MEEM for customer bases.
Internally developed software Expenditure on the research phase of projects to develop new customised software for IT and telecommunication systems is recognised as an expense as incurred.
Costs that are directly attributable to a projects development phase are recognised as intangible assets provided they meet the following criteria the development cost can be measured reliably the project is technically feasible and viable the Group intends to and has sufficient resources to complete the project the Group has the ability to use or sell the software and the software is expected to generate probable future economic benefits.
Intangible assets are carried at cost less accumulated amortisation and any impairment losses.
Intangible assets arising on acquisition of subsidiaries or businesses are recognised separately from goodwill if the fair value of these assets can be identified separately and measured reliably.
Amortisation is calculated on a straightline basis over the estimated useful life of the intangible asset.
The useful life of the Groups intangible assets is 5 years to 20 years for brands and customer bases and 5 years for other intangibles which are predominately software.
Impairment reviews are carried out if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may be impaired.
An impairment loss is recognised in the income statement when the assets carrying value exceeds its recoverable amount.
Its recoverable amount is the higher of an assets fair value less costs to sell or value in use.
Impairment losses are not reversed.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting Policies continued
Inventory comprises goods held for resale which are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value.
Cost is calculated using the first in first out method.
Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less applicable variable selling expenses.
Provision is made for slow moving and obsolete stock if required.
Trade and other receivables Trade receivables are recognised initially at fair value less any provision for impairment.
A provision for impairment of trade receivables is established when there is objective evidence that the Group will not be able to collect all outstanding amounts in full due to the receivables being classified as bad or there are indications that collection is doubtful.
The carrying amount of the asset is reduced through the use of an allowance account and the amount of the loss is recognised in the income statement within cost of sales.
When a trade receivable is uncollectible it is written off against the allowance account for trade receivables.
Subsequent recoveries of amounts previously written off are credited against cost of sales in the income statement.
Other receivables are noninterest bearing and are recognised initially at fair value and subsequently at amortised cost.
Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents comprise cash on hand and demand deposits together with other shortterm highly liquid investments maturing within three months or less from the date of acquisition that are readily convertible into known amounts of cash and which are subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
Trade and other payables Trade payables are obligations to pay for goods and services which have been acquired in the commercial operations of the Group.
Trade payables are classified as current liabilities if payment is due within one year.
If not they are presented as noncurrent liabilities.
Trade payables are recognised initially at fair value and are subsequently measured at amortised cost using the effective interest method.
Provisions
A provision is recognised in the balance sheet when the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event that can be reliably measured and it is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation.
Provisions are determined by discounting the expected future cash flows at a pretax rate that reflects risks specific to the liability.
Dividends
Interim dividends on ordinary shares are recognised in equity in the period in which they are paid.
Final dividends on ordinary shares are recognised when they have been approved by the shareholders at the Annual General Meeting.
Leases
Leases are classified as finance leases when the terms of the lease transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership to the Group.
All other leases are classified as operating leases.
Operating leases Assets leased under operating leases are not recorded in the statement of financial position.
Rental payments are charged directly to the income statement on a straight line basis over the lease term.
Any lease incentives primarily upfront cash payments or rentfree periods are capitalised and spread over the period of the lease term.
74 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting Policies continued Leases continued Finance leases Assets acquired under finance leases are capitalised and the outstanding future lease obligations are shown in short term and long term borrowings.
Minimum lease payments are apportioned between the finance charge and the reduction of the outstanding liability.
The finance charge is allocated to each period during the lease term so as to produce a constant periodic rate of interest on the remaining balance of the liability.
Employee Benefit Trust The assets and liabilities of the Employee Benefit Trust EBT have been included in the Group accounts.
The assets of the EBT are held separately from those of the company.
Any assets held by the EBT cease to be recognised on the consolidated statement of financial position when the assets vest unconditionally in identified beneficiaries.
Finance cost and administrative expenses of the EBT are recorded in the companys income statement where material gains and losses on the purchase sales issue or cancellation of the companys own shares are recorded as movements on reserves.
Neither the purchase nor sale of own shares leads to a gain or loss being recognised in the Group consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Investments in the companys own shares held by the EBT are presented as a deduction from reserves and any dividend income received by the EBT is deducted from the aggregate of dividends paid and proposed.
The number of such shares held by the EBT is deducted from the number of shares in issue when calculating earnings per share.
Interestbearing borrowings Interestbearing borrowings are recognised initially at fair value less attributable transaction costs.
Subsequent to initial recognition interestbearing borrowings are stated at amortised cost using the effective interest method less any impairment losses.
Taxation
The tax expense for the period comprises of current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income or in equity.
In this case the tax is recognised directly in other comprehensive income or in equity. a.
Current taxation Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period using tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulation is subject to interpretation.
It establishes provisions where appropriate on the basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities. b.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is recognised using the statement of financial position liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax base of assets and liabilities and their carrying amount in the historical financial information.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset against each other when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current assets against current liabilities and it is the intention to settle these on a net basis.
Pension costs The Group operates a stakeholder defined contribution pension scheme.
The total expense recognised in the income statement represents contributions payable to the fund by the Group as specified in the rules of the scheme.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Accounting Policies continued Exceptional items The Group classifies certain items as exceptional where they possess a high degree of abnormality which arise from events or transactions that fall outside the ordinary activities of the Group and which are not expected to recur.
The Directors apply judgement in assessing the particular items which by virtue of their scale and nature should be classified as exceptional items.
The Directors consider that separate disclosure of these items is relevant to an understanding of the Groups financial performance.
Derivative financial instruments and hedging Derivative financial instruments are recognised at fair value.
The gain or loss on remeasurement to fair value is recognised immediately in profit or loss.
However where derivatives qualify for hedge accounting recognition of any resultant gain or loss depends on the nature of the item being hedged.
Where a derivative financial instrument is designated as a hedge of the variability in cash flows of a recognised asset or liability or a highly probable forecast transaction the effective part of any gain or loss on the derivative financial instrument is recognised directly in the hedging reserve.
Any ineffective portion of the hedge is recognised immediately in the income statement.
Sharebased payments The Group issues equity and cash settled sharebased payments to certain employees and Franchisees.
Equity settled sharebased payments are measured at fair value excluding the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the grant date is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of the shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions.
Fair value is measured using the BlackScholes pricing model.
The expected useful life used in the models has been adjusted based on managements best estimate for the effects of exercise restrictions and behavioural considerations.
For cash settled sharebased payments a liability equal to the portion of the goods or services received is recognised at the current fair value determined at each reporting date.
National Insurance is accrued periodically in line with the sharebased payment charge.
Equity
Equity comprises the following Share capital represents the nominal value of equity shares Share premium represents the excess over nominal value of the fair value of consideration received for equity shares net of expenses of the share issue Share based payment reserve represents the IFRS 2 Sharebased payment charge for the year Other reserves incorporates movement in the Groups EBT and the hedging reserve created for the interest rate hedge Retained earnings represents cumulative retained earnings.
76 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Accounting Policies continued New standards and interpretations The following amendments to accounting standards and interpretations issued by the International Accounting Standards Board IASB have been adopted for the first time by the Group in the period with no significant impact on its consolidated results or financial position Disclosure Initiative  Amendments to IAS1 Annual Improvements to IFRSs 2012  2014 Cycle Amendments to IAS16 and IAS28 Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and
Amendments to IFRS11 Accounting for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations Amendments to IFRS10 IFRS12 and IAS28 Investment Entities Applying the Consolidation Exception IFRS 9 Financial Instruments is expected to be applicable after 1 January 2018.
If endorsed this standard will simplify the classification of financial assets for measurement purposes but it is not anticipated to have a significant impact on the financial statements.
IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers is expected for periods that commence on or after 1 January 2018.
The standard will replace IAS18 Revenue and IFRIC13 Customer Loyalty Programmes.
The standard introduces a new revenue recognition model that recognises revenue either at a point in time or over a period of time.
The model features a contractbased fivestep analysis of transactions to determine whether how much and when revenue is recognised.
The Group is currently undertaking an impact assessment of the likely effect on the Groups consolidated results and financial position.
IFRS 16 Leases is effective for periods that commence on or after 1 January 2019 and will significantly affect the presentation of the Group financial statements with all leases apart from short term leases being recognised as onbalance sheet finance leases with a corresponding liability being the present value of lease payments.
IFRS 16 is also expected to have a material impact on key components within the Consolidated Income Statement as operating lease rental charges will be replaced with depreciation and finance costs.
The Group is currently undertaking an impact assessment of the likely effect on the Groups consolidated results and financial position.
The Group continued to monitor the potential impact of other new standards and interpretations which may be endorsed and require adoption by the Group in future reporting periods.
The Group does not consider that any other standards amendments or interpretations issued by the IASB but not yet applicable will have a significant impact on the financial statements.
Segment information The Groups activities consist of the wholesale and retail distribution of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionery within the United Kingdom to both the OnTrade and OffTrade markets.
The
Chief Executive Officer is considered to be the chief operating decision maker CODM.
Each trading division within Conviviality Plc wholesales to businesses that retail alcohol via stores pubs bars restaurants and events.
The performance of each division is therefore driven by the UK market for alcohol consumption which is a single market with a single set of economic characteristics and risks.
In addition 90% of the Groups sales are of the same products and the sales process is similar in each division and is serviced by a single supply chain.
Consequently all activities are reported as one segment.
To assist with the understanding of performance however an analysis of sales is disclosed for each of the business units.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Segment information continued
2017 2016
Conviviality Direct 1040515 478218 Conviviality Retail 378014 359363 Conviviality Trading 145982 5215 Intersegment revenue 4430 1775 Total revenue 1560081 841021 Figures in the column headed 2017 relate to the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017.
Figures in the column headed 2016 relate to the 53 weeks ended 1 May 2016.
Note 2 Accounting Policies provides detail on the restatement of prior year revenue.
The CODM manages the business using adjusted EBITDA which is not a statutory profit measure.
As required by IFRS 8 Operating Segments the table below provides a reconciliation from this figure to the reported profit before tax in the consolidated income statement 2017 2016 Adjusted EBITDA 60870 30168
4560 2833 Amortisation of nonacquisition intangible assets 2871 1335 Sharebased payment charge 2427 1767 Net finance expense 5221 2502 Adjusted profit before income tax 45791 21731 Exceptional items 10017 9855 Amortisation of acquisition intangible assets 10028 4754 Fair value of foreign exchange derivatives 3284 1958 Profit before income tax 22462 9080 No individual customer accounted for 10% or more of the Groups revenue in either 2017 or 2016.
The sharebased payment charge above of 2427000 excludes sharebased payment charges classified as exceptional of 497000 2016 Nil see note 4.
The net finance costs of 5221000 above excludes exceptional finance costs of 229000 2016 Nilsee note 4.
Operating Profit a.
Operating profit is arrived at after chargingcrediting 2017 2016 Note 000 000 Distribution costs 65861 33761 Depreciation of property plant and equipment 10 4560 2833 Amortisation of intangible assets 12 12899 6089 Profit on disposal of property plant and equipment Operating lease payments Land and buildings 4414 4187 Plant and machinery 4571 3621 Sharebased payment expense nonexceptional 27 2427 1767 Fair value of foreign exchange derivatives 18 3284 1958 Exceptional items 4b 9788 9855 78 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Operating profit continued b.
Exceptional items The exceptional items are analysed below 2017 2016 Within operating costs Costs associated with the acquisition of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited  5941 Costs associated with the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group 1644 31 Impairment of property plant and equipment 390 Business integration and restructuring costs 8699 3322 Sharebased payment costs 497 Costs associated with other business combinations  139 Increase in contingent consideration  Elastic Productions Limited 1365 Release of contingent consideration  Peppermint Events Limited 3375 Other nonrecurring events and projects 568 422 9788 9855 Within finance costs Unwind of discount on provisions and deferred consideration 229 Total exceptional items 10017 9855 The costs associated with the acquisition of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and Bibendum PLB Group include professional fees incurred during the acquisition.
Business integration and restructuring costs include employee management and consultancy costs associated with the generation of buying logistics and organisational synergies.
Sharebased payment costs relate to employee sharebased benefits awarded to retain specific employees to facilitate the integration of businesses.
Increase in contingent consideration relates to an increase in the deferred consideration payable in relation to the future acquisition of the remaining shares in Elastic Productions Limited.
The release of contingent consideration is due to a reduction in the estimated deferred consideration payable in relation to the future acquisition of the remaining shares in Peppermint Events Limited.
Costs associated with other business combinations in the prior period include 58000 additional costs incurred in respect of the purchase of GT News Holdings Limited and 81000 relating to the acquisition of Peppermint Events.
Included within Other nonrecurring events and project costs of 568000 2016 422000 are costs relating to a oneoff cash bonus of 323000 paid to Diana Hunter on 13 September 2016 and 245000 relating to the unwind of a favourable lease creditor in Matthew Clark.
The prior year costs relate to professional and consultancy charges arising from oneoff transactional activity of 208000 and restructuring and reorganisation costs of 214000 following an exercise to create efficiencies and streamline processes.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Operating profit continued c.
Auditors remuneration During the period the Group obtained the following services from the Companys auditor 2017 2016 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the consolidated financial statements 46 38 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for the audit of the subsidiary financial statements 190 132 Fees payable to the Companys auditor for other services Auditrelated assurance services 15 18 Other assurance services  6 Total fees payable to the Companys auditor 251 194 Employee costs a.
Employee benefits expense 2017 2016 Wages and salaries 72667 37401 Social security costs 7736 3694 Pension contributions 2400 836 Social security costs on sharebased payment charge note 27 199 106 Sharebased payment charge note 27 2724 768 Compensation for loss of office 1628 1742 87354 44547 The average monthly number of people including Executive Directors employed by the Group during the period was 2017 2016 Number Number Directors 9 7 Administration 729 550 Marketing selling and distribution 1528 1328 Retail staff 374 311 2640 2196 80 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Employee costs continued b.
Directors remuneration The remuneration of the Directors comprise 2017 2016 Salaries fees and other shortterm employee benefits 3126 1627 Payment in lieu of pension contribution 68 42 Total salaries and other short term employment benefits 3194 1669 Sharebased payment charge operating expenses 397 309 3591 1978 Number Number Directors accruing a pension during the financial period The highest paid Directors compensation is as follows 000 000 Salaries fees and other shortterm employee benefits including sharebased payment charge 1024 845 1024 845 Finance Income and Expense 2017 2016 Finance income Bank interest receivable 2 24 Other interest receivable 60 Total finance income 62 24 Finance expense
Working capital financing facilities 1659 376 Term loans 2759 1436 Tobacco guarantees 315 229 Amortisation of arrangement fees 416 231 Nonutilisation charges 47 235 Interest on financial leases 18 Other bank interest 69 19 5283 2526
Discount unwind on onerous contract provision 154 Discount unwind on Peppermint contingent consideration 75 Total finance expense 5512 2526 Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Income Tax 2017 2016 Current tax Current tax on profits for the period 6323 4579 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 132 25 Total current tax 6455 4554 Deferred tax Origination and reversal of temporary differences 2535 884 Changes in taxation rate 96 140 Total deferred tax note 19 2439 744 Income tax expense 4016 3tel Tax on profit before exceptional items 6105 4159 Tax on exceptional items 2089 349 Income tax expense 4016 3tel Amounts recognised in equity Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge Deferred tax on interest rate swap 104 Total amounts recognised in equity 353 364 The tax charge differs from the theoretical amount that would arise using the weighted average tax rate applicable to profits of the consolidated entities as follows 2017 2016 Profit before tax 22462 9080 Profit on ordinary activities multiplied by rate of corporation tax in the UK of 19.91% 2016 20.00% 4473 1816 Tax effects of Expenses not deductible for tax purposes 278 1764 Changes in taxation rate 46 165 Sharebased payment 527 16 Adjustment in respect of prior periods 193 132 Nonqualifying depreciation 262 Movement in deferred tax not provided 329 46 Other differences 98 5 Tax charge 4016 3810 Factors that may affect future tax charges Reductions in the UK corporation tax rate from 20% to 19% effective from 1 April 2017 and to 17% effective from 1 April 2020 were substantively enacted on 26 October 2015 and 6 September 2016 respectively.
The reductions in rate will reduce the companys future tax charge accordingly and the relevant deferred tax balances have been remeasured with consideration to the reduction in rate to 17% in accordance with the rates enacted at the balance sheet date.
82 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Earnings Per Ordinary Share As at 1 May 2016 155238488 ordinary shares were in issue.
During the year an additional 17404446 ordinary shares were issued giving 172642934 shares in issue as at 30 April 2017 note 21.
2017 2016 Profit attributable to ordinary shareholders 000 18446 5270 Basic earnings per share pence 10.8 4.6 Diluted earnings per share pence 10.4 4.4 Basic and diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the profit for the period attributable to equity holders by the weighted average number of shares.
2017 2016 Number Number Basic weighted average 170142975 115263828 Diluted weighted average 176985247 119429816 The basic weighted average number of ordinary shares is calculated as follows 2017 2016 Number Number Ordinary shares in issue at the start of the period 155238488 66940383 Effect of Employee Benefit Trust EBT shares held 897755 954755 Effect of shares issued for the Franchise Incentive Plan FIP 556697 Effect of shares issued for the Share Inventive Plan SIP 413387 178098 Effect of shares issued for the Matthew Clark acquisition  48355795 Effect of shares issued for the Bibendum PLB Group acquisition 14794962 Effect of shares issued for the Zeus Capital warrant  744307 Effect of share options granted 37196 Weighted average number of ordinary shares at the end of the period 170142975 115263828 The difference between the basic and diluted average number of shares represents the dilutive effect of share options and warrants in existence.
The weighted average number of shares can be reconciled to the weighted average number of shares including dilutive shares as follows 2017 2016 Number Number Basic weighted average shares 170142975 115263828 Diluted effect of Exceptional employee share incentive plans resulting from IPO 816914 814749 Long term incentive plan 786029 Employee share incentive plans 2048579 1280019 Franchisee share incentive plan 3190750 2071220 Total dilutive effect of share incentive plans 6842272 4165988 Diluted weighted average number of shares 176985247 119429816 Adjusted earnings per share Although not presented on the face of the Income Statement the adjusted earnings per share is based on adjusted profit before tax with the nonexceptional effective tax rate applied.
Adjusted earnings per share is calculated in the table below.
A reconciliation of profit before tax to adjusted profit before tax is shown in note 3.
2017 2016 Adjusted profit before income tax 000 45791 21731 Tax at effective tax rate  18.8% 2016 22.0% 000 8586 4781 Adjusted profit attributable to ordinary shareholders 000 37205 16950 Adjusted Basic earnings per share pence 21.9 14.7 Adjusted Diluted earnings per share pence 21.0 14.2 Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Earnings Per Ordinary Share continued Adjusted basic and diluted earnings per share are calculated by dividing the adjusted profit before income tax of 45791000 note 3 less tax at the effective rate of 18.8% 8586000 by the weighted average number of shares which is the same as disclosed in the tables above.
Dividends
Amounts recognised as distributions to ordinary shareholders in the period comprise 2017 2016 Final dividend for 2016 of 7.4 pence and 2015 of 6.3 pence per ordinary share 12785 4235 Interim dividend for 2017 of 4.2 pence and 2016 of 2.1 pence per ordinary share 7237 3260 Less amounts received by the Employee Benefit Trust 108 81 19914 7414 The 2017 final proposed dividend of 14502000 8.4 pence per share has not been accrued as it had not been approved by the period end.
Sufficient reserves are in place to pay the final proposed dividend.
Property Plant and Equipment
Cost
As at 26 April 2015 1560 14771 63 16394 Acquisitions through business combinations 729 2656  3385
150 7560  7710
As at 1 May 2016 2162 24808 52 27022 Acquisitions through business combinations note 28 1476 1394 62 2932
903 9092 95 10090
1053 5958 63 7074 As at 30 April 2017 3488 29336 146 32970
As at 26 April 2015 550 8611 9 9170 Charge for the period 276 2541 16 2833
As at 1 May 2016 753 11000 20 11773 Charge for the period 497 4019 44 4560
Disposals
As at 30 April 2017 862 14465 33 15360 Net book value As at 30 April 2017 2626 14871 113 17610 As at 1 May 2016 1409 13808 32 15249 The net book value of assets held under finance leases as at 30 April 2017 is 205000 2016 122000.
The obligations under finance leases are secured on the assets to which they relate.
The net book value of land not depreciated as at 30 April 2017 is Nil 2016 1969000.
84 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017
Restated
Total
Cost and net book value As at 26 April 2015 Acquisitions through business combinations Other acquisitions Other disposals As at 1 May 2016 Acquisitions through business combinations note 28 Other acquisitions note 28 Other disposals As at 30 April 2017 Other acquisitions in the period relate to a number of individual smaller store acquisitions for a total cash consideration of 396000 2016 796000 all of which has been recognised as goodwill.
When purchasing individual stores the Group is purchasing both the trade and assets of the store.
Goodwill acquired in a business combination is allocated at acquisition to the CGUs that are expected to benefit from that business combination or are established as a result of the business combination.
The carrying amount of goodwill has been allocated as follows 2017 2016 Bargain Booze 43228 42832 Wine Rack 720 720 Matthew Clark Holdings 126483 126483 Peppermint Events 7456 7456 Bibendum PLB Group 30488 KMD Enterprises 2619 210994 177491 Goodwill as at 1 May 2016 has been restated due to an increase of 5824000 in an acquisition fair value provision in Matthew Clark Holdings Limited offset by a decrease of 1779000 relating to the deferred tax asset relating to this fair value provision note 2.
Goodwill has an indefinite useful life and is subject to annual impairment testing.
The recoverable amounts of the CGUs are determined from valueinuse calculations.
The valueinuse is the present value of the pretax cash flow projections.
The key assumptions used in determining value in use are growth rates and the discount rate.
For each CGU cash flow projections are based on the most recent financial budgets approved by management for one year.
Subsequent cash flows are extrapolated using an estimated annual growth rate of 2% for a further four years and terminal growth rates of 1% are then applied to perpetuity.
The rate used to discount the projected cash flows being a pretax riskadjusted discount rate is 7.55% 2016 7.40%.
This has been calculated using the Groups weighted average cost of capital taking account of market assessment of risks.
Risk factors are similar in each of the Groups CGUs.
All assumptions apply to all CGUs due to each CGU wholesaling to businesses that retail alcohol via stores pubs bars restaurants and events and the performance of each CGU is therefore driven by the UK market for alcohol consumption which is a single market with a single set of economic characteristics and risks.
Management have reviewed the key assumptions in the forecast and have concluded that no impairment is required in respect of the carrying values of the goodwill.
A sensitivity analysis on the impairment test of each CGUs carrying value including reducing sales levels and increasing the discount rate has also been carried out.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Intangible Assets Brands and Other customer base Total
As at 26 April 2015 806 1180 1986 Acquisitions through business combinations 3313 62943 66256 Additions 4158  4158 As at 1 May 2016 8277 64123 72400 Acquisitions through business combinations note 28 100 10840 10940 Additions 9668  9668 Disposals 11  11 As at 30 April 2017 18034 74963 92997
As at 26 April Charge for the year 1252 4837 6089 As at 1 May 2016 1331 4911 6242 Charge for the year 2871 10028 12899 Disposals 5  5 As at 30 April 2017 4197 14939 19136 Net book value As at 30 April 2017 13837 60024 73861 As at 1 May 2016 6946 59212 66158 Acquired brands and customer bases are initially recognised at their fair value on acquisition.
Acquired brands are amortised over 10 years and customer bases are amortised over their expected life of between 5 and 6.5 years.
Other intangible assets are predominantly software costs which are initially recognised at their cost on acquisition and amortised over 5 years.
Inventories
2017 2016 Goods for resale 93840 61825 No security has been granted over inventories.
The Group operates a bonded warehouse and as such the majority of the licensed stock held is under bond and valued excluding duty.
The duty payable when sold will be 38706000 2016 22330000.
Of this amount Nil 2016 270000 has been provided as a guarantee to HRMC.
The cost of inventories recognised as an expense and included in cost of sales amounts to 1353012000 2016 739831000.
86 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Trade and Other Receivables 2017 2016 Trade and other receivables due in greater than one year 000 000 Other debtors 8978 3757 Prepayments 2601 2667 11579 6tel Trade and other receivables due in less than one year 000 000 Trade receivables 186962 131506 Less provision for impairment of trade receivables 2779 1859 Net trade receivables 184183 129647 Other debtors 9635 7222 Accrued income 7104 6643 Prepayments 19777 8416 220699 151928 The 130000000 receivables financing facility note 17 is secured over the trade receivables of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited Bibendum PLB Group and Bargain Booze Limited.
The difference between the carrying value and fair value of all receivables is not considered to be material.
As of 30 April 2017 trade receivables of 42263000 2016 6813000 were past due but not impaired.
These relate to customers and Franchisees for which there is no recent history of default.
Movements on the Group provision for impairment of trade receivables are as follows 2017 2016 Opening 1859 1385 Charge for receivables impairment 892 297 Provision acquired through business combinations 2610 956 Receivables written off as uncollectable 2582 779 Closing 2779 1859 Provisions are estimated based upon past default experience and managements assessment of the current economic environment.
The creation and release of provision for impairment of trade receivables is chargedcredited to cost of sales in the income statement.
Trade receivables consist of a large number of Franchisees and customers for whom there is no significant history of default.
The credit risk of the Franchisees and customers is assessed by taking account of their financial positions past experiences and other relevant factors.
Individual Franchisee and customer credit limits are imposed based on these factors.
The maximum exposure to credit risk at the reporting date is the carrying value of each class of receivables mentioned above.
In the event of a default in payment by a Franchisee the Group may recover unpaid inventory held in the Franchisees store further reducing the credit risk for this element of the Group.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Cash and Cash Equivalents 2017 2016 Cash at bank and in hand 10424 9540 Trade and Other Payables 2017 2016 Trade and other payables due in more than one year 000 000 Other creditors 2859 6tel Trade and other payables due in less than one year 000 000 Trade payables 235819 131551 Social security and other taxes 20329 9624 Accruals 43062 42078 299210 183253 Trade and other payables due in greater than one year relate to contingent consideration arising on the acquisition of Peppermint Events Limited note 28.
Trade and other payables due in less than one year comprise amounts outstanding for trade purchases and ongoing costs.
The average credit period taken for trade purchases is 55 days 2016 55 days.
The
Directors consider that the carrying amount of trade and other payables approximates to their fair value.
Borrowings
2017 2016
Term loan A 13972 8000 Arrangement fees on term loans 193 165 Receivables financing facility 10741 20255 Obligations under finance leases due in less than one year 131 47 Total Current 24651 28137
Term loan A 31806 28000 Term loan B 50000 40000 Arrangement fees on term loans 622 565 Obligations under finance leases due between two and five years 335 75 Total Noncurrent 81519 67510
106170 95647 88 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Borrowings continued On 16 January 2017 the Groups receivable financing facilities were restructured to reduce costs and increase flexibility.
Under the new agreement the Group can sell any debts owed to Matthew Clark Wholesale Limited Bibendum PLB Group and Bargain Booze Limited by its customers who have purchased goods or services.
The maximum facility available is 85% of the allowable trade receivables up to 130m.
The discount margin for the funding of debts is 1.25%.
There is a non utilisation fee of 0.5% of the available facility payable during the minimum period of the facility being 24 months from the date of the agreement.
The agreement terminates in October 2020.
An arrangement fee of 150000 was incurred and is being amortised over 3 years.
The Groups existing senior term and revolving facilities agreement have been revised.
Term loan A has increased from 41m to 51m and Term loan B has increased to 50m.
The Group has a revolving credit facility RCF totaling 30m which was undrawn at 30 April 2017.
In addition the Group had an Accordion option of 15m which is unutilised at 30 April 2017.
The interest margin payable on the two terms loans and the RCF is 2.5% above Libor.
A nonutilisation fee of 1.0% is payable on the RCF up to the agreement termination date of 7 September 2020.
An arrangement fee of 1260000 was incurred on this agreement.
The element relating to the RCF 437000 is being amortised through prepayments over the life of the agreement.
The element relating to the term loans 823000 is being amortised over the life of the agreement with the balance as at 30 April 2017 of 815000 2016 730000 being netted off against the term loans in short term and long term borrowings.
The senior term and revolving facilities agreement terminates on 7 September 2020 and the two term loans are repayable as follows Term Loan A Term Loan B 60000000 50000000 24 April 2016 4000 23 October 2016 5111 30 April 2017 5111 31 May 2017 1250 29 October 2017 6361 29 April 2018 6361 28 October 2018 6361 28 April 2019 6361 27 October 2019 6361 26 April 2020 6361 Termination date 7 September 2020 6362 50000 Total 60000 50000 The RCF is repayable at the end of each interest period.
The interest period can be selected by the Group at the point of drawdown and can be one three or six months.
All amounts outstanding under the facilities are secured by debentures over certain assets of the Group.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Financial Risk Management and Financial Instruments The Groups activities expose it to a variety of financial risks.
The main financial risks faced by the Group relate to the risk of default by counterparties to financial transactions the availability of funds to meet business needs interest rate movements and foreign exchange movements.
These risks are managed as described below.
The Groups risk management is coordinated at its headquarters in close cooperation with the Board of Directors and focuses on actively securing the Groups short to mediumterm cash flows by minimising the exposure to financial risks.
The Group does not actively engage in the trading of financial assets for speculative purposes nor does it write options.
The most significant financial risks to which the Group is exposed are described below. a.
Credit risk The Groups principal assets subject to credit risk are cash deposits cash and trade receivables.
The credit risk associated with cash is limited.
The principal credit risk arises from nonrecovery of trade receivables.
In order to manage credit risk Franchise agreements specify that collection is by direct debit and credit limits are set for customers based on a combination of payment history and third party credit references.
Credit limits are reviewed by the credit controller on a regular basis in conjunction with debt ageing and collection history.
In addition the Group has a receivables financing facility in place and any trade receivables owed by its customers up to a maximum of 85% of the allowable trade receivables balance can be sold up to the maximum facility level of 130000000. b.
Market risk The Group finances its operations through a mixture of retained profits ordinary shares a receivables financing facility of 130000000 term loans of 95778000 and a RCF of 30000000.
The Group also has available a 15000000 Accordion option which allows the RCF to be increased at any time.
At 30 April 2017 the drawdown on receivables financing facility was 10741000 2016 20255000 and the drawdown on the RCF was Nil 2016 12500000 relating to bankissued guarantees for the benefit of certain suppliers.
The Accordion option has not been utilised.
The term loans have been drawn in full to fund the acquisitions of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and Bibendum PLB Group.
The headroom on the facilities as at 30 April 2017 was 164259000 119259000 receivables financing facility 30000000 RCF and 15000000 Accordian option. c.
Interest rate risk The Group has interest rate risk on the term loans of 95778000.
Interest is payable at a discount margin plus Libor.
The interest rate risk on 80% of the 50000000 Term loan B which is not repayable until 7 September 2020 has been mitigated by entering into an interest rate swap dated 25 April 2016 until 7 September 2020.
The interest rate swap fixes the Libor rate at 1%.
90 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Risk Management and Financial Instruments continued c.
Interest rate risk continued The interest rate exposure of financial assets and liabilities of the Group is shown below.
Fixed Floating Zero Total Financial assets Cash and shortterm deposits 10424  10424 Trade receivables 184183 184183 Financial liabilities Trade payables 235819 235819 Obligations under finance leases Term loan A 45778  45778 Term loan B 50000   50000 Receivables financing facility 10741  10741
50466 46095 51636 148197 Fixed Floating Zero Total Financial assets Cash and shortterm deposits 9540  9540 Trade receivables 129647 129647 Financial liabilities Trade payables 131551 131551 Obligations under finance leases Term loan A 36000  36000 Term loan B 40000   40000 Receivables financing facility 20255  20255
40122 46715 1904 88741 2017 2016 The Group had the following available undrawn facilities Against trade receivables 119259 29745 Revolving credit facility 30000 30000 Accordion option 15000 10000
164259 69745 The interest rate swap has been valued at fair value by using the Mark to Market rate and has been hedge accounted as a cashflow hedge through other comprehensive income.
As at 30 April 2017 the Mark to Market valuation of the interest rate swap was 610000 2016 88000 2017 2016 Opening fair value 88 Amounts recognised through equity 522 88 Closing fair value 610 88 Any change to the fair value is taken through equity except for any part of the hedge which is deemed to be ineffective.
At 30 April 2017 the hedge was deemed to be 100% effective and therefore all of the hedge has been recognised through equity.
The interest rate swap has been used to hedge the three month Libor interest rate exposure on the initial 40000000 tranche of term loan B which is repayable in full on 7 September 2020.
Under the hedge interest payments are payable every quarter at month end January April July and October at the discount margin of 2.5% plus the hedged Libor rate of 1.0% until the final repayment on 7 September 2020.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Financial Risk Management and Financial Instruments continued c.
Interest rate risk continued The table below summarises the maturity profile of the interest rate swap based on contractual undiscounted payments.
2017 2016 Within 1 year 254 147 Between 1 and 2 years 325 68 Between 2 and 5 years 31 127 Total 610 88 Sensitivity analysis A 0.25% increase in the interest rate curve would result in a fair value asset of 310000 2016 303000 asset.
A 0.25% decrease in the interest rate curve would result in a fair value liability of 313000 2016 502000 liability. d.
Foreign exchange risk The Group is exposed to an element of foreign exchange risk with a number of suppliers from abroad.
All sales are made from the UK.
The Group manages this risk by entering into forward exchange contracts.
The forward exchange contracts taken out are based on forecasts of purchases for the next 12 months.
The forward exchange contracts are valued at fair value by using the Mark to Market rate.
As at the 30 April 2017 the Group had 41 forward exchange contracts outstanding with a negative Mark to Market valuation of 1557000.
2017 2016 Opening fair value 1324 Derivatives acquired through business combinations note 28 403 634 Amounts recognised in the income statement during the year 3284 1958 Closing fair value 1557 1324 Any change to the fair value is taken through the income statement for each period.
The forward exchange contracts mature between 15 May 2017 and 19 February 2018 and the total amount payable on maturity is 44398000.
The carrying amount of trade payables are translated from the following currencies 2017 2016
203213 125844 Euro 21217 5198 US Dollar 3441 442 Australian Dollar 1954 67 New Zealand Dollar 990 South African Rand 1446 Japanese Yen 3558 Closing fair value 235819 131551 92 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Financial Risk Management and Financial Instruments continued e.
Liquidity risk The Group seeks to manage financial risk by ensuring sufficient liquidity is available to meet foreseeable needs and to invest cash safely and profitably.
The Group monitors its cash resources through short medium and longterm cash forecasting against available facilities.
Shortterm flexibility is achieved by the use of a receivables financing facility and an RCF the details of which are set out in the table above.
The maturity of borrowings is set out in note 17.
Capital risk management The Group manages its capital to ensure that the Group will be able to continue as a going concern while maximising the return to shareholders through optimising the debt and equity balance.
The capital structure of the Group consists of cash and cash equivalents and equity attributable to equity holders of the Company comprising issued capital reserves and retained earnings as disclosed in the consolidated statement of changes in equity.
In order to maintain or adjust the capital structure the Group may adjust the amount of dividends paid to shareholders return capital to shareholders issue new shares or sell assets to reduce debt.
The Groups capital is not restricted.
Management may seek additional external borrowings to fund the future investment and growth of the Group.
In addition the Group has entered into a receivables finance facility agreement under which the maximum facility available is 85% of the allowable trade receivables up to 130000000 and an RCF agreement under which the maximum facility is 30000000.
The Group draws down on these facilities from time to time as required to support short term working capital movements.
The amount drawn down on the receivables finance facility as at 30 April 2017 is 10741000 2016 20255000 and Nil on the RCF 2016 12500000 relating to bankissued guarantees for the benefit of certain suppliers.
The Group has an Accordion option on the RCF that allows the Group to increase the RCF by a further 15000000 if required.
The Group has a progressive dividend policy which aims to increase the value of ordinary dividends over time taking into account the results of the past year and the outlook.
Borrowings and cash The carrying values of cash and shortterm borrowings approximate to their fair values because of the shortterm maturity of these instruments.
The carrying value of longterm borrowings is held at amortised cost which is considered to equate to fair value.
Fair values of financial assets and financial liabilities The carrying values of all the Groups financial assets and financial liabilities approximate to their fair values because of the shortterm maturity of these instruments.
The fair value of trade receivables and payables is considered to be equal to the carrying values of these items due to their shortterm nature.
All other financial assets and liabilities are carried at amortised cost.
Cash is held with counterparties with a credit rating of A1 A2 and BBB.
Deferred Taxation Asset and Liability As at 26 April 2015 Charged to the income statement note 7 Charged to equity Arising on acquisition of subsidiaries Acquired through business combinations As at 1 May 2016 Charged to the income statement note 7 Charged to equity Acquired through business combinations note 28 As at 30 April 2017 Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Deferred Taxation Asset and Liability continued
2017 2016 The net deferred tax liability is made up as follows 000 000 Deferred tax asset 6051 3198 Deferred tax liability 10524 11165 Net deferred tax liability 4473 7967
2017 2016 The net deferred tax liability is made up as follows 000 000 Accelerated capital allowances 632 342 Tax on trade losses 271 119 Tax on share based payments 1462 696 Tax on intangible asset recognised on acquisition of subsidiary 10759 9378 Short term temporary differences 3817 239 Tax on interest rate hedging 104 15 4473 7967 The recoverability of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of those arising from the reversal of deferred tax liabilities.
The deferred tax asset has been recognised to the extent that it is considered to be recoverable based on forecasts for future periods.
As at 30 April 2017 the value of the unrecognised deferred tax asset is Nil 2016 329000.
The deferred tax asset as at 1 May 2016 has been restated to reflect a 1779000 deferred tax asset relating to an increase in an acquisition fair value provision in Matthew Clark Holdings Limited note 2.
Provisions
As at 1 May 2016  Restated Unwind of the discount Released to income statement Provisions utilised As at 30 April 2017
2017 2016 Provisions are made up as follows 000 000 Provisions less than one year 1015 449 Provisions greater than one year 5517 10736 Total provisions 6532 11185 Provisions relate to certain onerous contracts that were in place at the acquisition of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and to recognise that renovation works were required at certain Matthew Clark Holdings Limited depots acquired at acquisition.
The provisions are expected to be utilised over the next ten years.
Provisions less than one year represent the short term element of provisions for onerous contracts that were in place at the acquisition of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and the short term element of provisions to recognise that renovation works need to be carried out at certain Matthew Clark Holdings Limited depots acquired at acquisition.
The provisions balance as at 1 May 2016 has been restated to reflect a 5824000 increase in an acquisition fair value provision at Matthew Clark Holdings Limited note 2.
94 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share Capital 2017 2016 Authorised allotted called up and fully paid 000 000 172642934 ordinary shares of 0.0002 each 2016 155238488 34 31 217058802 deferred shares of 0.0002 each 2016 217058802 44 44 Total 78 75 On 19 May 2016 15609757 ordinary shares of 0.0002 each were issued at a price of 2.05 per share in relation to the Bibendum PLB Group acquisition creating a share premium of 31800000 net of costs.
During the year the company issued and allotted 670246 shares to fulfil obligations under the Bargain Booze Share Incentive Plan 2013.
938360 free shares were also issued to franchisees under the Bargain Booze Franchise Incentive Plan note 27 during the 52 weeks to 30 April 2017.
In addition 36667 shares were issued in relation to a new executive director and a further 149416 were issued to cover share option exercises for senior management.
Holders of deferred shares do not have any right to receive notice of any general meeting or to attend speak or vote at any general meeting of the Company.
No dividend shall arise on deferred shares save for a cumulative fixed rate dividend of 0. per annum of the nominal value of the deferred shares.
On a return of capital on a winding up holders of deferred shares shall receive only an amount equal to each deferred shares nominal value after all other shares have received 1000000 and deferred shares shall have no other rights to participate in the assets or profits of the Company.
The Company may redeem or purchase all or any of the deferred shares for an aggregate sum equal to the accrued but unpaid dividend due on such shares and any Director may execute any transfer of such deferred shares on behalf of the holders of such deferred shares.
Holders of ordinary shares are entitled to receive dividends as declared from time to time and are entitled to one vote per share at meetings of the Company.
Details of dividends paid in respect of these shares in the 52 weeks to 30 April 2017 are disclosed in note 9.
Other Reserves Share based Share payment Other Premium reserve reserves As at 26 April 2015 34020 2028 26 Sharebased payment charge note 27  1661 Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge  364 Transfer of sharebased payment charge for vested options  94 Hedging reserve for interest rate swap   86 Premium arising on shares issued in the period 130322 As at 1 May 2016 164342 3959 112 Sharebased payment charge note 27  2724 Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge Transfer of sharebased payment charge for vested options  1213 Hedging reserve for interest rate swap   522 Deffered tax on interest rate swap   104 Disposal of shares in EBT   122 Premium arising on shares issued in the period 31800 As at 30 April 2017 196142 5719 408 Included within the Group operations is Bargain Booze Employee Benefit Trust the EBT.
The EBT purchases shares to fund the share option schemes.
As at 30 April 2017 the Trust held 897756 ordinary shares 2016 954755 ordinary shares with a cost of 24000 2016 26000.
The market value of these shares as at 30 April 2017 was 304.00 pence per share 2016 213.50 pence per share.
Of these shares 896809 are under option as at 30 April 2017 2016 896809.
During the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017 the Trust sold 57000 shares at a price of 2.14 per share to satisfy part of the bonus paid to Diana Hunter.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Cash Generated From Operations and Net Debt 2017 2016 Profit for the financial period 18446 5270 Income tax expense 4016 3810 Profit before income tax 22462 9080 Adjustments for Depreciation and impairment 4950 2833 Amortisation 12899 6089 Profit on sale of property plant and equipment 621 65 Equity settled share options charge note 27 2724 1661 Change in fair value of foreign exchange derivatives 3284 1958 Net finance costs note 6 5450 2502 Increase in inventories 8557 5358 Increase in trade and other receivables 17370 7984 Increase in trade and other payables 47920 11904 Decrease in provisions 4653 410 Costs associated with acquisition of subsidiaries 9788 8956 Cash generated from operations 78276 27250 As at As at 1 May 30 April 2016 Cashflow 2017 Current borrowings note 17 28137 3486 24651 Noncurrent borrowings note 17 67510 14009 81519 Total debt 95647 10523 106170 Cash at bank and in hand note 15 9540 884 10424 Net debt 86107 9639 95746 Commitments Under Operating Leases At the reporting date the Group had the following future aggregate minimum lease payments under non cancellable operating leases Land and buildings Othertel 2016 Within 1 year 5545 6159 5391 3526 Between 2 and 5 years inclusive 17412 22113 10067 6547 After 5 years 18730 16612 364 Total 41687 44884 15822 10073 There are no significant obligations or incentives attached to any of the Groups lease agreements.
The significant operating leases relate to head office buildings regional depots corporate stores and vehicles used for distribution.
96 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Capital Commitments As at 30 April 2017 amounts contracted for but not provided in the consolidated financial statements for the acquisition of property plant and equipment amounted to 1857000 2016 1755000.
Pension Commitments The company operates a stakeholder pension scheme.
Contributions recognised as an employee benefit expense for the 52 week period ended 30 April 2017 were 2399000 2016 836000.
Pension contributions accrued and therefore not yet paid over to the pension provider as at 30 April 2017 were 346000 2016 42000.
Share Based Payments The Group makes equity settled share awards to senior executives employees and Franchisees under four different share option plans.
An accrual has been made for national insurance due on exercise of share options and treated as a cash settled share based payment.
Further details of the plans are provided below.
The amounts recognised in respect of these schemes is as followsteltel
Non exceptional Exceptional Total exceptional Exceptional Total Equity settled share based payment
LTIP
SIP
FIP
1280  1280 893  893 Total equity settled share based payment 2287 437 2724 1661  1661 Cash settled share based payment Employers national insurance on ESOP and SIP Total share based payment charge 2427 496 2923 1767  1767 a.
Bargain Booze Unapproved Employee Share Option Plan 2013 ESOP Under the ESOP the share options are awarded at a price which is determined by the Board but is not less than the market value of the shares as at the date of grant.
The awards granted on 26 February 2013 vested on successful admission to AIM.
All subsequent grants become exercisable between one and ten years after grant and upon the achievement of performance criteria in relation to EBITDA targets or service conditions.
All options lapse on the day immediately after the expiry date to the extent they have not been exercised.
Options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Company in the first three years following grant.
The following table provides details of all existing grants under the ESOP.
None of the options are cash settled.
Subscription
Earliest
Date of Grant Price p Performance conditions exercise date Expiry date 26022013 2.7 achieving IPO 31072013 25022023 31072013 100.0 2014 to 2016 aggregate EBITDA of 38.2m 31072016 30072023 03032014 187.0 2014 to 2016 aggregate EBITDA of 38.2m 03032017 02032024 18092014 170.5 2014 to 2016 aggregate EBITDA of 38.2m 18092017 17092024 18092014 0.0 one year service condition 18092015 17092024 13102014 147.5 2014 to 2016 aggregate EBITDA of 38.2m 13102017 12102024 08092015 155.0 2014 to 2016 aggregate EBITDA of 38.2m 08092018 07092025 01122015 1.0 one year service condition 01122016 30112026 04012016 1.0 one year service condition 04012017 03012027 23052016 1.0 one year service condition 23052017 22052027 01072016 0.0 one year service condition 01072017 30062027 Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Share Based Payments continued a.
Bargain Booze Unapproved Employee Share Option Plan 2013 ESOP continued The tables below summarises the movement on share options in the period
Weighted
Share average exercise Share average exercise Options price options price number pence number pence Outstanding at the beginning of the period 3985241 81 3510745 85 Granted 213983 1 474496 50 Exercised 149416 66 Forfeited 30000 1 Outstanding at the end of the period 4019808 78 3985241 81 Exercisable at end of the period 3243226 Weighted average exercise price 72 pence 2.7 pence Weighted average remaining contractual life 6.81 years 7.67 years The weighted average share price for the options exercised during the 52 weeks to 30 April 2017 was 245.7 pence.
No options were exercised during the 53 week period to 1 May 2016.
Equity settled share based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the date of grant is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Fair value for the ESOP is measured by use of the BlackScholes model.
The inputs into the option pricing model are provided below Financial year 2017 2017 Grant date 01072016 23052016 Exercise price pence Expected volatility 30% 30% Expected life 5 years 5 years Expected dividend yield 7.0% 5.8% Riskfree interest rate 0.4% 0.9% The weighted average fair value of options granted during the period in relation to the ESOP was 1 pence 2016 152.1 pence.
Due to the short period of share trading activity expected volatility was determined by reference to the historical volatility of the share price of comparable listed companies over the previous four years.
The volatility of the Groups share price on each date of grant was calculated as the average of annualised standard deviations of daily continuously compounded returns on the stock calculated over four years back from the date of the grant.
The riskfree rate is the yield to maturity on the date of grant of a UK Gilt Strip with term to maturity equal to the life of the option.
The expected life of each option is equal to the vesting period plus a one year exercise period.
98 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Share Based Payments continued b.
Conviviality Long Term Incentive Plan LTIP Under the LTIP annual awards of performance vesting shares are awarded at nil cost and vest based on three year growth in adjusted basic EPS.
For the existing awards 30% will vest if adjusted basic EPS exceeds 20.3p in the year ending April 2019 60% will vest if adjusted basic EPS exceeds 21.45p in the year ending April 2019 and 100% will vest if adjusted basic EPS exceeds 24.25 p in the year ending April 2019.
No vesting will occur if adjusted basic EPS is below 20.3 p in the year ending April 2019 and vesting between these points will be on a straightline basis.
Options are forfeited if the employee leaves the Company before the options have vested.
The following table provides details of all existing grants under the ESOP.
None of the options are cash settled.
Notes to the financial statements
Subscription
Earliest
Date of Grant Price p Performance conditions exercise date Expiry date 01072016 0.0 one year service condition 01072017 30062027 The tables below summarises the movement on share options in the period
Weighted
Share average exercise Share average exercise options price options price number pence number pence Outstanding at the beginning of the period Granted 2081608
Forfeited 180580 Outstanding at the end of the period 1901028 Exercisable at end of the period Weighted average exercise price Weighted average remaining contractual life 9.32 years Equity settled share based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
The fair value determined at the date of grant is expensed on a straightline basis over the vesting period based on the Groups estimate of shares that will eventually vest.
Fair value for the LTIP is measured by use of the BlackScholes model.
The inputs into the option pricing model are provided below Financial year Grant date Exercise price pence Expected volatility 30% Expected life 5 years Expected dividend yield 5.6% Riskfree interest rate 0.2% The weighted average fair value of options granted during the period in relation to the ESOP was nil pence.
Due to the short period of share trading activity expected volatility was determined by reference to the historical volatility of the share price of comparable listed companies over the previous four years.
The volatility of the Groups share price on each date of grant was calculated as the average of annualised standard deviations of daily continuously compounded returns on the stock calculated over four years back from the date of the grant.
The riskfree rate is the yield to maturity on the date of grant of a UK Gilt Strip with term to maturity equal to the life of the option.
The expected life of each option is equal to the vesting period plus a one year exercise period.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Share Based Payments continued c.
Bargain Booze Share Incentive Plan 2013 The Group operates a Share Incentive Plan SIP approved by HMRC on 14 October 2013 approved by the Board on 11 October 2013 and commenced 1 November 2013.
All UK resident taxpaying employees of Conviviality and its participating subsidiaries are eligible to participate in the SIP subject to completing a minimum qualifying period of service of six months.
Under the SIP the Group can a.
Give 10% of salary up to 3000 worth of free shares in each tax year to an employee Free Shares b.
Offer an employee the opportunity of buying up to 1500 of shares a year Partnership Shares c.
Give an employee a matching share for each Partnership Share bought Matching Shares.
Each employee must complete three years service before these shares are awarded and d.
In addition to buying up to 1500 of Partnership Shares each year allow employees to purchase more shares Dividend Shares using dividends received on Free Shares Partnership Shares and Matching Shares up to percentage limits set by the Company.
Awards of Matching Shares under this scheme are at Nil cost and therefore their fair value is equal to the share price on the date of issue at the time when each grant is allocated.
If a person ceases to be an employee prior to the exercise date the Matching Shares will be forfeited.
Details of all Matching Share grants in the year are below none of which are exercisable at the period end 100 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the financial statements
Share Based Payments continued c.
Bargain Booze Share Incentive Plan 2013 continued Fair Value Number of Options at grant Exercise Date of Grant pence date Opening Granted Forfeited Closing 22112013 163.00 22112016 1538  828 710 23122013 168.00 23122016 1681  930 751 22012014 184.00 22012017 1547  842 705 24022014 190.00 24022017 1673  922 751 24032014 160.00 24032017 1849  1040 809 22042014 168.00 22042017 1786  908 878 22052014 172.50 22052017 1845  866 979 23062014 173.00 23062017 1716  776 940 22072014 159.50 22072017 1863  734 1129 22082014 166.00 22082017 1920  804 1116 22092014 169.00 22092017 1723  710 1013 22102014 160.00 22102017 1886  800 1086 24112014 146.00 24112017 1975  844 1131 22122014 145.00 22122017 1967  837 1130 22012015 127.75 22012018 2393  884 1509 23022015 154.00 23022018 1883  674 1209 23032015 148.50 23032018 2116  688 1428 06052015 144.00 06052018 2089  624 1465 08062015 149.50 08062018 1878  550 1328 06072015 154.00 06072018 2143  677 1466 08092015 187.00 08092018 1834  512 1322 06102015 183.80 06102018 1879  535 1344 10112015 201.75 10112018 3118  829 2289 07122015 214.00 07122018 2184  654 1530 06012016 220.49 06012019 2186  669 1517 08022016 207.75 08022019 2384  740 1644 07032016 213.50 07032019 2473  776 1697 06042016 236.93 06042019 2225  659 1566 06052016 206.75 06052019  2844 866 1978 06062016 203.00 06062019  17151 2069 15082 06072016 169.00 06072019  21778 2282 19496 08082016 220.00 08082019  16525 1547 14978 06092016 223.38 06092019  16583 1404 15179 06102016 221.00 06102019  16540 1336 15204 07112016 209.00 07112019  17752 1351 16401 06122016 199.50 06122019  18754 1234 17520 06012017 223.66 06012020  16462 999 15463 06022017 269.75 06022020  15340 614 14726 06032017 274.25 06032020  15683 500 15183 06042017 264.25 06042020  16525 310 16215 55754 191937 35824 211867 Weighted average share price pence 175.19 222.39 188.62 215.68 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Share Based Payments continued c.
Bargain Booze Share Incentive Plan 2013 continued Awards of Free Shares under this scheme are at Nil cost and therefore their fair value is equal to the share price on the date of issue at the time when each grant is allocated.
If a person ceases to be an employee prior the exercise date the Free Shares will be forfeited.
Details of all Free Share grants in the year are below none of which are exercisable at the period end Fair Value Number of Options at grant Exercise Date of Grant pence date Opening Granted Forfeited Closing 16102014 149.50 16102017 180876  21496 159380 09092015 155.00 09092018 251533  22315 229218 24102016 202.00 24102019  417715 2970 414745 432409 417715 46781 803343 Weighted average share price pence Start of Estimated Number of Options vesting fair value Exercise Date of Grant period pence date Opening Granted Adjustment Forfeited Exercised Closing 01092016 31072013 155.00 30092016 1008220   88040 920180 30092017 31072014 155.00 30092017 1063000  49250   1112250 30092018 30062016 184.75 30092018  1151750 168750   983000 30092019 30092016 216.00 30092019  1179500 84000   1095000 2071220 2331250 203500 88040 920180 3190750 Weighted average share price pence Date of grant is subject to Board approval Adjustment reflects the companys estimation of how many awards will actually vest d.
Franchisee incentive plan FIP The FIP is intended to provide issued ordinary shares as awards to Franchisees subject to the achievement of performance conditions and then at the discretion of the Board.
There are four categories of proposed award all of which are subject to approval at the discretion of the Board at the end of the third year of measurement Part 1  Store Standards Incentive Plan  All Franchisees could be entitled to one third of their maximum allocation on passing each of three annual store audits.
Part 2  Group EBITDA Target  Awards may be made at the discretion of the Board based on Group EBITDA targets over a three year period and will be shared between all stores equally.
Part 3  Individual Franchisee Performance Awards  Annual awards may be made subject to the achievement by a store of certain key performance indicators.
Part 4  New Franchisee Incentives  awards may be made at the discretion of the Board three years after passing a store audit.
The shares are transferred to the Franchisees for no payment.
If a person ceases to be a Franchisee prior to the vesting of any award that award will lapse entirely.
The awards are subject to Board approval prior to vesting and therefore the service period commences prior to the grant date.
The fair value of each grant is calculated as the best estimate of the share price on the date of grant being the year end share price.
102 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business Combinations Current period business combinations Bibendum PLB Group On 20 May 2016 the Group entered into an agreement to acquire the entire issued share capital of Bibendum PLB Group for a total consideration of 39.7 million in cash.
Bibendum PLB Group is a leading independent wholesaler in the drinks industry specialising in wines and spirits.
This acquisition is consistent with the Groups ongoing strategy of expanding the Groups wholesaling expertise and entering new markets and channels.
The acquisition together with the current businesses in the Group creates a unique offering that addresses both the On Trade and Off Trade retailers.
Significant synergies across buying and distribution plus organisational efficiencies and additional revenue generation are expected to be achieved by bringing the businesses together.
The following table summarises the consideration paid for Bibendum PLB Group and the amount of assets acquired and liabilities assumed recognised at the acquisition date.
Fair
Book value Fair value adjustments value Property plant and equipment 1899 108 1791 Intangible assets 1528 1428 100 Inventories 28805 5935 22870 Derivatives 403  403 Trade and other receivables 59924 3735 56189 Net debt and debt like items 19147  19147 Trade and other payables 59222 4631 63853 Corporation tax liability 683  683 Deferred tax liabilityasset Total identifiable net assets  liabilities 13338 15003 1665 Allocation to intangible assets  Brands note 12 Allocation to intangible assets  Customer Base note 12 Goodwill note 11 Total consideration satisfied by cash Cash flow Cash consideration Debt acquired with subsidiary Acquisition costs The goodwill arising on acquisition represents the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognised on the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group these largely relate to synergy and integration benefits.
On the acquisition of Bibendum PLB Group the fair value of assets and liabilities has been assessed and adjustments made as shown in the table above.
Within property plant and equipment a fair value adjustment of 0.1 million was made to write down assets to their fair value.
Within inventories a fair value adjustment of 5.9 million was made which represents the adjustment required to bring inventories to their net realisable value.
Within intangible assets the fair value adjustment of 1.4m predominately related to impairments of IT systems.
Within trade and other receivables a number of fair value adjustments totalling 3.7 million relating to recoverability of recievables were made to write down assets to their fair value.
Within trade and other payables a number of additional accruals have been made to reflect fair values totalling 4.6 million.
A deferred tax liability of 2.0 million has been recognised on the brand and customer base intangible assets offset by a deferred tax asset of 2.8 million on fair value adjustments.
From the date of acquisition Bibendum PLB Group has contributed revenue of 275.0 million and 4.3 million to profit before tax to the Groups results.
Acquisition costs of 1644000 have been charged to exceptional costs in the consolidated income statement for the period.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Business Combinations continued KMD Enterprises On 4 December 2016 the Group entered into an agreement to acquire the entire issued share capital of KMD Enterprises Limited and Xcel Retail Limited for a total consideration of 4.0 million in cash plus normalised working capital on a debtcash free basis.
KMD Enterprises and Xcel Retail comprise a chain of 15 high quality convenience stores branded as Nisa Local operating at various locations in the UK.
This acquisition is consistent with the Groups ongoing strategy of focusing on key regions to improve store density and drive logistics and marketing efficiencies.
All of the stores have been rebranded under the Bargain Booze Select Convenience fascia.
The table below summarises the consideration paid for KMD Enterprises Limited and Xcel Retail Limited and the amount of assets and liabilities assumed recognised at the acquisition date.
Fair
Book value Fair value adjustments value Property plant and equipment 1141  1141 Inventories 589  589 Receivable due from the seller 1950  1950 Trade and other receivables 282  282 Cash and cash like items 171  171 Trade and other payables 743  743 Corporation tax liability 62  62 Deferred tax asset 37  37 Total identifiable net assets 3365  3365 Goodwill note 11 Total consideration Cash flow Total consideration Less payable due to the seller Cash consideration Net cash acquired with subsidiary Acquisition costs Following the acquisition a loan of 1950000 both due to and from the seller were novated extinguishing the balances due from both parties.
The Goodwill arising on acquisition represents the premium paid to acquire KMD Enterprises Limited and Xcel Retail Limited providing significant opportunities for increased wholesale sales and crossselling and other synergies.
Goodwill has been allocated to the KMD CGU.
There are no separately identifiable intangible assets as the Nisa Local brand name was not acquired and the customer base was deemed to have no value.
Management have not yet finalised its assessment of the fair values at the acquisition date.
This is expected to be completed during 2017.
In addition to the acquisitions set out above the Group has also completed a number of individual smaller store acquisitions for a total cash consideration of 396000 2016 796000 all of which has been recognised as goodwill.
When purchasing individual stores the Group is purchasing both the trade and assets of the store.
104 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business Combinations continued Prior period business combinations Matthew Clark Holdings Limited On 7 October 2015 the Group entered into an agreement to acquire the entire issued share capital of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited for a total consideration of 199.0 million in cash.
Matthew Clark Holdings Limited is a leading independent wholesaler in the drinks industry.
This acquisition is consistent with the Groups ongoing strategy of expanding the Groups wholesaling expertise and entering new markets and channels.
The acquisition together with the current businesses in the Group creates a unique offering that addresses both the On Trade and Off Trade retailers.
Significant synergies across buying and distribution plus organisational efficiencies and additional revenue generation are expected to be achieved by bringing the businesses together.
The following table summarises the consideration paid for Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and the amount of assets acquired and liabilities assumed recognised at the acquisition date.
Fair
Book value Fair value adjustments value Property plant and equipment 4074 891 3183 Intangible assets 3624 311 3313 Inventories 44238 266 43972 Trade and other receivables 116738 359 116379 Net debt and debt like items 10838 247 11085 Trade and other payables 122979 1084 124063 Derivatives 634  634 Deferred tax liability note 19 402 10080 9678 Provisions 603 10991 11594 Total identifiable net assets 34022 24229 9793 Allocation to intangible assets  Brands note 12 Allocation to intangible assets  Customer Base note 12 Goodwill note 11 Total consideration satisfied by cash Cash flow Cash consideration Debt acquired with subsidiary Acquisition costs expensed to exceptional items Acquisition costs accrued and not yet paid out Adjustments made to the fair value of assets acquired include the recognition of the deferred tax liability relating to the intangible asset 10.1 million additional provisions and accruals to recognise three onerous contracts that were in place at acquisition 11.0 million which has been recalculated this year and uplifted by 5.8 million additional provisions to recognise that renovation works needed to be carried out at specific depots 1 million and impairments for property plant and equipment that is impaired at the point of acquisition 0.9 million.
A deferred tax asset of 1.8 million has been recognised in these financial statements relating to the fair value adjustment of onerous contracts.
Goodwill has increased by net 4.0 million as a result of the measurement period adjustments.
The comparative balance sheets have been restated to reflect these measurement period adjustments.
The goodwill arising on acquisition represents the premium paid to acquire Matthew Clark Holdings Limited and the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in the business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognised on the acquisition of Matthew Clark Holdings Limited these largely relate to synergy and integration benefits.
Goodwill has been allocated to the Matthew Clark Holdings cashgenerating unit CGU.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Business Combinations continued Peppermint Events Limited On 31 December 2015 the Group entered into an agreement to acquire 61% of issued share capital of Peppermint Events Limited for a total consideration of 1.8 million in cash plus contingent consideration of 6.2 million.
This is contingent on meeting EBITDA targets for financial years ended 2017 2018 and 2019.
The transaction is subject to an initial earnout performance based payment during 2017 and 2018 up to a total of 800000.
There is an earnout put option in respect of the remaining 39% of the ordinary share capital.
The put and call option allows the noncontrolling shareholder to require sales of their shares to the Group at an agreed pricing method between 2019 and 2020 based on EBITDA up to a total of 9200000.
The timing of the final earnout will depend on whether Peppermint Events exceeds an EBITDA target that has been set for financial year 2019.
If the target is not met the earnout moves to financial year 2020.
The company has agreed to pay the vendors additional consideration dependent on the performance of Peppermint Events over the subsequent four financial years.
The range of the additional consideration payment is estimated to be between Nil and 10000000.
The Company has included 6159000 as contingent consideration related to the additional consideration which represents the amount determined at the acquisition date based on forecast EBITDA for the next three years discounted to net present value. representing the unwind of the discount on the contingent consideration note 6.
The valuation model for the contingent consideration considers the present value of the expected payment discounted using a riskfree rate of 2.7%.
The expected payment is determined by considering the possible scenarios of forecast revenue and EBITDA the amount to be paid under each scenario and the probability of each scenario.
The acquisition of Peppermint Events Limited has been accounted for using the anticipated acquisition method as if the put and call option has already been exercised and therefore no noncontrolling interest has been recognised.
Peppermint Events Limited is an independent events company specialising in bars and events in the outdoor event arena including festivals.
This acquisition is consistent with the Groups ongoing strategy of focusing on new markets and channels.
The following table summarises the consideration paid for Peppermint Events Limited and the amount of assets acquired and liabilities assumed recognised at the acquisition date.
Fair
Book value Fair value adjustments value Property plant and equipment 225 23 202 Inventories 152 15 137 Trade and other receivables 179 12 167 Cash and cash equivalents 536  536 Trade and other payables 596  596 Borrowings short term 46  46 Current tax payable 6  6 Deferred tax liability note 19 26 48 74 Borrowings long term 60  60 Total identifiable net assets 358 98 260 Allocation to intangible assets  Brands note 12 Goodwill note 11 Total consideration Cash flow Cash consideration Contingent consideration payable April 2017 April 2018 and April 2019 Cash acquired with subsidiary Acquisition costs expensed to exceptional items 7504 106 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Business Combinations continued Significant adjustments made to the fair value of assets acquired include the recognition of the deferred tax liability relating to the intangible asset provision for doubtful debts and obsolete stock and impairments for property plant and equipment.
The goodwill arising on acquisition represents the premium paid to acquire Peppermint Events Limited in a key channel providing significant opportunities for increased wholesale sales and crossselling and other synergies.
Goodwill has been allocated to the Peppermint Events cashgenerating unit CGU.
Acquisition costs of 81000 have been charged to exceptional items in the consolidated income statement for the period note 4.
These represent legal costs incurred during the acquisition.
For the period ended 1 May 2016 Peppermint Events Limited contributed revenue of 0.6 million and 0.4 million loss before tax to the Groups results from the date of acquisition.
If the acquisition had taken place at the beginning of the prior financial period it is estimated that the Group revenue for the period ended 1 May 2016 would have been 877.0 million and total Group operating profit would have been 12.0 million.
Events Occurring After the Reporting Date There are no material events after the reporting date.
Subsidiary Audit Exemption Under section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 the Group is claiming exemption from audit for the subsidiary companies listed below Company Name Company number Conviviality Stores Limited Conviviality Retail Logistics Limited Bargain Booze EBT Trustees Limited Wine Rack Limited GT News Holdings Limited
News Limited Matthew Clark Holdings Limited Bibendum PLB Topco Limited Bibendum PLB Group Limited Ardiles Bidco Limited KMD Enterprises Limited Xcel Retail Limited Related Parties During the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017 the Group purchased services totalling 13000 2016 13000 from Practicology Limited.
Martin D Newman is a NonExecutive Director of Conviviality Plc and also a 52% shareholder of Practicology Limited.
There are no amounts outstanding to Practicology Limited as at 30 April 2017 2016 Nil.
During the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017 the Group made donations of 33500 2016 5000 to The Benevolent which is a drinks industry charity.
Diana Hunter is the CEO of Conviviality Plc and also a trustee of The Benevolent.
Key management comprises the Executive and NonExecutive Directors.
Information on their emoluments is provided in note 5.
Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Company balance sheet As at 30 Apriltel Note 000 000 Fixed assets Investments 2 49756 47400 Current assets Debtors 4 183693 142803 183693 142803 Creditors amounts falling due within one year 5 29228 906 Net current assets 154465 141897 Net assets 204221 189297 Capital and reserves Called up share capital 7 78 75 Share premium account 196142 165336 Share based payment reserve 5710 3977 Other reserves Profit and loss account 2316 19935 Shareholders funds 204221 189297 These financial statements were approved and authorised for issue by the Board of Directors on 17 July 2017 Diana Hunter
Chief Executive Officer
Conviviality Plc Company registration number telConviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Company statement of changes in equity For the 52 weeks ended 30 April 2017 Share based Share Share payment Other Retained Total capital premium reserve reserves earnings equity Balance as at 26 April 2015 57 34020 2052 26 67 36170 Profit for the financial period 27269 27269 Total comprehensive income for the period 27269 27269 Transactions with owners Issue of new ordinary shares 18 131316    131334 Transfer of share based payment charge
7495 7495 Share options granted to subsidiary employees 1352   1352 Sharebased payment charge Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge Total transactions with owners 18 131316 1925  7401 125858 Balance as at 1 May 2016 75 165336 3977 26 19935 189297 Profit for the financial period 1376 1376 Total comprehensive income for the period 1376 1376 Transactions with owners Issue of new ordinary shares 3 30806    30809 Transfer of sharebased payment charge 1027  1027
20022 20022 Share options granted to subsidiary employees 2356   2356 Sharebased payment charge Disposal of treasury shares Deferred tax on sharebased payment charge Total transactions with owners 3 30806 1733 1 18995 13548 Balance as at 30 April 2017 78 196142 5710 25 2316 204221 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Company statement of cash flows For the 52 weeks ended 30 Apriltel Net cash outflow from operating activities 10528 152981 Cash flows from investing activities Exceptional costs incurred on acquisition of subsidiary undertakings 259 877 Net cash used in investing activities 259 877 Cash flows from financing activities Dividends paid 20022 7495 Dividends received  30000 Proceeds from sale of shares 30809 131334 Net cash used in financing activities 10787 153839 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents  19 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the period  19 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period   110 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Notes to the Company financial statements Accounting Policies Basis of preparation of financial statements The accounts have been prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 2006 and International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European Union IFRS.
In preparing these financial statements the Company applies the recognition measurement and disclosure requirements of International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the EU Adopted IFRSs but makes adjustments where necessary in order to comply with Companies Act 2006.
The consolidated financial statements of Conviviality plc which are presented separately have been prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as adopted by the European
Under Section 408 of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is exempt from the requirement to present its own profit and loss account.
Investments
Investments are included at cost less any provision for impairment.
Share based payments Share based payments are measured at fair value at the date of grant.
Fair value is measured using the Black Scholes pricing model.
The charge relating to grants to employees of the company is recognised on a straight line basis as an expense in the profit and loss account spread over the vesting period based on the Companys estimate of the shares that will eventually vest and adjusted for the effect of nonmarket based vesting conditions.
Dividends
Dividends are recognised in the Companys financial statements in the year in which they are approved in general meeting by the Companys shareholders.
Interim dividends are recognised when paid.
Final dividends are recognised when they have been approved by the shareholders at the Annual General
Taxation
The tax expense for the period comprises of current and deferred tax.
Tax is recognised in the income statement except to the extent that it relates to items recognised directly in other comprehensive income or in equity.
In this case the tax is recognised directly in other comprehensive income or in equity. a.
Current taxation Current tax is the expected tax payable on the taxable income for the period using tax rates and laws enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date.
Management periodically evaluates positions taken in tax returns with respect to situations in which applicable tax regulation is subject to interpretation.
It establishes provisions where appropriate on the basis of amounts expected to be paid to the tax authorities. b.
Deferred taxation Deferred tax is recognised using the statement of financial position liability method on temporary differences arising between the tax base of assets and liabilities and their carrying amount in the historical financial information.
Deferred tax is calculated at the tax rates and laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by reporting date and are expected to apply when the related deferred tax asset is realised or the deferred tax liability is settled.
Deferred tax assets are recognised only to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which the temporary differences can be utilised.
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reviewed at each reporting date.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset against each other when there is a legally enforceable right to set off current assets against current liabilities and it is the intention to settle these on a net basis.
Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements
As at 26 April 2015 Share options granted to subsidiary employees As at 1 May 2016 Share options granted to subsidiary employees As at 30 April 2017 The Company is the holding company of the Group.
The following table contains details of the Companys directly and indirectly held subsidiaries
Country of Percentage Company name activity incorporation ownership Conviviality Brands Limited Holding company England 100% Conviviality Stores Limited Holding company England 100% Bargain Booze Limited Wholesale marketing logistics and franchisor England 100% Conviviality Retail Logistics Limited Distribution company England 100% Bargain Booze EBT Trustees Limited Trustee of EBT England 100% Wine Rack Limited Retail distributor of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionary England 100% GT News Holdings Limited Holding company England 100%
News Limited Retail distributor of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionary England 100% GT News Nottingham Limited Dormant England 100% Rhythm and Booze Limited Dormant England 100% Conviviality Retail Limited Dormant England 100% Matthew Clark Holdings Limited Holding company England 100% Conviviality Group Limited Wholesale distributor of formally known as Matthew Clark Wholesale Limited beers wines and spirits England 100% Elastic Productions Limited Marketing agency England 51% Peppermint Events Limited Events company England 61% Matthew Clark Limited Dormant England 100% Matthew Clark and Sons Limited Dormant England 100% Matthew Clark Wholesale Bond Limited Dormant England 100% Matthew Clark Scotland Limited Dormant Scotland 100% The Wine Studio Limited Dormant England 100% A2 Contractors Limited Dormant England 100% Odyssey Intelligence Limited Dormant England 100% CatalystPLB Brands Limited Dormant England 100% Bibendum PLB Topco Limited Holding company England 100% Bibendum PLB Group Limited Holding company England 100% Bibendum Wine Limited Wholesale distributor of beers wines and spirits England 100% The Wondering Wine Company Limited Events company England 100% Walker and Wodehouse Wines Limited Wholesale distributor of beers wines and spirits England 100% PLB Group Limited Wholesale distributor of beers wines and spirits England 100% PLB Wines Limited Dormant England 100% 112 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Investments continued West Country Beverages Limited Dormant England 100% formally known as PLB Beers Limited The Real Rose Company Limited Dormant England 100% Chalk Farm Wines Limited Dormant England 100% Instill Drinks Company Limited Dormant England 100% The Yorkshire Fine Wine Company Limited Dormant England 100% Mixbury Drinks Limited Dormant England 100% Bibendum Limited Dormant England 100% Vivas Wine Limited Dormant England 100% European Wine Partnership LLP Dormant England 70% Ardiles Bidco Limited Holding company England 100% KMD Enterprises Limited Retail distributor of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionary England 100% Xcel Retail Limited Retail distributor of beers wines spirits tobacco grocery and confectionary England 100% Registered office Unit 1 Weston Road Crewe Cheshire CW1 6BP 2 Registered office Whitchurch Lane Whitchurch Bristol BS14 0JZ 3 Registered office The CaDOro 45 Gordon Street Glasgow G1 3PE 4 Registered office Co TLT 1 Redcliff Street Bristol BS1 6TP Under section 479A of the Companies Act 2006 the Company is claiming exemption from audit for the subsidiary companies listed below Company name Company number Conviviality Stores Limited Conviviality Retail Logistics Limited Bargain Booze EBT Trustees Limited Wine Rack Limited GT News Holdings Limited
News Limited Matthew Clark Holdings Limited Bibendum PLB Topco Limited Bibendum PLB Group Limited Ardiles Bidco Limited KMD Enterprises Limited Xcel Retail Limited Directors remuneration The Directors are the only employees of the Company.
Further details of Directors remuneration are provided in note 5 of the consolidated financial statements.
Debtors
2017 2016 Amounts owed by group undertakings 182346 142102 Prepayments and accrued income 71 31 Deferred tax asset note 6 1276 670 183693 142803 Notes to the financial statements Continued Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Creditors amounts falling due within one year 2017 2016 Amounts owed to group undertakings 28708 Accruals and deferred income 520 906 29228 906 Deferred tax asset 2017 2016 At beginning of period 670 401 Creditedcharged to the profit and loss account 570 88 Credited to equity 36 357 At the end of period 1276 670 The deferred tax asset is made up as follows 2017 2016 Other timing differences 1276 670 The deferred tax asset relates to timing differences on share based payment charges.
The recoverability of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of those arising from the reversal of deferred tax liabilities.
The deferred tax asset has been recognised to the extent that it is considered to be recoverable based on forecasts for future periods.
As at 30 April 2017 the value of the unrecognised deferred tax asset is Nil 2016 Nil.
Share capital 2017 2016 Authorised allotted called up and fully paid 172642934 ordinary shares of 0.0002 each 2016 155238488 34 31 217058802 deferred shares of 0.0002 each 2016 217058802 44 Total 78 75 Details of share capital transactions are provided in note 21 to the consolidated financial statements.
Dividends
Amounts recognised as distributions to ordinary shareholders in the period comprise 2017 2016 Final dividend for 2016 of 7.4 pence and 2015 of 6.3 pence per ordinary share 12785 4235 Interim dividend for 2017 of 4.2 pence and 2016 of 2.1 pence per ordinary share 7237 3260 20022 7495 The 2017 final proposed dividend of 14502.000 8.4 pence per share has not been accrued as it had not been approved by the period end.
Sufficient reserves are in place to pay the proposed dividend.
Related party transactions Details of the Directors emoluments are provided in note 5 of the consolidated financial statements.
114 Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Multiple Specialist Retailer of the Year Drinks Retailing Awards 2016 Conviviality Retail Drinks Retailer of the Year Grocer Gold Awards 2017 Conviviality Retail Drinks Company of the Year The Drink Business Awards 2017 Conviviality Merchant of the Year Sommelier Wine Awards 2017 Bibendum Drinks Supplier of the Year Mitchells and Butlers Supplier Awards 2017 Bibendum Fine Wine Merchant of the Year Sommelier Wine Awards 2016 Matthew Clark Innovator of the Year IWC Awards 2016 Bibendum New World Merchant of the Year Sommelier Wine Awards 2016 Bibendum Wine Importer of the Year IWSC 2016 Matthew Clark Excellence in Category Collaboration Mitchells and Butlers Supplier Awards 2017 Bibendum Best Implementation The Compass Group Supplier Awards 2016 Bibendum Best Drinks Supplier Restaurant Magazine Readers Choice Awards 2017 Matthew Clark Wine Importer of the Year IWSC 2016 Matthew Clark Best National Wine Supplier Publicans Choice Awards 2016 Matthew Clark Best Drinks Supplier Restaurant Magazines Chefs Choice Awards 2016 Matthew Clark Best Airline Wine List for British Airways First Class Business Traveller Cellars in the Sky Awards 2016 Bibendum Food or Drink Supplier Website of the Year The Caterer DIVA Awards 2016 Matthew Clark Deal of the Year Grant Thornton Quoted Company Awards 2017 Conviviality 73 gold awardwining wines 127 silver 73 bronze and 167 commended Sommelier Wine Awards 2017 Conviviality Celebrating awardwinning success Conviviality Plc Annual Report and Accounts 2017 Strategic report Corporate governance Financial statements Independent Auditors KPMG LLP 1 St Peters Square
M2 3AE Solicitors to the Company DLA Piper UK LLP 1 St Peters Square
M2 3DE Company Registrars Capita Registrars Limited The Registry 34 Beckenham Road
Kent
BR3 4TU Nominated adviser Investec Bank Plc 2 Gresham Street
EC2V 7QP
David A R Adams Chairman
Diana Hunter Chief Executive Officer
C Andrew Humphreys Mark T Aylwin David P Robinson Martin D Newman NonExecutive Director Stephen G Wilson NonExecutive Director Ian M W Jones NonExecutive Directorsitesite Report design and production by inhouse design team Oliver Treacy and Matt Ellis Directors secretary and advisors LONDON 109a Regents Park Road
NW1 8UR 0telCREWE Weston Road Crewe Cheshire CW1 6BP 0telBRISTOL Whitchurch Lane
